Skip to main content

A line drawing of the Internet Archive headquarters building façade.

An illustration of a computer application window
An illustration of an open book.
TEXTS
An illustration of two cells of a film strip.
VIDEO
An illustration of an audio speaker.
AUDIO
An illustration of a 3.5" floppy disk.
SOFTWARE
An illustration of two photographs.
IMAGES
AN ILLUSTRATION OF A PERSON'S HEAD AND CHEST.
SIGN UP | LOG IN
AN ILLUSTRATION OF A HORIZONTAL LINE OVER AN UP POINTING ARROW. UPLOAD

An illustration of a magnifying glass.

* 		Sign up for free 
* 		Log in 
Search metadata
Search text contents
Search TV news captions
Search radio transcripts
Search archived web sites
Advanced Search
* ABOUT BLOG PROJECTS HELP DONATE AN ILLUSTRATION OF A HEART SHAPE CONTACT JOBS VOLUNTEER PEOPLE
Full text of "War and peace"
See other formats

DUKE 

UNIVERSITY 


LIBRARY 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2017  with  funding  from 
Duke  University  Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/warpeace01tols_0 


A  CARLTON  HOUSE  EDITION 


iWMOWQ  ywWMWWWWWWWyMWy)^^  ><>>>^<>0<><><>>^00<>000<><>0s>  C>00<»0<x><><>000i 


^CWOQ<WQWKm><Wto<K>OOOWWOWO^ 

1 

WAR  AND  PEACE  1 


fry 

LEO  TOLSTOY 


Translated  by 

CONSTANCE  GARNETT 


CARLTON  HOUSE  •  NEW  YORK 


PRINTED  AND  BOUND  BY 
THE  J.  J.  LITTLE  &  IVES  CO. 
IN  NEW  YORK  CITY,  U.  S.  A, 


8cl  l . 

Tt.54£cB 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


509133 


PART  I 


I 

'Well,  prince.  Genoa  and  Lucca  are  now  no  more  than  private  estates 
of  the  Bonaparte  family.  No,  I  warn  you,  that  if  you  do  not  tell  me  we 
are  at  war,  if  you  again  allow  yourself  to  palliate  all  the  infamies  and 
atrocities  of  this  Antichrist  (upon  my  word,  I  believe  he  is),  I  don’t  know 
you  in  future,  you  are  no  longer  my  friend,  no  longer  my  faithful  slave, 
as  you  say.  There,  how  do  youdo,  how  do  you  do?  I  see  I’m  scaring  you, 
sit  down  and  talk  to  me.’ 

These  words  were  uttered  in  July  1805  by  Anna  Pavlovna  Scherer,  a 
distinguished  lady  of  the  court,  and  confidential  maid-of-honour  to'  the 
Empress  Mariya  Fyodorovna.  It  was  her  greeting  to  Prince  Vassily,  a 
man  high  in  rank  and  office,  who  was  the  first  to  arrive  at  her  soiree. 
Anna  Pavlovna  had  been  coughing  for  the  last  few  days;  she  had  an 
attack  of  la  grippe,  as  she  said — grippe  was  then  a  new  word  only  used  by 
a  few  people.  In  the  notes  she  had  sent  round  in  the  morning  by  a  footman 
in  red  livery,  she  had  written  to  all  indiscriminately: 

‘If  you  have  nothing  better  to  do,  count  (or  prince),  and  if  the  prospect 
of  spending  an  evening  with  a  poor  invalid  is  not  too  alarming  to  you,  I 
shall  be  charmed  to  see  you  at  my  house  between  7  and  10.  Annette 
Scherer.’ 

I  ‘Heavens!  what  a  violent  outburst!’  the  prince  responded,  not  in  the 
least  disconcerted  at  such  a  reception.  He  was  wearing  an  embroidered 
court  uniform,  stockings  and  slippers,  and  had  stars  on  his  breast,  and  a 
bright  smile  on  his  flat  face. 

He  spoke  in  that  elaborately  choice  French,  in  which  our  forefathers 
not  only  spoke  but  thought,  and  with  those  slow,  patronising  intonations 
peculiar  to  a  man  of  importance  who  has  grown  old  in  court  society. 
He  went  up  to  Anna  Pavlovna,  kissed  her  hand,  presenting  her  with  a 
view  of  his  perfumed,  shining  bald  head,  and  complacently  settled  him¬ 
self  on  the  sofa. 

‘First  of  all,  tell  me  how  you  are,  dear  friend.  Relieve  a  friend’s  anxiety,’ 
he  said,  with  no  change  of  his  voice  and  tone,  in  which  indifference,  and 
even  irony,  was  perceptible  through  the  veil  of  courtesy  and  sympathy. 
I  ‘How  can  one  be  well  when  one  is  in  moral  suffering?  How  can  one  help 
being  worried  in  these  times,  if  one  has  any  feeling?’  said  Anna  Pavlovna. 
‘You’ll  spend  the  whole  evening  with  me,  I  hope?’ 

‘And  the  fete  at  the  English  ambassador’s?  To-day  is  Wednesday.  I 
must  put  in  an  appearance  there,’  said  the  prince.  ‘My  daughter  is  com¬ 
ing  to  fetch  me  and  take  me  there.’ 

1 


509133 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


'I  thought  to-day’s  fete  had  been  put  off.  I  confess  that  all  these  fes¬ 
tivities  and  fireworks  are  beginning  to  pall.’ 

‘If  they  had  known  that  it  was  your  wish,  the  fete  would  have  been  put 
off,’  said  the  prince,  from  habit,  like  a  wound-up  clock,  saying  things  he 
did  not  even  wish  to  be  believed. 

‘Don’t  tease  me.  Well,  what  has  been  decided  in  regard  to  the  Novo- 
siltsov  dispatch?  You  know  everything.’ 

‘What  is  there  to  tell?’  said  the  prince  in  a  tired,  listless  tone.  ‘What 
has  been  decided?  It  has  been  decided  that  Bonaparte  has  burnt  his 
ships,  and  I  think  that  we  are  about  to  burn  ours.’ 

Prhjce^Vassily  always  spoke  languidly,  like  an  actor  repeating  his  part 
in  an  old  play.  Anna  Pavlovna  Scherer,  in  spite  of  her  forty  years,  was 
on  the  contrary  brimming  over  with  excitement  and  impulsiveness.  To  be 
enthusiastic  had  become  her  pose  in  society,  and  at  times  even  when  she 
had,  indeed,  no  inclination  to  be  so,  she  was  enthusiastic  so  as  not  to 
disappoint  the  expectations  of  those  who  knew  her.  The  affected  smile 
which  played  continually  about  Anna  Pavlovna’s  face,  out  of  keeping  as 
it  was  with  her  faded  looks,  expressed  a  spoilt  child’s  continual  conscious¬ 
ness  of  a  charming  failing  of  which  she  had  neither  the  wish  nor  the  power 
to  correct  herself,  which,  indeed,  she  saw  no  need  to  correct. 

In  the  midst  of  a  conversation  about  politics,  Anna  Pavlovna  became 
greatly  excited. 

‘Ah,  don’t  talk  to  me  about  Austria!  I  know  nothing  about  it,  perhaps, 
but  Austria  has  never  wanted,  and  doesn’t  want  war.  She  is  betraying  us. 
Russia  alone  is  to  be  the  saviour  of  Europe.  Our  benefactor  knows  his 
lofty  destiny,  and  will  be  true  to  it.  That’s  the  one  thing  I  have  faith  in. 
Our  good  and  sublime  emperor  has  the  greatest  part  in  the  world  to  play, 
and  he  is  so  virtuous  and  noble  that  God  will  not  desert  him,  and  he  will 


fulfil  his  mission — to  strangle  the  hydra  of  revolution,  which  is  more 
horrible  than  ever  now  in  the  person  of  this  murderer  and  miscreant.  .  .  . 
Whom  can  we  reckon  on,  I  ask  you?  .  .  .  England  with  her  commercial 
spirit  will  not  comprehend  and  cannot  comprehend  all  the  loftiness  of 
soul  of  the  Emperor  Alexander.  She  has  refused  to  evacuate  Malta.  She 
tries  to  detect,  she  seeks  a  hidden  motive  in  our  actions.  What  have  they 
said  to  Novosiltsov?  Nothing.  They  didn’t  understand,  they’re  incapable 
of  understanding  the  self-sacrifice  of  our  emperor,  who  desires  nothing 
for  himself,  and  everything  for  the  good  of  humanity.  And  what  have  they 
promised?  Nothing.  What  they  have  promised  even  won’t  come  to  any 
thing!  Prussia  has  declared  that  Bonaparte  is  invincible,  and  that  all 
Europe  can  do  nothing  against  him.  .  .  .  And  I  don’t  believe  a  single 
word  of  what  was  said  by  Hardenberg  or  Haugwitz.  That  famous  Prussian 
neutrality  is  a  mere  snare.  I  have  no  faith  but  in  God  and  the  lofty  destiny 
of  our  adored  emperor.  He  will  save  Europe!  ’  She  stopped  short  abruptly 
with  a  smile  of  amusement  at  her  own  warmth. 

‘I  imagine,’  said  the  prince,  smiling,  ‘that  if  you  had  been  sent  Instead  bui 
of  our  dear  Wintsengerode,  you  would  have  carried  the  Prussian  king’s 
consent  by  storm, — you  are  so  eloquent.  Will  you  give  me  some  tea?’ 


E 


WARANDPEACE  3 

‘In  a  moment.  By  the  way/  she  added,  subsiding  into  calm  again,  ‘there 
are  two  very  interesting  men  to  be  here  to-night,  the  vicomte  de  Morte- 
mart ;  he  is  connected  with  the  Montmorencies  through  the  Rohans,  one 
of  the  best  families  in  France.  He  is  one  of  the  good  emigrants,  the  real 
ones.  Then  Abbe  Morio;  you  know  that  profound  intellect?  He  has  been 
received  by  the  emperor.  Do  you  know  him?’ 

‘Ah!  I  shall  be  delighted,’  said  the  prince.  ‘Tell  me,’  he  added,  as 
though  he  had  just  recollected  something,  speaking  with  special  non¬ 
chalance,  though  the  question  was  the  chief  motive  of  his  visit:  ‘is  it  true 
that  the  dowager  empress  desires  the  appointment  of  Baron  Funke  as 
first  secretary  to  the  Vienna  legation?  He  is  a  poor  creature,  it  appears, 
that  baron.’  Prince  Vassily  would  have  liked  to  see  his  son  appointed  to 
the  post,  which  people  were  trying,  through  the  Empress  Marya  Fyo¬ 
dorovna,  to  obtain  for  the  baron. 

Anna  Pavlovna  almost  closed  her  eyes  to  signify  that  neither  she  nor 
any  one  else  could  pass  judgment  on  what  the  empress  might  be  pleased 
or  see  fit  to  do. 

‘Baron  Funke  has  been  recommended  to  the  empress-mother  by  her 
sister,’  was  all  she  said  in  a  dry,  mournful  tone.  When  Anna  Pavlovna 
spoke  of  the  empress  her  countenance  suddenly  assumed  a  profound  and 
genuine  expression  of  devotion  and  respect,  mingled  with  melancholy, 
and  this  happened  whenever  she  mentioned  in  conversation  her  illustrious 
patroness.  She  said  that  her  Imperial  Majesty  had  been  graciously  pleased 
to  show  great  esteem  to  Baron  Funke,  and  again  a  shade  of  melancholy 
passed  over  her  face.  The  prince  preserved  an  indifferent  silence.  Anna 
Pavlovna,  with  the  adroitness  and  quick  tact  of  a  courtier  and  a  woman, 
felt  an  inclination  to  chastise  the  prince  for  his  temerity  in  referring  in 
such  terms  to  a  person  recommended  to  the  empress,  and  at  the  same 
time  to  console  him. 

‘But  about  your  own  family/  she  said,  ‘do  you  know  that  your 
daughter,  since  she  has  come  out,  charms  everybody?  People  say  she  is 
as  beautiful  as  the  day.’ 

The  prince  bowed  in  token  of  respect  and  acknowledgment. 

‘I  often  think/  pursued  Anna  Pavlovna,  moving  up  to  the  prince  and 
smiling  cordially  to  him,  as  though  to  mark  that  political  and  worldly 
conversation  was  over  and  now  intimate  talk  was  to  begin:  ‘I  often  think 
how  unfairly  the  blessings  of  life  are  sometimes  apportioned.  Why  has 
fate  given  you  two  such  splendid  children — I  don’t  include  Anatole,  your 
youngest — him  I  don’t  like’  (she  put  in  with  a  decision  admitting  of  no 
appeal,  raising  her  eyebrows) — ‘such  charming  children?  And  you  really 
seem  to  appreciate  them  less  than  any  one,  and  so  you  don’t  deserve  them.’ 

And  she  smiled  her  ecstatic  smile. 

‘What  would  you  have?  Lava  ter  would  have  said  that  I  have  not  the 
bump  of  paternity,’  said  the  prince. 

‘Don’t  keep  on  joking.  I  wanted  to  talk  to  you  seriously.  Do  you  know 
I’m  not  pleased  with  your  youngest  son.  Between  ourselves’  (her  face 


4 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


took  its  mournful  expression),  ‘people  have  been  talking  about  him  to 
her  majesty  and  commiserating  you  .  .  .’ 

The  prince  did  not  answer,  but  looking  at  him  significantly,  she  waited 
in  silence  for  his  answer.  Prince  Vassily  frowned. 

‘What  would  you  have  me  do?’  he  said  at  last.  ‘You  know  I  have  done 
everything  for  their  education  a  father  could  do,  and  they  have  both 
turned  out  dcs  imbeciles.  Ippolit  is  at  least  a  quiet  fool,  while  Anatole’s 
a  fool  that  won’t  keep  quiet,  that’s  the  only  difference,’  he  said,  with  a 
smile,  more  unnatural  and  more  animated  than  usual,  bringing  out  with 
peculiar  prominence  something  surprisingly  brutal  and  unpleasant  in  the 
lines  about  his  mouth. 

‘Why  are  children  born  to  men  like  you?  If  you  weren’t  a  father,  I 
could  find  no  fault  with  you,’  said  Anna  Pavlovna,  raising  her  eyes 
pensively. 

‘I  am  your  faithful  slave  and  to  you  alone  I  can  confess.  My  children 
are  the  bane  of  my  existence.  It’s  the  cross  I  have  to  bear,  that’s  how  I 
explain  it  to  myself.  What  would  you  have?’  ...  He  broke  off  with  a 
gesture  expressing  his  resignation  to  a  cruel  fate.  Anna  Pavlovna  pon¬ 
dered  a  moment. 

‘Have  you  never  thought  of  marrying  your  prodigal  son  Anatole? 
People  say,’  she  said,  ‘that  old  maids  have  a  mania  for  matchmaking.  I 
have  never  been  conscious  of  this  failing  before,  but  I  have  a  little  person 
in  my  mind,  who  is  very  unhappy  with  her  father,  a  relation  of  ours,  the 
young  Princess  Bolkonsky.’ 

Prince  Vassily  made  no  reply,  but  with  the  rapidity  of  reflection  and 
memory  characteristic  of  worldly  people,  he  signified  by  a  motion  of  the 
head  that  he  had  taken  in  and  was  considering  what  she  said. 

‘No,  do  you  know  that  that  boy  is  costing  me  forty  thousand  roubles 
a  year?’  he  said,  evidently  unable  to  restrain  the  gloomy  current  of  his 
thoughts.  He  paused.  ‘What  will  it  be  in  five  years  if  this  goes  on?  These 
are  the  advantages  of  being  a  father.  ...  Is  she  rich,  your  young 
princess?’ 

‘Her  father  is  very  rich  and  miserly.  He  lives  in  the  country.  You  know 
that  notorious  Prince  Bolkonsky,  retired  under  the  late  emperor,  and 
nicknamed  the  “Prussian  King.”  He’s  a  very  clever  man,  but  eccentric 
and  tedious.  The  poor  little  thing  is  as  unhappy  as  possible.  Her  brother 
it  is  who  has  lately  been  married  to  Liza  Meinen,  an  adjutant  of  Kutu¬ 
zov’s.  He’ll  be  here  this  evening.’ 

‘Listen,  dear  Annette,’  said  the  prince,  suddenly  taking  his  companion’s 
hand,  and  for  some  reason  bending  it  downwards.  ‘Arrange  this  matter 
for  me  and  I  am  your  faithful  slave  for  ever  and  ever.  She’s  of  good 
family  and  well  off.  That’s  all  I  want.’ 

And  with  the  freedom,  familiarity,  and  grace  that  distinguished  him, 
he  took  the  maid-of-honour’s  hand,  kissed  it,  and  as  he  kissed  it  waved 
her  hand,  while  he  stretched  forward  in  his  low  chair  and  gazed  away 
into  the  distance. 

‘Wait,’  said  Anna  Pavlovna,  considering.  ‘I’ll  talk  to  Lise  (the  wife  of 


i 


1 

f; 

't! 

IT 


f 

T] 

Ei 

C( 

V 

ill 

W2 

til; 


WARANDPEACE  5 

young  Bolkonsky)  this  very  evening,  and  perhaps  it  can  be  arranged. 
I’ll  try  my  prentice  hand  as  an  old  maid  in  your  family.’ 


II 

Anna  Pavlovna’s  drawing-room  gradually  began  to  fill.  The  people  of 
the  highest  distinction  in  Petersburg  were  there,  people  very  different  in 
ages  and  characters,  but  alike  in  the  set  in  which  they  moved.  The 
daughter  of  Prince  Vassily,  the  beauty,  Ellen,  came  to  fetch  her  father 
and  go  with  him  to  the  ambassador’s  fete.  She  was  wearing  a  ball-dress 
with  an  imperial  badge  on  it.  The  young  Princess  Bolkonsky  was  there, 
celebrated  as  the  most  seductive  woman  in  Petersburg.  She  had  been 
married  the  previous  winter,  and  was  not  now  going  out  into  the  great 
world  on  account  of  her  interesting  condition,  but  was  still  to  be  seen  at 
small  parties.  Prince  Ippolit,  the  son  of  Prince  Vassily,  came  too  with 
Mortemart,  whom  he  introduced.  The  Abbe  Morio  was  there  too,  and 
many  others. 

‘Have  you  not  yet  seen,  or  not  been  introduced  to  ma  tante?'  Anna 
Pavlovna  said  to  her  guests  as  they  arrived,  and  very  seriously  she  led 
them  up  to  a  little  old  lady  wearing  tall  bows,  who  had  sailed  in  out  of 
the  next  foom  as  soon  as  the  guests  began  to  arrive.  Anna  Pavlovna  men¬ 
tioned  their  names,  deliberately  turning  her  eyes  from  the  guest  to  ma 
tante,  and  then  withdrew.  All  the  guests  performed  the  ceremony  of 
greeting  the  aunt,  who  was  unknown,  uninteresting  and  unnecessary  to 
every  one.  Anna  Pavlovna  with  mournful,  solemn  sympathy,  followed 
these  greetings,  silently  approving  them.  Ma  tante  said  to  each  person  the 
same  words  about  his  health,  her  own  health,  and  the  health  of  her 
majesty,  who  was,  thank  God,  better  to-day.  Every  one,  though  from 
politeness  showing  no  undue  haste,  moved  away  from  the  old  lady  with 
a  sense  of  relief  at  a  tiresome  duty  accomplished,  and  did  not  approach 
her  again  all  the  evening.  The  young  Princess  Bolkonsky  had  come  with 
her  work  in  a  gold-embroidered  velvet  bag.  Her  pretty  little  upper  lip, 
faintly  darkened  with  down,  was  very  short  over  her  teeth,  but  was  all 
the  more  charming  when  it  was  lifted,  and  still  more  charming  when  it 
was  at  times  drawn  down  to  meet  the  lower  lip.  As  is  always  the  case  with 
perfectly  charming  women,  her  defect — the  shortness  of  the  lip  and  the 
half-opened  mouth — seemed  her  peculiar,  her  characteristic  beauty. 
Every  one  took  delight  in  watching  the  pretty  creature  full  of  life  and 
gaiety,  so  soon  to  be  a  mother,  and  so  lightly  bearing  her  burden.  Old 
men  and  bored,  depressed  young  men  gazing  at  her  felt  as  though  they 
were  becoming  like  her,  by  being  with  her  and  talking  a  little  while  to 
her.  Any  man  who  spoke  to  her,  and  at  every  word  saw  her  bright  little 
smile  and  shining  white  teeth,  gleaming  continually,  imagined  that  he 
was  being  particularly  successful  this  evening.  And  this  each  thought  in 
turn. 

The  little  princess,  moving  with  a  slight  swing,  walked  with  rapid  little 


6 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

steps  round  the  table  with  her  work-bag  in  her  hand,  and  gaily  arranging 
the  folds  of  her  gown,  sat  down  on  a  sofa  near  the  silver  samovar;  it 
seemed  as  though  everything  she  did  was  a  festival  for  herself  and  all 
around  her. 

‘I  have  brought  my  work,’  she  said,  displaying  her  reticule,  and  ad¬ 
dressing  the  company  generally.  ‘Mind,  Annette,  don’t  play  me  a  nasty 
trick,’  she  turned  to  the  lady  of  the  house;  ‘you  wrote  to  me  that  it  was 
quite  a  little  gathering.  See  how  I  am  got  up.’ 

And  she  flung  her  arms  open  to  show  her  elegant  grey  dress,  trimmed 
with  lace  and  girt  a  little  below  the  bosom  with  a  broad  sash. 

‘Never  mind,  Lise,  you  will  always  be  prettier  than  any  one  else,’ 
answered  Anna  Pavlovna. 

‘You  know  my  husband  is  deserting  me,’  she  went  on  in  just  the  same 
voice,  addressing  a  general;  ‘he  is  going  to  get  himself  killed.  Tell  me 
what  this  nasty  war  is  for,’  she  said  to  Prince  Vassily,  and  without  waiting 
for  an  answer  she  turned  to  Prince  Vassily’s  daughter,  the  beautiful  Ellen. 

‘How  delightful  this  little  princess  is!  ’  said  Prince  Vassily  in  an  under¬ 
tone  to  Anna  Pavlovna. 

Soon  after  the  little  princess,  there  walked  in  a  massively  built,  stout 
young  man  in  spectacles,  with  a  cropped  head,  light  breeches  in  the  mode 
of  the  day,  with  a  high  lace  ruffle  and  a  ginger-coloured  coat.  This  stout 
young  man  was  the  illegitimate  son  of  a  celebrated  dandy  of  the  days  of 
Catherine,  Count  Bezuhov,  who  was  now  dying  at  Moscow.  He  had  not 
yet  entered  any  branch  of  the  service;  he  had  only  just  returned  from 
abroad,  where  he  had  been  educated,  and  this  was  his  first  appearance 
in  society.  Anna  Pavlovna  greeted  him  with  a  nod  reserved  for  persons 
of  the  very  lowest  hierarchy  in  her  drawing-room.  But,  in  spite  of  this 
greeting,  Anna  Pavlovna’s  countenance  showed  signs  on  seeing  Pierre  of 
uneasiness  and  alarm,  such  as  is  shown  at  the  sight  of  something  too  big 
and  out  of  place.  Though  Pierre  certainly  was  somewhat  bigger  than  any 
of  the  other  men  in  the  room,  this  expression  could  only  have  reference 
to  the  clever,  though  shy,  observant  and  natural  look  that  distinguished 
him  from  every  one  else  in  the  drawing-room. 

‘It  is  very  kind  of  you,  M.  Pierre,  to  have  come  to  see  a  poor  invalid,’ 
Anna  Pavlovna  said  to  him,  exchanging  anxious  glances  with  her  aunt, 
to  whom  she  was  conducting  him. 

Pierre  murmured  something  unintelligible,  and  continued  searching 
for  something  with  his  eyes.  He  smiled  gleefully  and  delightedly,  bowing 
to  the  little  princess  as  though  she  were  an  intimate  friend,  and  went  up 
to  the  aunt.  Anna  Pavlovna’s  alarm  was  not  without  grounds,  for  Pierre 
walked  away  from  the  aunt  without  waiting  to  the  end  of  her  remarks 
about  her  majesty’s  health.  Anna  Pavlovna  stopped  him  in  dismay  with 
the  words:  ‘You  don’t  know  Abbe  Morio?  He’s  a  very  interesting  man,’ 
she  said. 

‘Yes,  I  have  heard  of  his  scheme  for  perpetual  peace,  and  it’s  very 
interesting,  but  hardly  possible  .  .  .’ 

‘You  think  so?’  said  Anna  Pavlovna  in  order  to  say  something  and  to 


WAR  AND  PEACE  7 

get  away  again  to  her  duties  as  hostess,  but  Pierre  committed  the  opposite 
incivility.  Just  now  he  had  walked  off  without  listening  to  the  lady  who 
was  addressing  him:  now  he  detained  by  his  talk  a  lady  who  wanted  to 
get  away  from  him.  With  head  bent  and  legs  planted  wide  apart,  he  began 
explaining  to  Anna  Pavlovna  why  he  considered  the  abbe’s  scheme 
chimerical. 

‘We  will  talk  of  it  later,’  said  Anna  Pavlovna,  smiling. 

And  getting  rid  of  this  unmannerly  young  man  she  returned  to  her 
duties,  keeping  her  eyes  and  ears  open,  ready  to  fly  to  the  assistance  at 
any  point  where  the  conversation  was  flagging.  Just  as  the  foreman  of  a 
spinning-mill  settles  the  work-people  in  their  places,  walks  up  and  down 
the  works,  and  noting  any  stoppage  or  unusual  creaking  or  too  loud  a 
whir  in  the  spindles,  goes  up  hurriedly,  slackens  the  machinery  and  sets 
it  going  properly,  so  Anna  Pavlovna,  walking  about  her  drawing-room, 
went  up  to  any  circle  that  was  pausing  or  too  loud  in  conversation  and 
by  a  single  word  or  change  of  position  set  the  conversational  machine 
going  again  in  its  regular,  decorous  way.  But  in  the  midst  of  these  cares  ' 
a  special  anxiety  on  Pierre’s  account  could  still  be  discerned  in  her.  She 
kept  an  anxious  watch  on  him  as  he  went  up  to  listen  to  what  was  being 
said  near  Mortemart.  and  walked  away  to  another  group  where  the  abbe 
was  talking.  Pierre  had  been  educated  abroad,  and  this  party  at  Anna 
Pavlovna’s  was  the  first  at  which  he  had  been  present  in  Russia.  He 
knew  all  the  intellectual  lights  of  Petersburg  gathered  together  here,  and 
his  eyes  strayed  about  like  a  child's  in  a  toy-shop.  He  was  afraid  at  every 
moment  of  missing  some  intellectual  conversation  which  he  might  have 
heard.  Gazing  at  the  self-confident  and  refined  expressions  of  the  per¬ 
sonages  assembled  here,  he  was  continually  expecting  something  excep¬ 
tionally  clever.  At  last  he  moved  up  to  Abbe  Morio.  The  conversation 
seemed  interesting,  and  he  stood  still  waiting  for  an  opportunity  of  ex¬ 
pressing  his  own  ideas,  as  young  people  are  fond  of  doing.  • 


III 

Anna  Pavlovna’s  soiree  was  in  full  swing.  The  spindles  kept  up  their 
regular  hum  on  all  sides  without  pause.  Except  the  aunt,  beside  whom 
was  sitting  no  one  but  an  elderly  lady  with  a  thin,  careworn  face,  who 
seemed  rather  out  of  her  element  in  this  brilliant  society,  the  company 
was  broken  up  into  three  groups.  In  one  of  these,  the  more  masculine,  the 
centre  was  the  abbe;  in  the  other,  the  group  of  young  people,  the  chief 
attractions  were  the  beautiful  Princess  Ellen,  Prince  Vassily's  daughter, 
and  the  little  Princess  Bolkonsky,  with  her  rosy  prettiness,  too  plump 
for  her  years.  In  the  third  group  were  Mortemart  and  Anna  Pavlovna. 

The  vicomte  was  a  pretty  young  gentleman  with  soft  features  and 
manners,  who  obviously  regarded  himself  as  a  celebrity,  but  with  good¬ 
breeding  modestly  allowed  the  company  the  benefit  of  his  society.  Anna 
Pavlovna  unmistakably  regarded  him  as  the  chief  entertainment  she  was 


s 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

giving  her  guests.  As  a  clever  maitre  d’hotel  serves  as  something  superla¬ 
tively  good  the  piece  of  beef  which  no  one  would  have  cared  to  eat  seeing 
it  in  the  dirty  kitchen,  Anna  Pavlovna  that  evening  served  up  to  her 
guests — first,  the  vicomte  and  then  the  abbe,  as  something  superlatively 
subtle.  In  Mortemart’s  group  the  talk  turned  at  once  on  the  execution  of 
the  due  d’Enghien.  The  vicomte  said  that  the  due  d’Enghien  had  been 
lost  by  his  own  magnanimity  and  that  there  were  special  reasons  for 
Bonaparte’s  bitterness  again  him. 

‘Ah,  come!  Tell  us  about  that,  vicomte,’  said  Anna  Pavlovna  gleefully, 
feeling  that  the  phrase  had  a  peculiarly  Louis  Quinze  note  about  it: 
‘Contez-nous  cela,  vicomte.’ 

The  vicomte  bowed  and  smiled  courteously  in  token  of  his  readiness 
to  obey.  Anna  Pavlovna  made  a  circle  round  the  vicomte  and  invited 
every  one  to  hear  his  story. 

‘The  vicomte  was  personally  acquainted  with  his  highness,’  Anna  Pav¬ 
lovna  whispered  to  one.  ‘The  vicomte  tells  a  story  perfectly,’  she  said 
to  another.  ‘How  one  sees  the  man  of  quality,’  she  said  to  a  third,  and 
the  vicomte  was  presented  to  the  company  in  the  most  elegant  and 
advantageous  light,  like  the  roast-beef  on  the  hot  dish  garnished  with 
green  parsley. 

The  vicomte  was  about  to  begin  his  narrative,  and  he  smiled  subtly. 

‘Come  over  here,  chore  Helene,’  said  Anna  Pavlovna  to  the  young 
beauty  who  was  sitting  a  little  way  off,  the  centre  of  another  group. 

Princess  Ellen  smiled.  She  got  up  with  the  same  unchanging  smile  of 
the  acknowledged  beauty  with  which  she  had  entered  the  drawing-room. 
Her  white  ball-dress  adorned  with  ivy  and  moss  rustled  lightly;  her  white 
shoulders,  glossy  hair,  and  diamonds  glittered,  as  she  passed  between  the 
men  who  moved  apart  to  make  way  for  her.  Not  looking  directly  at  any 
one,  but  smiling  at  every  one,  as  it  were  courteously  allowing  to  all  the 
right  to  admire  the  beauty  of  her  figure,  her  full  shoulders,  her  bosom 
and  back,  which  were  extremely  exposed  in  the  mode  of  the  day,  she 
moved  up  to  Anna  Pavlovna,  seeming  to  bring  with  her  the  brilliance 
of  the  ballroom.  Ellen  was  so  lovely  that  she  was  not  merely  free  from 
the  slightest  shade  of  coquetry,  she  seemed  on  the  contrary  ashamed  of 
the  too  evident,  too  violent  and  all-conquering  influence  of  her  beauty. 
She  seemed  to  wish  but  to  be  unable  to  soften  the  effect  of  her  beauty. 

‘What  a  beautiful  woman!’  every  one  said  on  seeing  her.  As  though 
struck  by  something  extraordinary,  the  vicomte  shrugged  his  shoulders 
and  dropped  his  eyes,  when  she  seated  herself  near  him  and  dazzled  him 
too  with  the  same  unchanging  smile. 

‘Madame,  I  doubt  my  abilities  before  such  an  audience,’  he  said,  bow¬ 
ing  with  a  smile. 

The  princess  leaned  her  plump,  bare  arm  on  the  table  and  did  not 
find  it  necessary  to  say  anything.  She  waited,  smiling.  During  the 
vicomte’s  story  she  sat  upright,  looking  from  time  to  time  at  her  beautiful, 
plump  arm,  which  lay  with  its  line  changed  by  pressure  on  the  table, 
then  at  her  still  lovelier  bosom,  on  which  she  set  straight  her  diamond 


WARANDPEACE  9 

necklace.  Several  times  she  settled  the  folds  of  her  gown,  and  when  the 
narrative  made  a  sensation  upon  the  audience,  she  glanced  at  Anna 
Pavlovna  and  at  once  assumed  the  expression  she  saw  on  the  maid-of- 
honour’s  face,  then  she  relapsed  again  into  her  unvarying  smile.  After 
Ellen  the  little  princess  too  moved  away  from  the  tea-table. 

‘Wait  for  me,  I  will  take  my  work,’  she  said.  ‘Come,  what  are  you 
thinking  of?’  she  said  to  Prince  Ippolit.  ‘Bring  me  my  reticule.’ 

The  little  princess,  smiling  and  talking  to  every  one,  at  once  effected 
a  change  of  position,  and  settling  down  again,  gaily  smoothed  out  her 
skirts. 

‘Now  I’m  comfortable,’  she  said,  and  begging  the  vicomte  to  begin, 
she  took  up  her  work.  Prince  Ippolit  brought  her  reticule,  moved  to  her 
side,  and  bending  close  over  her  chair,  sat  beside  her. 

Le  charmant  Hippolyte  struck  every  one  as  extraordinarily  like  his 
sister,  and,  still  more,  as  being,  in  spite  of  the  likeness,  strikingly  ugly. 
His  features  were  like  his  sister’s,  but  in  her,  everything  was  radiant  with 
joyous  life,  with  the  complacent,  never-failing  smile  of  youth  and  life 
and  an  extraordinary  antique  beauty  of  figure.  The  brother’s  face  on 
the  contrary  was  clouded  over  by  imbecility  and  invariably  wore  a  look 
of  aggressive  fretfuiness,  while  he  was  thin  and  feebly  built.  His  eyes, 
his  nose,  his  mouth — everything  was,  as  it  were,  puckered  up  in  one 
vacant,  bored  grimace,  while  his  arms  and  legs  always  fell  into  the  most 
grotesque  attitudes. 

‘It  is  not  a  ghost  story,’  he  said,  sitting  down  by  the  princess  and  hur¬ 
riedly  fixing  his  eyeglass  in  his  eye,  as  though  without  that  instrument 
he  could  not  begin  to  speak. 

‘Why,  no,  my  dear  fellow,’  said  the  astonished  vicomte,  with  a  shrug. 

‘Because  I  detest  ghost  stories,’  said  Prince  Ippolit  in  a  tone  which 
showed  that  he  uttered  the  words  before  he  was  aware  of  their  meaning. 

From  the  self-confidence  with  which  he  spoke,  no  one  could  tell  whether 
what  he  said  was  very  clever  or  very  stupid.  He  was  dressed  in  a  dark- 
green  frock  coat,  breeches  of  the  colour  of  the  cuisse  de  nymphe  effrayee, 
as  he  called  it,  stockings  and  slippers.  The  vicomte  very  charmingly  re¬ 
lated  the  anecdote  then  current,  that  the  due  d’Enghien  had  secretly 
visited  Paris  for  the  sake  of  an  interview  with  the  actress,  Mile.  Georges, 
and  that  there  he  met  Bonaparte,  who  also  enjoyed  the  favours  of  the 
celebrated  actress,  and  that,  meeting  the  due,  Napoleon  had  fallen  into 
one  of  the  fits  to  which  he  was  subject  and  had  been  completely  in  the 
due’s  power,  how  the  due  had  not  taken  advantage  of  it,  and  Bonaparte 
had  in  the  sequel  avenged  this  magnanimity  by  the  due’s  death. 

The  story  was  very  charming  and  interesting,  especially  at  the  point 
when  the  rivals  suddenly  recognise  each  other  and  the  ladies  seemed  to 
be  greatly  excited  by  it.  ‘Charmant!’  said  Anna  Pavlovna,  looking  in¬ 
quiringly  at  the  little  princess.  ‘Charming!’  whispered  the  little  princess, 
sticking  her  needle  into  her  work  as  an  indication  that  the  interest  and 
charm  of  the  story  prevented  her  working.  The  vicomte  appreciated  this 
silent  homage,  and  smiling  gratefully,  resumed  his  narrative.  But  mean- 


IO 


WAR  AND  PEACE 
while  Anna  Pavlovna,  still  keeping  a  watch  on  the  dreadful  young  man, 
noticed  that  he  was  talking  too  loudly  and  too  warmly  with  the  abbe 
and  hurried  to  the  spot  of  danger.  Pierre  had  in  fact  succeeded  in  getting 
into  a  political  conversation  with  the  abbe  on  the  balance  of  power,  and 
the  abbe,  evidently  interested  by  the  simple-hearted  fervour  of  the  young 
man,  was  unfolding  to  him  his  cherished  idea.  Both  were  listening  and 
talking  too  eagerly  and  naturally,  and  Anna  Pavlovna  did  not  like  it. 

‘The  means? — the  balance  of  power  in  Europe  and  the  rights  of  the 
people,’  said  the  abbe.  ‘One  powerful  state  like  Russia — with  the  prestige 
of  barbarism — need  only  take  a  disinterested  stand  at  the  head  of  the 
alliance  that  aims  at  securing  the  balance  of  power  in  Europe,  and  it 
would  save  the  world!’  ‘How  are  you  going  to  get  such  a  balance  of 
power?’  Pierre  was  beginning;  but  at  that  moment  Anna  Pavlovna  came 
up,  and  glancing  severely  at  Pierre,  asked  the  Italian  how  he  was  sup¬ 
porting  the  climate.  The  Italian’s  face  changed  instantly  and  assumed 
the  look  of  offensive,  affected  sweetness,  which  was  evidently  its  habitual 
expression  in  conversation  with  women.  ‘I  am  so  enchanted  by  the  wit 
and  culture  of  the  society — especially  of  the  ladies — in  which  I  have  had 
the  happiness  to  be  received,  that  I  have  not  yet  had  time  to  think  of  the 
climate,’  he  said.  Not  letting  the  abbe  and  Pierre  slip  out  of  her  grasp, 
Anna  Pavlovna,  for  greater  convenience  in  watching  them,  made  them 
join  the  bigger  group. 

At  that  moment  another  guest  walked  into  the  drawing-room.  This 
was  the  young  Prince  Andrey  Bolkonsky,  the  husband  of  the  little 
princess.  Prince  Bolkonsky  was  a  very  handsome  young  man,  of  medium 
height,  with  clear,  clean-cut  features.  Everything  in  his  appearance,  from 
his  weary,  bored  expression  to  his  slow,  measured  step,  formed  the  mosc 
striking  contrast  to  his  lively  little  wife.  Obviously  all  the  people  in  the 
drawing-room  were  familiar  figures  to  him,  and  more  than  that,  he  was 
unmistakably  so  sick  of  them  that  even  to  look  at  them  and  to  listen  to 
them  was  a  weariness  to  him.  Of  all  the  wearisome  faces  the  face  of  his 
pretty  wife  seemed  to  bore  him  most.  With  a  grimace  that  distorted  his 
handsome  face  he  turned  away  from  her.  He  kissed  Anna  Pavlovna’s 
hand,  and  with  half-closed  eyelids  scanned  the  whole  company. 

‘You  are  enlisting  for  the  war,  prince?’  said  Anna  Pavlovna. 

‘General  Kutuzov  has  been  kind  enough  to  have  me  as  an  aide-de- 
camp,’  said  Bolkonsky.  < 

‘And  Lise,  your  wife? - ’ 

‘She  is  going  into  the  country.’ 

‘Isn’t  it  too  bad  of  you  to  rob  us  of  your  charming  wife?’ 

‘Andre,’  said  his  wife,  addressing  her  husband  in  exactly  the  same 
coquettish  tone  in  which  she  spoke  to  outsiders,  ‘the  vicomte  has  just 
told  us  such  a  story  about  Mile.  Georges  and  Bonaparte!’ 

Prince  Andrey  scowled  and  turned  away.  Pierre,  who  had  kept  his 
eyes  joyfully  and  affectionately  fixed  on  him  ever  since  he  came  in,  went 
up  to  him  and  took  hold  of  his  arm.  Prince  Andrey,  without  looking 
round,  twisted  his  face  into  a  grimace  of  annoyance  at  any  one’s  touch- 


II 


WAR  AND  PEACE 
ing  him,  but  seeing  Pierre’s  smiling  face,  he  gave  him  a  smile  that  was 
unexpectedly  sweet  and  pleasant. 

‘Why,  you!  .  .  .  And  in  such  society  too,’  he  said  to  Pierre. 

‘I  knew  you  would  be  here,’  answered  Pierre.  ‘I’m  coming  to  supper 
with  you,’  he  added  in  an  undertone,  not  to  interrupt  the  vicomte  who 
was  still  talking.  ‘Can  I?’ 

‘Oh  no,  impossible,’  said  Prince  Andrey,  laughing,  with  a  squeeze  of 
his  hand  giving  Pierre  to  understand  that  there  was  no  need  to  ask. 
He  would  have  said  something  more,  but  at  that  instant  Prince  Vassily 
and  his  daughter  got  up  and  the  two  young  men  rose  to  make  way  for 
them. 

‘Pardon  me,  my  dear  vicomte,’  said  Prince  Vassily  in  French,  gently 
pulling  him  down  by  his  sleeve  to  prevent  him  from  getting  up  from  his 
seat.  ‘This  luckless  fete  at  the  ambassador’s  deprives  me  of  a  pleasure 
and  interrupts  you.  I  am  very  sorry  to  leave  your  enchanting  party,’  he 
said  to  Anna  Pavlovna. 

His  daughter,  Princess  Ellen,  lightly  holding  the  folds  of  her  gown, 
passed  between  the  chairs,  and  the  smile  glowed  more  brightly  than  ever 
on  her  handsome  face.  Pierre  looked  with  rapturous,  almost  frightened 
eyes  at  this  beautiful  creature  as  she  passed  them. 

‘Very  lovely!’  said  Prince  Andrey. 

‘Very,’  said  Pierre. 

As  he  came  up  to  them,  Prince  Vassily  took  Pierre  by  the  arm,  and 
addressing  Anna  Pavlovna: 

‘Get  this  bear  into  shape  for  me,’  he  said.  ‘Here  he  has  been  staying 
with  me  for  a  month,  and  this  is  the  first  time  I  have  seen  him  in  society. 
Nothing’s  so  necessary  for  a  young  man  as  the  society  of  clever  women.’ 


IV 

Anna  Pavlovna  smiled  and  promised  to  look  after  Pierre,  who  was,  she 
knew,  related  to  Prince  Vassily  on  his  father’s  side.  The  elderly  lady, 
who  had  been  till  then  sitting  by  the  aunt,  got  up  hurriedly,  and  overtook 
Prince  Vassily  in  the  hall.  All  the  affectation  of  interest  she  had  assumed 
till  now  vanished.  Her  kindly,  careworn  face  expressed  nothing  but 
anxiety  and  alarm. 

‘What  have  you  to  tell  me,  prince,  of  my  Boris?’  she  said,  catching  him 
in  the  hall.  ‘I  can’t  stay  any  longer  in  Petersburg.  Tell  me  what  news 
am  I  to  take  to  my  poor  boy?’ 

Although  Prince  Vassily  listened  reluctantly  and  almost  uncivilly  to 
the  elderly  lady  and  even  showed  signs  of  impatience,  she  gave  him 
an  ingratiating  and  appealing  smile,  and  to  prevent  his  going  away  she 
took  him  by  the  arm.  ‘It  is  nothing  for  you  to  say  a  word  to  the  Emperor, 
and  he  will  be  transferred  at  once  to  the  Guards,’  she  implored. 

‘Believe  me,  I  will  do  all  I  can,  princess,’  answered  Prince  Vassily; 
‘but  it’s  not  easy  for  me  to  petition  the  Emperor.  I  should  advise  you  to 

I 


12 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

apply  to  Rumyantsov,  through  Prince  Galitsin;  that  would  be  the 
wisest  course.’ 

The  elderly  lady  was  a  Princess  Drubetskoy,  one  of  the  best  families 
in  Russia;  but  she  was  poor,  had  been  a  long  while  out  of  society,  and 
had  lost  touch  with  her  former  connections.  She  had  come  now  to  try 
and  obtain  the  appointment  of  her  only  son  to  the  Guards.  It  was  simply 
in  order  to  see  Prince  Vassily  that  she  had  invited  herself  and  come  to 
Anna  Pavlovna’s  party,  simply  for  that  she  had  listened  to  the  vicomte’s 
story.  She  was  dismayed  at  Prince  Vassily’s  words;  her  once  handsome 
face  showed  exasperation,  but  that  lasted  only  one  moment.  She  smiled 
again  and  grasped  Prince  Vassily’s  arm  more  tightly. 

‘Hear  what  I  have  to  say,  prince,’  she  said.  ‘I  have  never  asked  you  a 
favour,  and  never  will  I  ask  one;  I  have  never  reminded  you  of  my 
father’s  affection  for  you.  But  now,  for  God’s  sake,  I  beseech  you,  do 
this  for  my  son,  and  I  shall  consider  you  my  greatest  benefactor,’  she 
added  hurriedly.  ‘No,  don’t  be  angry,  but  promise  me.  I  have  asked 
Galitsin;  he  has  refused.  Be  as  kind  as  you  used  to  be,’  she  said,  trying 
to  smile,  though  there  were  tears  in  her  eyes. 

‘Papa,  we  are  late,’  said  Princess  Ellen,  turning  her  lovely  head  on 
her  statuesque  shoulders  as  she  waited  at  the  door. 

But  influence  in  the  world  is  a  capital,  which  must  be  carefully 
guarded  if  it  is  not  to  disappear.  Prince  Vassily  knew  this,  and  having 
once  for  all  reflected  that  if  he  were  to  beg  for  all  who  begged  him  to  do 
so,  he  would  soon  be  unable  to  beg  for  himself,  he  rarely  made  use  of  his 
influence.  In  Princess  Drubetskoy’s  case,  however,  he  felt  after  her  new 
appeal  something  akin  to  a  conscience-prick.  She  had  reminded  him  of 
the  truth ;  for  his  first  step  upwards  in  the  service  he  had  been  indebted  ! 
to  her  father.  Besides  this,  he  saw  from  her  manner  that  she  was  one  of 
those  women — especially  mothers — who  having  once  taken  an  idea  into 
their  heads  will  not  give  it  up  till  their  wishes  are  fulfilled,  and  till  then 
are  prepared  for  daily,  hourly  persistence,  and  even  for  scenes.  This  last 
consideration  made  him  waver. 

‘Chere  Anna  Mihalovna,’  he  said,  with  his  invariable  familiarity  and 
boredom  in  his  voice,  ‘it’s  almost  impossible  for  me  to  do  what  you 
wish;  but  to  show  you  my  devotion  to  you,  and  my  reverence  for  your 
dear  father’s  memory,  I  will  do  the  impossible — your  son  shall  be  trans¬ 
ferred  to  the  Guards;  here  is  my  hand  on  it.  Are  you  satisfied?’ 

‘My  dear  prince,  you  are  our  benefactor.  I  expected  nothing  less  in¬ 
deed  ;  I  know  how  good  you  are - ’  He  tried  to  get  away.  ‘Wait  a  mo¬ 

ment,  one  word.  Once  in  the  Guards  .  .  .’  She  hesitated.  ‘You  are  on 
friendly  terms  with  Mihail  Ilarionovitch  Kutuzov,  recommend  Boris  as 
his  adjutant.  Then  my  heart  will  be  set  at  rest,  then  indeed  .  .  .’ 

Prince  Vassily  smiled.  ‘That  I  can’t  promise.  You  don’t  know  how 
Kutuzov  has  been  besieged  ever  since  he  has  been  appointed  commander- 
in-chief.  He  told  me  himself  that  all  the  Moscow  ladies  were  in  league 
together  to  give  him  all  their  offspring  as  adjutants.' 

‘No,  promise  me ;  I  can’t  let  you  off,  kind,  good  friend,  benefactor  .  .  .’ 


*3 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Papa,’  repeated  the  beauty  in  the  same  tone,  ‘we  are  late.’ 

‘Come,  au  revoir,  good-bye.  You  see  how  it  is.’ 

‘To-morrow  then  you  will  speak  to  the  Emperor?’ 

‘Certainly;  but  about  Kutuzov  I  can’t  promise.’ 

‘Yes;  do  promise,  promise,  Basile,’  Anna  Mihalovna  said,  pursuing 
him  with  the  smile  of  a  coquettish  girl,  once  perhaps  characteristic, 
but  now  utterly  incongruous  with  her  careworn  face.  Evidently  she  had 
forgotten  her  age  and  from  habit  was  bringing  out  every  feminine 
resource.  But  as  soon  as  he  had  gone  out  her  face  assumed  once  more 
the  frigid,  artificial  expression  it  had  worn  all  the  evening.  She  went 
back  to  the  group  in  which  the  vicomte  was  still  talking,  and  again 
affected  to  be  listening,  waiting  for  the  suitable  moment  to  get  away, 
now  that  her  object  had  been  attained. 

‘And  what  do  you  think  of  this  latest  farce  of  the  coronation  at 
Milan?’  said  Anna  Pavlovna.  ‘And  the  new  comedy  of  the  people  of 
Lucca  and  Genoa  coming  to  present  their  petitions  to  Monsieur  Buona¬ 
parte.  Monsieur  Buonaparte  sitting  on  a  throne  and  granting  the  petitions 
of  nations!  Adorable!  Why,  it  is  enough  to  drive  one  out  of  one’s  senses! 
It  seems  as  though  the  whole  world  had  lost  its  head.’ 

Prince  Andrey  smiled  sarcastically,  looking  straight  into  Anna  Pav¬ 
lovna’s  face. 

‘God  gives  it  me;  let  man  beware  of  touching  it,’  he  said  (Bonaparte’s 
words  uttered  at  the  coronation).  ‘They  say  that  he  was  very  fine  as  he 
spoke  those  words,’  he  added,  and  he  repeated  the  same  words  in  Italian: 
‘ Dio  mi  la  dona,  gai  a  qui  la  tocca.’ 

‘I  hope  that  at  last,’  pursued  Anna  Pavlovna,  ‘this  has  been  the  drop 
of  water  that  will  make  the  glass  run  over.  The  sovereigns  cannot  con¬ 
tinue  to  endure  this  man  who  is  a  threat  to  everything.’ 

‘The  sovereigns!  I  am  not  speaking  of  Russia,’  said  the  vicomte, 
deferentially  and  hopelessly.  ‘The  sovereigns!  .  .  .  Madame!  What  did 
they  do  for  Louis  the  Sixteenth,  for  the  queen,  for  Madame  Elisabeth? 
Nothing,’  he  went  on  with  more  animation;  ‘and  believe  me,  they  are 
undergoing  the  punishment  of  their  treason  to  the  Bourbon  cause.  The 
sovereigns!  .  .  .  They  are  sending  ambassadors  to  congratulate  the 
usurper.’ 

And  with  a  scornful  sigh  he  shifted  his  attitude  again.  Prince  Ippolit, 
who  had  for  a  long  time  been  staring  through  his  eyeglass  at  the  vicomte, 
at  these  words  suddenly  turned  completely  round,  and  bending  over  the 
little  princess  asked  her  for  a  needle,  and  began  showing  her  the  coat- 
of-arms  of  the  Conde  family,  scratching  it  with  the  needle  on  the  table. 
He  explained  the  coat-of-arms  with  an  air  of  gravity,  as  though  the 
princess  had  asked  him  about  it.  ‘Staff,  gules;  engrailed  with  gules  of 
azure — house  of  Conde,’  he  said.  The  princess  listened  smiling. 

‘If  Bonaparte  remains  another  year  on  the  throne  of  France,’  resumed 
the  vicomte,  with  the  air  of  a  man  who,  being  better  acquainted  with  the 
subject  than  any  one  else,  pursues  his  own  train  of  thought  without 
listening  to  other  people,  ‘things  will  have  gone  too  far.  By  intrigue  and 

I 


i4  WAR  AND  PEACE 

violence,  by  exiles  and  executions,  French  society — I  mean  good  society 
— will  have  been  destroyed  for  ever,  and  then  .  .  .’ 

He  shrugged  his  shoulders,  and  made  a  despairing  gesture  with  his 
hand.  Pierre  wanted  to  say  something — the  conversation  interested  him 
— but  Anna  Pavlovna,  who  was  keeping  her  eye  on  him,  interposed. 

‘And  the  Emperor  Alexander,’  she  said  with  the  pathetic  note  that 
always  accompanied  all  her  references  to  the  imperial  family,  ‘has  de¬ 
clared  his  intention  of  leaving  it  to  the  French  themselves  to  choose  their 
own  form  of  government.  And  I  imagine  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  whole 
nation,  delivered  from  the  usurper,  would  fling  itself  into  the  arms  of 
its  lawful  king,’  said  Anna  Pavlovna,  trying  to  be  agreeable  to  an 
emigre  and  loyalist. 

‘That’s  not  certain,’  said  Prince  Andrey.  ‘M.  le  vicomte  is  quite  right 
in  supposing  that  things  have  gone  too  far  by  now.  I  imagine  it  would 
not  be  easy  to  return  to  the  old  regime.’ 

‘As  far  as  I  could  hear,’  Pierre,  blushing,  again  interposed  in  the  con¬ 
versation,  ‘almost  all  the  nobility  have  gone  over  to  Bonaparte.’ 

‘That’s  what  the  Bonapartists  assert,’  said  the  vicomte  without  look¬ 
ing  at  Pierre.  ‘It’s  a  difficult  matter  now  to  find  out  what  public  opinion 
is  in  France.’ 

‘Bonaparte  said  so,’  observed  Prince  Andrey  with  a  sarcastic  smile.  It 
was  evident  that  he  did  not  like  the  vicomte,  and  that  though  he  was 
not  looking  at  him,  he  was  directing  his  remarks  against  him. 

‘  “I  showed  them  the  path  of  glory;  they  would  not  take  it,”  ’  he  said 
after  a  brief  pause,  again  quoting  Napoleon’s  words.  ‘  “I  opened  my 
anterooms  to  them;  they  crowded  in.”  ...  I  do  not  know  in  what 
degree  he  had  a  right  to  say  so.’ 

‘None!’  retorted  the  vicomte.  ‘Since  the  due’s  murder,  even  his  warm¬ 
est  partisans  have  ceased  to  regard  him  as  a  hero.  If  indeed  some  people 
made  a  hero  of  him,’  said  the  vicomte  addressing  Anna  Pavlovna,  ‘since 
the  duke’s  assassination  there  has  been  a  martyr  more  in  heaven,  and 
a  hero  less  on  earth.’ 

Anna  Pavlovna  and  the  rest  of  the  company  hardly  had  time  to  smile 
their  appreciation  of  the  vicomte’s  words,  when  Pierre  again  broke  into 
the  conversation,  and  though  Anna  Pavlovna  had  a  foreboding  he  would 
say  something  inappropriate,  this  time  she  was  unable  to  stop  him. 

‘The  execution  of  the  due  d’Enghien,’  said  Monsieur  Pierre,  ‘was  a 
political  necessity,  and  I  consider  it  a  proof  of  greatness  of  soul  that 
Napoleon  did  not  hesitate  to  take  the  whole  responsibility  of  it  upon 
himself.’ 

‘Dieul  mon  Dieu!’  moaned  Anna  Pavlovna,  in  a  terrified  whisper. 

‘What,  Monsieur  Pierre!  you  think  assassination  is  greatness  of  soul,’ 
said  the  little  princess,  smiling  and  moving  her  work  nearer  to  her. 

‘Ah!  oh!’  cried  different  voices. 

‘Capital!’  Prince  Ippolit  said  in  English,  and  he  began  slapping  his 
knee.  The  vicomte  merely  shrugged  his  shoulders. 

Pierre  looked  solemnly  over  his  spectacles  at  his  audience. 


WARANDPEACE  15 

‘I  say  so,’  he  pursued  desperately,  ‘because  the  Bourbons  ran  away 
from  the  Revolution,  leaving  the  people  to  anarchy;  and  Napoleon  alone 
was  capable  of  understanding  the  Revolution,  of  overcoming  it,  and  so 
for  the  public  good  he  could  not  stop  short  at  the  life  of  one  man.’ 

‘Won’t  you  come  over  to  this  table?’  said  Anna  Pavlovna.  But  Pierre 
went  on  without  answering  her. 

‘Yes,’  he  said,  getting  more  and  more  eager,  ‘Napoleon  is  great  because 
he  has  towered  above  the  Revolution,  and  subdued  its  evil  tendencies, 
preserving  all  that  was  good — the  equality  of  all  citizens,  and  freedom 
of  speech  and  of  the  press,  and  only  to  that  end  has  he  possessed  himself 
of  supreme  power.’ 

‘Yes,  if  on  obtaining  power  he  had  surrendered  it  to  the  lawful  king, 
instead  of  making  use  of  it  to  commit  murder,’  said  the  vicomte,  ‘then  I 
might  have  called  him  a  great  man.’ 

‘He  could  not  have  done  that.  The  people  gave  him  power  simply  for 
him  to  rid  them  of  the  Bourbons,  and  that  was  just  why  the  people 
believed  him  to  be  a  great  man.  The  Revolution  was  a  grand  fact,’  pur¬ 
sued  Monsieur  Pierre,  betraying  by  this  desperate  and  irrelevantly 
provocative  statement  his  extreme  youth  and  desire  to  give  full  expres¬ 
sion  to  everything. 

‘Revolution  and  regicide  a  grand  fact?  .  .  .  What  next?  .  .  .  but 
won’t  you  come  to  this  table?’  repeated  Anna  Pavlovna. 

‘Contrat  social,’  said  the  vicomte  with  a  bland  smile. 

‘I’m  not  speaking  of  regicide.  I’m  speaking  of  the  idea. 

‘The  idea  of  plunder,  murder,  and  regicide!’  an  ironical  voice  put  in. 

‘Those  were  extremes,  of  course;  but  the  whole  meaning  of  the  Revo¬ 
lution  did  not  lie  in  them,  but  in  the  rights  of  man,  in  emancipation  from 
conventional  ideas,  in  equality;  and  all  these  Napoleon  has  maintained 
in  their  full  force.’ 

‘Liberty  and  equality,’  said  the  vicomte  contemptuously,  as  though 
he  had  at  last  made  up  his  mind  to  show  this  youth  seriously  all  the 
folly  of  his  assertions:  ‘all  high-sounding  words,  which  have  long  since 
been  debased.  Who  does  not  love  liberty  and  equality?  Our  Saviour  in- 
1  deed  preached  liberty  and  equality.  Have  men  been  any  happier  since 
the  Revolution?  On  the  contrary.  We  wanted  liberty,  but  Bonaparte  has 
crushed  it.’ 

Prince  Andrey  looked  with  a  smile  first  at  Pierre,  then  at  the  vicomte, 
then  at  their  hostess. 

For  the  first  minute  Anna  Pavlovna  had,  in  spite  of  her  social  adroit¬ 
ness,  been  dismayed  by  Pierre’s  outbreak;  but  when  she  saw  that  the 
;  vicomte  was  not  greatly  discomposed  by  Pierre’s  sacrilegious  utterances, 
and  had  convinced  herself  that  it  was  impossible  to  suppress  them,  she 
'  rallied  her  forces  and  joined  the  vicomte  in  attacking  the  orator. 

‘Mats,  mon  chcr  Monsieur  Pierre,’  said  Anna  Pavlovna,  ‘what  have 
you  to  say  for  a  great  man  who  was  capable  of  executing  the  due — or 
simply  any  human  being — guiltless  and  untried?’ 


i6 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘I  should  like  to  ask,’  said  the  vicomte,  ‘how  monsieur  would  explain 
the  1 8th  of  Brumaire?  Was  not  that  treachery?’ 

‘It  was  a  juggling  trick,  not  at  all  like  a  great  man’s  way  of  acting.’ 

‘And  the  wounded  he  killed  in  Africa?’  said  the  little  princess;  ‘that 
was  awful !  ’  And  she  shrugged  her  shoulders. 

‘He’s  a  plebeian,  whatever  you  may  say,’  said  Prince  Ippolit. 

Monsieur  Pierre  did  not  know  which  to  answer.  He  looked  at  them  all 
and  smiled.  His  smile  was  utterly  unlike  the  half-smile  of  all  the  others. 
When  he  smiled,  suddenly,  instantaneously,  his  serious,  even  rather 
sullen,  face  vanished  completely,  and  a  quite  different  face  appeared, 
childish,  good-humoured,  even  rather  stupid,  that  seemed  to  beg  in¬ 
dulgence.  The  vicomte,  who  was  seeing  him  for  the  first  time,  saw  clearly 
that  this  Jacobin  was  by  no  means  so  formidable  as  his  words.  Every  one 
was  silent. 

‘How  is  he  to  answer  every  one  at  once?’  said  Prince  Andrey.  ‘Besides, 
in  the  actions  of  a  statesman,  one  must  distinguish  between  his  acts  as 
a  private  person  and  as  a  general  or  an  emperor.  So  it  seems  to  me.’ 

‘Yes,  yes,  of  course,’  put  in  Pierre,  delighted  at  the  assistance  that 
had  come  to  support  him. 

‘One  must  admit,’  pursued  Prince  Andrey,  ‘that  Napoleon  as  a  man 
was  great  at  the  bridge  of  Areola,  or  in  the  hospital  at  Jaffa,  when  he  gave 
his  hand  to  the  plague-stricken,  but  .  .  .  but  there  are  other  actions  it 
would  be  hard  to  justify.’ 

Prince  Andrey,  who  obviously  wished  to  relieve  the  awkwardness  of 
Pierre’s  position,  got  up  to  go,  and  made  a  sign  to  his  wife. 

Suddenly  Prince  Ippolit  got  up,  and  with  a  wave  of  his  hands  stopped 
every  one,  and  motioning  to  them  to  be  seated,  began: 

‘Ah,  I  heard  a  Moscow  story  to-day;  I  must  entertain  you  with  it. 
You  will  excuse  me,  vicomte,  I  must  tell  it  in  Russian.  If  not,  the  point 
of  the  story  will  be  lost.’  And  Prince  Ippolit  began  speaking  in  Russian, 
using  the  sort  of  jargon  Frenchmen  speak  after  spending  a  year  in 
Russia.  Every  one  waited  expectant;  Prince  Ippolit  had  so  eagerly,  so 
insistently  called  for  the  attention  of  all  for  his  story. 

‘In  Moscow  there  is  a  lady,  une  dame.  And  she  is  very  stingy.  She 
wanted  to  have  two  footmen  behind  her  carriage.  And  very  tall  foot¬ 
men.  That  was  her  taste.  And  she  had  a  lady’s  maid,  also  very  tall.  She 
said  .  .  .’ 

Here  Prince  Ippolit  paused  and  pondered,  apparently  collecting  his 
ideas  with  difficulty. 

‘"She  said  .  .  .  yes,  she  said:  “Girl,”  to  the  lady’s  maid,  “put  on  livree, 
and  get  up  behind  the  carriage,  to  pay  calls.”  ’ 

Here  Prince  Ippolit  gave  a  loud  guffaw,  laughing  long  before  any  of 
his  audience,  which  created  an  impression  by  no  means  flattering  to  him. 
Several  persons,  among  them  the  elderly  lady  and  Anna  Pavlovna,  did 
smile,  however. 

‘She  drove  off.  Suddenly  there  was  a  violent  gust  of  wind.  The  girl  lost 
her  hat,  and  her  long  hair  fell  down  .  .  .’ 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


i7 

At  this  point  he  could  not  restrain  himself,  and  began  laughing  vio¬ 
lently,  articulating  in  the  middle  of  a  loud  guffaw,  ‘And  all  the  world 
knew  .  .  .’ 

There  the  anecdote  ended.  Though  no  one  could  understand  why  he 
had  told  it,  and  why  he  had  insisted  on  telling  it  in  Russian,  still  Anna 
Pavlovna  and  several  other  people  appreciated  the  social  breeding  of 
Prince  Ippolit  in  so  agreeably  putting  a  close  to  the  disagreeable  and 
ill-bred  outbreak  of  Monsieur  Pierre.  The  conversation  after  this  episode 
broke  up  into  small  talk  of  no  interest  concerning  the  last  and  the 
approaching  ball,  the  theatre,  and  where  and  when  one  would  meet 
so-and-so  again. 


V 

Thanking  Anna  Pavlovna  for  her  charmante  soiree,  the  guests  began 
to  take  leave. 

Pierre  was  clumsy,  stout  and  uncommonly  tall,  with  huge  red  hands; 
he  did  not,  as  they  say,  know  how  to  come  into  a  drawing-room  and  still 
less  how  to  get  out  of  one,  that  is,  how  to  say  something  particularly 
agreeable  on  going  away.  Moreover,  he  was  dreamy.  He  stood  up,  and 
picking  up  a  three-cornered  hat  with  the  plume  of  a  general  in  it  instead 
of  his  own,  he  kept  hold  of  it,  pulling  the  feathers  till  the  general  asked 
him  to  restore  it.  But  all  his  dreaminess  and  his  inability  to  enter  a 
drawing-room  or  talk  properly  in  it  were  atoned  for  by  his  expression  of 
good-nature,  simplicity  and  modesty.  Anna  Pavlovna  turned  to  him, 
and  with  Christian  meekness  signifying  her  forgiveness  for  his  misbe¬ 
haviour,  she  nodded  to  him  and  said: 

‘I  hope  I  shall  see  you  again,  but  I  hope  too  you  will  change  your 
opinions,  my  dear  Monsieur  Pierre.’ 

He  made  no  answer,  simply  bowed  and  displayed  to  every  one  once 
more  his  smile,  which  said  as  plainly  as  words:  ‘Opinions  or  no  opinions, 
you  see  what  a  nice,  good-hearted  fellow  I  am.’  And  Anna  Pavlovna  and 
every  one  else  instinctively  felt  this.  Prince  Andrey  had  gone  out  into 
the  hall  and  turning  his  shoulders  to  the  footman  who  was  ready  to  put 
his  cloak  on  him,  he  listened  indifferently  to  his  wife’s  chatter  with  Prince 
Ippolit,  who  had  also  come  out  into  the  hall.  Prince  Ippolit  stood  close 
to  the  pretty  princess,  so  soon  to  be  a  mother,  and  stared  persistently 
straight  at  her  through  his  eyeglass. 

‘Go  in,  Annette,  you’ll  catch  cold,’  said  the  little  princess,  saying 
good-bye  to  Anna  Pavlovna.  ‘It  is  settled,’  she  added  in  a  low  voice. 

Anna  Pavlovna  had  managed  to  have  a  few  words  with  Liza  about  the 
match  she  was  planning  between  Anatole  and  the  sister-in-law  of  the 
little  princess. 

‘I  rely  on  you,  my  dear,’  said  Anna  Pavlovna,  also  in  an  undertone; 
‘you  write  to  her  and  tell  me  how  the  father  will  view  the  matter.  Au 
revolt  I’  And  she  went  back  out  of  the  hall. 


. 


xS 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


Prince  Ippolit  went  up  to  the  little  princess  and,  bending  his  face 
down  close  to  her,  began  saying  something  to  her  in  a  half  whisper. 

Two  footmen,  one  the  princess’s,  the  other  his  own,  stood  with  shawl 
and  redingote  waiting  till  they  should  finish  talking,  and  listened  to  their 
French  prattle,  incomprehensible  to  them,  with  faces  that  seemed  to  say 
that  they  understood  what  was  being  said  but  would  not  show  it.  The 
princess,  as  always,  talked  with  a  smile  and  listened  laughing. 

‘I’m  very  glad  I  didn’t  go  to  the  ambassador’s,’  Prince  Ippolit  was 
saying:  ‘such  a  bore.  ...  A  delightful  evening  it  has  been,  hasn’t  it? 
delightful.’ 

‘They  say  the  ball  will  be  a  very  fine  one,’  answered  the  little  princess, 
twitching  up  her  downy  little  lip.  ‘All  the  pretty  women  are  to  be  there.’ 

‘Not  all,  since  you  won’t  be  there;  not  all,’  said  Prince  Ippolit,  laugh¬ 
ing  gleefully;  and  snatching  the  shawl  from  the  footman,  shoving  him 
aside  as  he  did  so,  he  began  putting  it  on  the  little  princess.  Either  from 
awkwardness  or  intentionally — no  one  could  have  said  which — he  did 
not  remove  his  arms  for  a  long  while  after  the  shawl  had  been  put  on, 
as  it  were  holding  the  young  woman  in  his  embrace. 

Gracefully,  but  still  smiling,  she  moved  away,  turned  round  and 
glanced  at  her  husband.  Prince  Andrey’s  eyes  were  closed:  he  seemed 
weary  and  drowsy. 

‘Are  you  ready?’  he  asked  his  wife,  avoiding  her  eyes. 

Prince  Ippolit  hurriedly  put  on  his  redingote,  which  in  the  latest  mode 
hung  down  to  his  heels,  and  stumbling  over  it,  ran  out  on  to  the  steps 
after  the  princess,  whom  the  footman  was  assisting  into  the  carriage. 

‘Princesse,  au  revoir,’  he  shouted,  his  tongue  tripping  like  his  legs. 

The  princess,  picking  up  her  gown,  seated  herself  in  the  darkness  of 
the  carriage;  her  husband  was  arranging  his  sabre;  Prince  Ippolit,  under 
the  pretence  of  assisting,  was  in  every  one’s  way. 

‘Allow  me,  sir,’  Prince  Andrey  said  in  Russian  drily  and  disagreeably 
to  Prince  Ippolit,  who  prevented  his  passing. 

‘I  expect  you,  Pierre,’  the  same  voice  called  in  warm  and  friendly  tones. 

The  postillion  started  at  a  trot,  and  the  carriage  rumbled  away.  Prince 
Ippolit  gave  vent  to  a  short,  jerky  guffaw,  as  he  stood  on  the  steps 
waiting  for  the  vicomte,  whom  he  had  promised  to  take  home. 

‘Well,  my  dear  fellow,  your  little  princess  is  very  good-looking,  very 
good-looking,’  said  the  vicomte,  as  he  sat  in  the  carriage  with  Ippolit. 
‘Very  good-looking  indeed;’  he  kissed  his  finger  tips.  ‘And  quite  French.’ 

Ippolit  snorted  and  laughed. 

‘And,  do  you  know,  you  are  a  terrible  fellow  with  that  little  innocent 
way  of  yours,’  pursued  the  vicomte.  ‘I  am  sorry  for  the  poor  husband, 
that  officer  boy  who  gives  himself  the  airs  of  a  reigning  prince.’ 

Ippolit  guffawed  again,  and  in  the  middle  of  a  laugh  articulated: 

‘And  you  said  that  the  Russian  ladies  were  not  equal  to  the  French 
ladies.  You  must  know  how  to  take  them.’ 

Pierre,  arriving  first,  went  to  Prince  Andrey’s  study,  like  one  of  the 
household,  and  at  once  lay  down  on  the  sofa,  as  his  habit  was,  and  taking 


WARANDPEACE  19 

up  the  first  book  he  came  upon  in  the  shelf  (it  was  Caesar’s  Commen¬ 
taries)  he  propped  himself  on  his  elbow,  and  began  reading  it  in  the 
middle. 

‘What  a  shock  you  gave  Mile.  Scherer!  She’ll  be  quite  ill  now,’  Prince 
Andrey  said,  as  he  came  into  the  study  rubbing  his  small  white  hands. 

Pierre  rolled  his  whole  person  over  so  that  the  sofa  creaked,  turned  his 
eager  face  to  Prince  Andrey,  smiled  and  waved  his  hand  to  him. 

‘Oh,  that  abbe  was  very  interesting,  only  he’s  got  a  wrong  notion  about 
it.  .  .  .  To  my  thinking,  perpetual  peace  is  possible,  but  I  don’t  know 
how  to  put  it.  .  .  .  Not  by  means  of  the  balance  of  political  power.  .  . 

Prince  Andrey  was  obviously  not  interested  in  these  abstract  discus¬ 
sions. 

‘One  can’t  always  say  all  one  .thinks  everywhere,  mon  cher.  Come  tell 
me,  have  you  settled  on  anything  at  last?  Are  you  going  into  the  cavalry 
or  the  diplomatic  service?’  asked  Prince  Andrey,  after  a  momentary 
pause. 

Pierre  sat  on  the  sofa  with  his  legs  crossed  under  him. 

‘Can  you  believe  it,  I  still  don’t  know.  I  don’t  like  either.’ 

‘But  you  must  decide  on  something;  you  know  your  father’s  expect¬ 
ing  it.’ 

At  ten  years  old  Pierre  had  been  sent  with  an  abbe  as  tutor  to  be  edu¬ 
cated  abroad,  and  there  he  remained  till  he  was  twenty.  When  he  re¬ 
turned  to  Moscow,  his  father  had  dismissed  the  tutor  and  said  to  the 
young  man:  ‘Now  you  go  to  Petersburg,  look  about  you  and  make  your 
choice.  I  agree  to  anything.  Here  is  ajetter  to  Prince  Vassily  and  here 
is  money.  Write  and  tell  me  everything;  I  will  help  you  in  everything.’ 
Pierre  had  been  three  months  already  choosing  a  career  and  had  not  yet 
made  his  choice.  It  was  of  this  choice  Prince  Andrey  spoke  to  him  now. 
Pierre  rubbed  his  forehead. 

‘But  he  must  be  a  freemason,’  he  said,  meaning  the  abbe  he  had  seen 
that  evening. 

‘That’s  all  nonsense,’  Prince  Andrey  pulled  him  up  again;  ‘we’d  better 
talk  of  serious  things.  Have  you  been  to  the  Horse  Guards?’ 

‘No,  I  haven’t;  but  this  is  what  struck  me  and  I  wanted  to  talk  to 
you  about  it.  This  war  now  is  against  Napoleon.  If  it  were  a  war  for 
freedom,  I  could  have  understood  it,  I  would  have  been  the  first  to  go 
into  the  army;  but  to  help  England  and  Austria  against  the  greatest  man 
in  the  world — that’s  not  right.’ 

Prince  Andrey  simply  shrugged  his  shoulders  at  Pierre’s  childish  words. 
He  looked  as  though  one  really  could  not  answer  such  absurdities.  But 
in  reality  it  was  hard  to  find  any  answer  to  this  naive  question  than  the 
answer  Prince  Andrey  made.  ‘If  every  one  would  only  fight  for  his  own 
convictions,  there’d  be  no  war,’  he  said. 

‘And  a  very  good  thing  that  would  be  too,’  said  Pierre. 

Prince  Andrey  smiled  ironically.  ‘Very  likely  it  would  be  a  good 
thing,  but  it  will  never  come  to  pass  .  .  .’ 

‘Well,  what  are  you  going  to  the  war  for?’  asked  Pierre. 


20 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘What  for?  I  don’t  know.  Because  I  have  to.  Besides,  I’m  going  .  .  .’ 
he  stopped.  ‘I’m  going  because  the  life  I  lead  here,  this  life  is — not  to 
my  taste !  ’ 


VI 

There  was  the  rustle  of  a  woman’s  dress  in  the  next  room.  Prince  Andrey 
started  up,  as  it  were  pulling  himself  together,  and  his  face  assumed  the 
expression  it  had  worn  in  Anna  Pavlovna’s  drawing-room.  Pierre  dropped 
his  legs  down  off  the  sofa.  The  princess  came  in.  She  had  changed  her 
gown,  and  was  wearing  a  house  dress  as  fresh  and  elegant  as  the  other 
had  been.  Prince  Andrey  got  up  and  courteously  set  a  chair  for  her. 

‘Why  is  it,  I  often  wonder,’  she  began  in  French  as  always,  while  she 
hurriedly  and  fussily  settled  herself  in  the  low  chair,  ‘why  is  it  Annette 
never  married?  How  stupid  you  gentlemen  all  are  not  to  have  married 
her.  You  must  excuse  me,  but  you  really  have  no  sense  about  women. 
What  an  argumentative  person  you  are,  Monsieur  Pierre!’ 

‘I’m  still  arguing  with  your  husband;  I  can’t  make  out  why  he  wants 
to  go  to  the  war,’  said  Pierre,  addressing  the  princess  without  any  of 
the  affectation  so  common  in  the  attitude  of  a  young  man  to  a  young 
woman. 

The  princess  shivered.  Clearly  Pierre’s  words  touched  a  tender  spot. 

‘Ah,  that’s  what  I  say,’  she  said.  ‘I  can’t  understand,  I  simply  can’t 
understand  why  men  can’t  get  on  without  war.  Why  is  it  we  women 
want  nothing  of  the  sort?  we  don’t  care  for  it.  Come,  you  shall  be  the 
judge.  I  keep  saying  to  him:  here  he  is  uncle’s  adjutant,  a  most  brilliant 
position.  He’s  so  well  known,  so  appreciated  by  every  one.  The  other  day 
at  the  Apraxins’  I  heard  a  lady  ask:  “So  that  is  the  famous  Prince  Andre? 
Upon  my  word!”  ’  She  laughed.  ‘He’s  asked  everywhere.  He  could  very 
easily  be  a  fiiigel-adjutant.  You  know  the  Emperor  has  spoken  very 
graciously  to  him.  Annette  and  I  were  saying  it  would  be  quite  easy  to 
arrange  it.  What  do  you  think?’ 

•  Pierre  looked  at  Prince  Andrey,  and,  noticing  that  his  friend  did  not 
like  this  subject,  made  no  reply. 

‘When  are  you  starting?’  he  asked. 

‘Ah,  don’t  talk  to  me  about  that  going  away;  don’t  talk  about  it.  I 
won’t  even  hear  it  spoken  of,’  said  the  princess  in  just  the  capriciously 
playful  tone  in  which  she  had  talked  to  Ippolit  at  the  soiree,  a  tone 
utterly  incongruous  in  her  own  home  circle,  where  Tierre  was  like  one 
of  the  family.  ‘This  evening  when  I  thought  all  these  relations  so  precious 
to  me  must  be  broken  off.  .  .  .  And  then,  you  know,  Andre?’  She 
looked  significantly  at  her  husband.  ‘I’m  afraid!  I’m  afraid!’  she  whis¬ 
pered,  twitching  her  shoulder.  Her  husband  looked  at  her  as  though  he 
were  surprised  to  observe  that  there  was  some  one  in  the  room  besides 
himself  and  Pierre,  and  with  frigid  courtesy  he  addressed  an  inquiry  to 
his  wife. 

‘What  are  you  afraid  of,  Liza?  I  don’t  understand,’  he  said. 


21 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘See  what  egoists  all  men  are;  they  are  all,  all  egoists!  Of  his  own 
accord,  for  his  own  whim,  for  no  reason  whatever,-  he  is  deserting  me, 
shutting  me  up  alone  in  the  country.’ 

‘With  my  father  and  sister,  remember,’  said  Prince  Andrey  quietly. 

‘It’s  just  the  same  as  alone,  without  my  friends.  .  .  .  And  he  doesn’t 
expect  me  to  be  afraid.’  Her  tone  was  querulous  now,  her  upper  lip  was 
lifted,  giving  her  face  not  a  joyous  expression,  but  a  wild-animal  look, 
like  a  squirrel.  She  paused  as  though  feeling  it  indecorous  to  speak  of  her 
condition  before  Pierre,  though  the  whole  gist  of  the  matter  lay  in  that. 

‘I  still  don’t  understand  what  you  are  afraid  of,’  Prince  Andrey  said 
deliberately,  not  taking  his  eyes  off  his  wife.  The  princess  flushed  red, 
and  waved  her  hands  despairingly. 

‘No,  Andre,  I  say  you  are  so  changed,  so  changed  .  .  .’ 

‘Your  doctor’s  orders  were  that  you  were  to  go  to  bed  earlier,’  said 
Prince  Andrey.  ‘It’s  time  you  were  asleep.’ 

The  princess  said  nothing,  and  suddenly  her  short,  downy  lip  began 
to  quiver;  Prince  Andrey  got  up  and  walked  about  the  room,  shrugging 
his  shoulders. 

Pierre  looked  over  his  spectacles  in  naive  wonder  from  him  to  the 
princess,  and  stirred  uneasily  as  though  he  too  meant  to  get  up,  but  had 
changed  his  mind. 

‘What  do  I  care  if  Monsieur  Pierre  is  here,’  the  little  princess  said 
suddenly,  her  pretty  face  contorted  into  a  tearful  grimace;  ‘I  have  long 
wanted  to  say  to  you,  Andrey,  why  are  you  so  changed  to  me?  What 
have  I  done?  You  go  away  to  the  war,  you  don’t  feel  for  me.  Why  is  it?’ 

‘Liza!’  was  all  Prince  Andrey  said,  but  in  that  one  word  there  was 
entreaty  and  menace,  and,  most  of  all,  conviction  that  she  would  herself 
regret  her  words;  but  she  went  on  hurriedly. 

‘You  treat  me  as  though  I  were  ill,  or  a  child.  I  see  it  all.  You  weren’t 
like  this  six  months  ago.’ 

‘Liza,  I  beg  you  to  be  silent,’  said  Prince  Andrey,  still  more  expres¬ 
sively. 

Pierre,  who  had  been  growing  more  and  more  agitated  during  this 
conversation,  got  up  and  went  to  the  princess.  He  seemed  unable  to 
endure  the  sight  of  her  tears,  and  was  ready  to  weep  himself. 

‘Please  don’t  distress  yourself,  princess.  You  only  fancy  that  because 
.  .  .  I  assure  you,  I’ve  felt  so  myself  .  .  .  because  .  .  .  through  .  .  . 
0’n,  excuse  me  an  outsider  has  no  business  .  .  .  Oh,  don’t  distress  your¬ 
self  .  .  .  good-bye.’ 

Prince  Andrey  held  his  hand  and  stopped  him. 

‘No,  stay  a  little,  Pierre.  The  princess  is  so  good,  she  would  not  wish 
to  deprive  me  of  the  pleasure  of  spending  an  evening  with  you.’ 

‘No,  he  thinks  of  nothing  but  himself,’  the  princess  declared,  not  at¬ 
tempting  to  check  her  tears  of  anger. 

‘Liza,’  said  Prince  Andrey  drily,  raising  his  voice  to  a  pitch  that  showed 
his  patience  was  exhausted. 

All  at  once  the  angry  squirrel  expression  of  the  princess’s  lovely  little 


22 


WAR  AND  PEACE 
face  changed  to  an  attractive  look  of  terror  that  awakened  sympathy. 
She  glanced  from  under  her  brows  with  lovely  eyes  at  her  husband,  and 
her  face  wore  the  timorous,  deprecating  look  of  a  dog  when  it  faintly  but 
rapidly  wags  its  tail  in  penitence. 

‘Mon  Dieu!  mon  Dieu!’  murmured  the  princess,  and  holding  her  gown 
with  one  hand,  she  went  to  her  husband  and  kissed  him  on  the  forehead. 

‘Good-night,  Liza,’  said  Prince  Andrey,  getting  up  and  kissing  her 
hand  courteously,  as  though  she  were  a  stranger. 


The  friends  were  silent.  Neither  of  them  began  to  talk.  Pierre  looked 
at  Prince  Andrey;  Prince  Andrey  rubbed  his  forehead  with  his  small 
hand. 

‘Let  us  go  and  have  supper/  he  said  with  a  sigh,  getting  up  and  going 
to  the  door. 

They  went  into  the  elegantly,  newly  and  richly  furnished  dining-room. 
Everything  from  the  dinner-napkins  to  the  silver,  the  china  and  the 
glass,  wore  that  peculiar  stamp  of  newness  that  is  seen  in  the  household 
belongings  of  newly  married  couples.  In  the  middle  of  supper  Prince 
Andrey  leaned  on  his  elbow,  and  like  a  man  who  has  long  had  something 
on  his  mind,  and  suddenly  resolves  on  giving  it  utterance,  he  began  to 
speak  with  an  expression  of  nervous  irritation  which  Pierre  had  never 
seen  in  his  friend  before. 

‘Never,  never  marry,  my  dear  fellow;  that’s  my  advice  to  you;  don’t 
marry  till  you  have  faced  the  fact  that  you  have  done  all  you’re  capable 
of  doing,  and  till  you  cease  to  love  the  woman  you  have  chosen,  till  you 
see  her  plainly,  or  else  you  will  make  a  cruel  mistake  that  can  never  be 
set  right.  Marry  when  you’re  old  and  good  for  nothing  ...  Or  else 
everything  good  and  lofty  in  you  will  be  done  for.  It  will  all  be  frittered 
away  over  trifles.  Yes,  yes,  yes!  Don’t  look  at  me  with  such  surprise.  If 
you  expect  anything  of  yourself  in  the  future  you  will  feel  at  every  step 
that  for  you  all  is  over,  all  is  closed  up  except  the  drawing-room,  where 
you  will  stand  on  the  same  level  with  the  court  lackey  and  the  idiot  .  .  . 
And  why!’  ...  He  made  a  vigorous  gesture. 

Pierre  took  off  his  spectacles,  which  transformed  his  face,  making  it 
look  even  more  good-natured,  and  looked  wonderingly  at  his  friend. 

‘My  wife,’  pursued  Prince  Andrey,  ‘is  an  excellent  woman.  She  is  one 
of  those  rare  women  with  whom  one  can  feel  quite  secure  of  one’s  honour; 
but,  my  God!  what  wouldn’t  I  give  now  not  to  be  married!  You  are  the 
first  and  the  only  person  I  say  this  to,  because  I  like  you.’ 

As  Prince  Andrey  said  this  he  was  less  than  ever  like  the  Bolkonsky 
who  had  sat  lolling  in  Anna  Pavlovna’s  drawing-room  with  half-closed 
eyelids,  filtering  French  phrases  through  his  teeth.  His  dry  face  was 
quivering  with  nervous  excitement  in  every  muscle;  his  eyes,  which  had 
seemed  lustreless  and  lifeless,  now  gleamed  with  a  full,  vivid  light.  It 
seemed  that  the  more  lifeless  he  was  at  ordinary  times,  the  more  energetic 
he  became  at  such  moments  of  morbid  irritability. 


WARANDPEACE  23 

‘You  can’t  understand  why  I  say  this,’  he  went  on.  ‘Why,  the  whole 
story  of  life  lies  in  it.  You  talk  of  Bonaparte  and  his  career,’  he  said, 
though  Pierre  had  not  talked  of  Bonaparte;  ‘you  talk  of  Bonaparte,  but 
Bonaparte  when  he  was  working  his  way  up,  going  step  by  step  straight 
to  his  aim,  he  was  free;  he  had  nothing  except  his  aim  and  he  attained  it. 
But  tie  yourself  up  with  a  woman,  and,  like  a  chained  convict,  you  lose 
all  freedom.  And  all  the  hope  and  strength  there  is  in  you  is  only  a  drag 
on  you,  torturing  you  with  regret.  Drawing-rooms,  gossip,  balls,  vanity, 
frivolity — that’s  the  enchanted  circle  I  can’t  get  out  of.  I  am  setting  off 
now  to  the  war,  the  greatest  war  there  has  ever  been,  and  I  know  nothing, 
and  am  good  for  nothing.  I  am  very  agreeable  and  sarcastic,’  pursued 
Prince  Andrey,  ‘and  at  Anna  Pavlovna’s  every  one  listens  to  me.  And 
this  imbecile  society  without  which  my  wife  can’t  exist,  and  these  women 
.  .  .  If  you  only  knew  what  these  society  women  are,  and,  indeed,  women 
generally!  My  father’s  right.  Egoism,  vanity,  silliness,  triviality  in  every¬ 
thing— that’s  what  women  are  when  they  show  themselves  as  they  really 
are.  Looking  at  them  in  society,  one  fancies  there’s  something  in  them, 
but  there’s  nothing,  nothing,  nothing.  No,  don’t  marry,  my  dear  fellow, 
don’t  marry!’  Prince  Andrey  concluded. 

‘It  seems  absurd  to  me,’  said  Pierre,  ‘that  you,  you  consider  yourself 
a  failure,  your  life  wrecked.  You  have  everything,  everything  before  you. 
And  you  .  . 

He  did  not  say  why  you,  but  his  tone  showed  how  highly  he  thought 
of  his  friend,  and  how  much  he  expected  of  him  in  the  future. 

‘How  can  he  say  that?’  Pierre  thought. 

Pierre  regarded  Prince  Andrey  as  a  model  of  all  perfection,  because 
Prince  Andrey  possessed  in  the  highest  degree  just  that  combination  of 
qualities  in  which  Pierre  was  deficient,  and  which  might  be  most  nearly- 
expressed  by  the  idea  of  strength  of  will.  Pierre  always  marvelled  at 
Prince  Andrey’s  faculty  for  dealing  with  people  of  every  sort  with  perfect 
composure,  his  exceptional  memory,  his  wide  knowledge  (he  had  read 
everything,  knew  everything,  had  some  notion  of  everything),  and  most 
of  all  at  his  capacity  for  working  and  learning.  If  Pierre  were  frequently 
struck  in  Andrey  by  his  lack  of  capacity  for  dreaming  and  philosophising 
(to  which  Pierre  was  himself  greatly  given),  he  did  not  regard  this  as  a 
defect  but  as  a  strong  point.  Even  in  the  very  warmest,  friendliest,  and 
simplest  relations,  flattery  or  praise  is  needed  just  as  grease  is  needed 
to  keep  wheels  going  round. 

‘I  am  a  man  whose  day  is  done,’  said  Prince  Andrey.  ‘Why  talk  of  me? 
let’s  talk  about  you,’  he  said  after  a  brief  pause,  smiling  at  his  own 
reassuring  thoughts.  The  smile  was  instantly  reflected  on  Pierre’s  face. 

‘Why,  what  is  there  to  say  about  me?’  said  Pierre,  letting  his  face 
relax  into  an  easy-going,  happy  smile.  ‘What  am  I?  I  am  a  bastard.’ 
And  he  suddenly  flushed  crimson.  Apparently  it  was  a  great  effort  to 
him  to  say  this.  ‘With  no  name,  no  fortune.  .  .  .  And  after  all,  really 
.  .  .’  He  did  not  finish.  ’Meanwhile,  I  am  free  though  and  I’m  content. 


24  WARANDPEACE 

Only  I  don’t  know  in  the  least  what  to  set  about  doing.  I  meant  to  ask 
your  advice  in  earnest.’ 

Prince  Andrey  looked  at  him  with  kindly  eyes.  But  in  his  eyes,  friendly 
and  kind  as  they  were,  there  was  yet  a 'consciousness  of  his  own  superior¬ 
ity. 

‘You  are  dear  to  me  just  because  you  are  the  one  live  person  in  all  our 
society.  You’re  lucky.  Choose  what  you  will,  that’s  all  the  same.  You’ll 
always  be  all  right,  but  there’s  one  thing:  give  up  going  about  with  the 
Kuragins  and  leading  this  sort  of  life.  It’s  not  the  right  thing  for  you 
at  all;  all  this  riotous  living  and  dissipation  and  all  .  .  .’ 

‘What  would  you  have,  my  dear  fellow?’  said  Pierre,  shrugging  his 
shoulders;  ‘women,  my  dear  fellow,  women.’ 

‘I  can’t  understand  it,’  answered  Andrey.  ‘Ladies,  that’s  another  mat¬ 
ter,  but  Kuragin’s  women,  women  and  wine,  I  can’t  understand!’ 

Pierre  was  living  at  Prince  Vassily  Kuragin’s,  and  sharing  in  the  dis¬ 
sipated  mode  of  life  of  his  son  Anatole,  the  son  whom  they  were  proposing 
to  marry  to  Prince  Andrey’s  sister  to  reform  him. 

‘Do  you  know  what,’  said  Pierre,  as  though  a  happy  thought  had  sud¬ 
denly  occurred  to  him;  ‘seriously,  I  have  been  thinking  so  for  a  long 
while.  Leading  this  sort  of  life  I  can’t  decide  on  anything,  or  consider 
anything  properly.  My  head  aches  and  my  money’s  all  gone.  He  invited 
me  to-night,  but  I  won’t  go.’ 

‘Give  me  your  word  of  honour  that  you  will  give  up  going.’ 

‘On  my  honour!’ 


It  was  past  one  o’clock  when  Pierre  left  his  friend’s  house.  It  was  a 
cloudless  night,  a  typical  Petersburg  summer  night.  Pierre  got  into  a 
hired  coach,  intending  to  drive  home.  But  the  nearer  he  got,  the  more 
he  felt  it  impossible  to  go  to  bed  on  such  a  night,  more  like  evening  or 
morning.  It  was  light  enough  to  see  a  long  way  in  the  empty  streets.  On 
the  way  Pierre  remembered  that  all  the  usual  gambling  set  were  to  meet 
at  Anatole  Kuragin’s  that  evening,  after  which  there  usually  followed  a 
drinking-bout,  winding  up  with  one  of  Pierre’s  favourite  entertainments. 

‘It  would  be  jolly  to  go  to  Kuragin’s,’  he  thought.  But  he  immediately 
recalled  his  promise  to  Prince  Andrey  not  to  go  there  again. 

But,  as  so  often  happens  with  people  of  weak  character,  as  it  is  called, 
he  was  at  once  overcome  with  such  a  passionate  desire  to  enjoy  once 
more  this  sort  of  dissipation  which  had  become  so  familiar  to  him,  that 
he  determined  to  go.  And  the  idea  at  once  occurred  to  him  that  his 
promise  was  of  no  consequence,  since  he  had  already  promised  Prince 
Anatole  to  go  before  making  the  promise  to  Andrey.  Finally  he  reflected 
that  all  such  promises  were  merely  relative  matters,  having  no  sort  of 
precise  significance,  especially  if  one  considered  that  to-morrow  one 
might  be  dead  or  something  so  extraordinary  might  happen  that  the 
distinction  between  honourable  and  dishonourable  would  have  ceased  to 


WAR  AND  PEACE  25 

exist.  Such  reflections  often  occurred  to  Pierre,  completely  nullifying 
all  his  resolutions  and  intentions.  He  went  to  Kuragin’s. 

Driving  up  to  the  steps  of  a  big  house  in  the  Horse  Guards’  barracks, 
where  Anatole  lived,  he  ran  up  the  lighted  steps  and  the  staircase  and 
went  in  at  an  open  door.  There  was  no  one  in  the  ante-room;  empty 
bottles,  cloaks,  and  over-shoes  were  lying  about  in  disorder:  there  was 
a  strong  smell  of  spirits;  in  the  distance  he  heard  talking  and  shouting. 

The  card-playing  and  the  supper  were  over,  but  the  party  had  not 
broken  up.  Pierre  flung  off  his  cloak,  and  went  into  the  first  room,  where 
there  were  the  remnants  of  supper,  and  a  footman  who,  thinking  himself 
unobserved,  was  emptying  the  half-full  glasses  on  the  sly.  In  the  third 
room  there  was  a  great  uproar  of  laughter,  familiar  voices  shouting,  and 
a  bear  growling.  Eight  young  men  were  crowding  eagerly  about  the  open 
window.  Three  others  were  busy  with  a  young  bear,  one  of  them  drag¬ 
ging  at  its  chain  and  frightening  the  others  with  it. 

‘I  bet  a  hundred  on  Stevens!  ’  cried  one. 

‘Mind  there’s  no  holding  him  up!’  shouted  another. 

‘I’m  for  Dolohov!’  shouted  a  third.  ‘Hold  the  stakes,  Kuragin/ 

‘I  say,  let  Mishka  be,  we’re  betting.’ 

‘All  at  a  go  or  the  wager’s  lost!’  cried  a  fourth. 

‘Yakov,  give  us  a  bottle,  Yakov!’  shouted  Anatole  himself,  a  tall, 
handsome  fellow,  standing  in  the  middle  of  the  room,  in  nothing  but  a 
thin  shirt,  open  over  his  chest.  ‘Stop,  gentlemen.  Here  he  is,  here’s 
Petrusha,  the  dear  fellow,’  he  turned  to  Pierre. 

A  man  of  medium  height  with  bright  blue  eyes,  especially  remarkable 
from  looking  sober  in  the  midst  of  the  drunken  uproar,  shouted  froni  the 
window:  ‘Come  here.  I’ll  explain  the  bets!  ’  This  was  Dolohov,  an  officer 
of  the  Semenov  regiment,  a  notorious  gambler  and  duellist,  who  was 
living  with  Anatole.  Pierre  smiled,  looking  good-humouredly  about  him. 

‘I  don’t  understand.  What’s  the  point?’ 

‘Wait  a  minute,  he’s  not  drunk.  A  bottle  here,’  said  Anatole;  and  tak¬ 
ing  a  glass  from  the  table  he  went  up  to  Pierre. 

‘First  of  all,  you  must  drink.’ 

Pierre  began  drinking  off  glass  after  glass,  looking  from  under  his 
brows  at  the  drunken  group,  who  had  crowded  about  the  window  again, 
and  listening  to  their  talk.  Anatole  kept  his  glass  filled  and  told  him 
that  Dolohov  had  made  a  bet  with  an  Englishman,  Stevens,  a  sailor  who 
was  staying  here,  that  he,  Dolohov,  would  drink  a  bottle  of  rum  sitting 
in  the  third  story  window  with  his  legs  hanging  down  outside. 

‘Come,  empty  the  bottle,’  said  Anatole,  giving  Pierre  the  last  glass, 
‘or  I  won’t  let  you  go!  ’ 

‘No,  I  don’t  want  to,’  said  Pierre,  shoving  Anatole  away;  and  he 
went  up  to  the  window. 

Dolohov  was  holding  the  Englishman’s  hand  and  explaining  distinctly 
the  terms  of  the  bet,  addressing  himself  principally  to  Anatole  and 
Pierre. 

Dolohov  was  a  man  of  medium  height,  with  curly  hair  and  clear  blue 


20 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

eyes.  He  was  five-and-twenty.  Like  all  infantry  officers  he  wore  no 
moustache,  so  that  his  mouth,  the  most  striking  feature  in  his  face,  was 
not  concealed.  The  lines  of  that  mouth  were  extremely  delicately  chiselled. 
The  upper  lip  closed  vigorously  in  a  sharp  wedge-shape  on  the  firm  lower 
one,  and  at  the  corners  the  mouth  always  formed  something  like  two 
smiles,  one  each  side,  and  altogether,  especially  in  conjunction  with  the 
resolute,  insolent,  shrewd  look  of  his  eyes,  made  such  an  impression  that 
it  was  impossible  to  overlook  his  face.  Dolohov  was  a  man  of  small  means 
and  no  connections.  And  yet  though  Anatole  was  spending  ten  thousand 
a  year,  Dolohov  lived  with  him  and  succeeded  in  so  regulating  the  posi¬ 
tion  that  Anatole  and  all  who  knew  them  respected  Dolohov  more  than 
Anatole.  Dolohov  played  at  every  sort  of  game,  and  almost  always  won. 
However  much  he  drank,  his  brain  never  lost  its  clearness.  Both  Kuragin 
and  Dolohov  were  at  that  time  notorious  figures  in  the  fast  and  dissipated 
world  in  Petersburg. 

The  bottle  of  rum  was  brought:  the  window-frame,  which  hindered 
any  one  sitting  on  the  outside  sill  of  the  window,  was  being  broken  out 
by  two  footmen,  obviously  flurried  and  intimidated  by  the  shouts  and 
directions  given  by  the  gentlemen  around  them. 

Anatole  with  his  swaggering  air  come  up  to  the  window.  He  was  long¬ 
ing  to  break  something.  He  shoved  the  footmen  aside  and  pulled  at  the 
frame,  but  the  frame  did  not  give.  He  smashed  a  pane. 

‘Now  then,  you’re  the  strong  man/  he  turned  to  Pierre.  Pierre  took 
hold  of  the  cross  beam,  tugged,  and  with  a  crash  wrenched  the  oak 
frame  out. 

‘All  out,  or  they’ll  think  I’m  holding  on,’  said  Dolohov. 

‘The  Englishman’s  bragging  .  .  .  it’s  a  fine  feat  .  .  .  eh?’  said 
Anatole. 

‘Fine/  said  Pierre,  looking  at  Dolohov,  who  with  the  bottle  in  his 
hand  had  gone  up  to  the  window,  from  which  the  light  of  the  sky  could 
be  seen  and  the  glow  of  morning  and  of  evening  melting  into  it.  Dolohov 
jumped  up  on  to  the  window,  holding  the  bottle  of  rum  in  his  hand. 
‘Listen!  ’  he  shouted,  standing  on  the  sill  and  facing  the  room.  Every  one 
was  silent. 

‘I  take  a  bet’  (he  spoke  in  French  that  the  Englishman  might  hear 
him,  and  spoke  it  none  too  well)  ...  ‘I  take  a  bet  for  fifty  imperials- 
like  to  make  it  a  hundred?’  he  added,  turning  to  the  Englishman. 

‘No,  fifty/  said  the  Englishman. 

‘Good,  for  fifty  imperials,  that  I’ll  drink  off  a  whole  bottle  of  rum 
without  taking  it  from  my  lips.  I’ll  drink  it  sitting  outside  the  window, 
here  on  this  place’  (he  bent  down  and  pointed  to  the  sloping  projection 
of  the  wall  outside  the  window)  .  .  .  ‘and  without  holding  on  to  any¬ 
thing.  .  .  .  That  right?’ 

‘All  right/  said  the  Englishman. 

Anatole  turned  to  the  Englishman  and  taking  him  by  the  button  of  his 
coat,  and  looking  down  at  him  (the  Englishman  was  a  short  man),  he 
began  repeating  the  terms  of  the  wager  in  English. 


WAR  AND  PEACE  27 

‘Wait  a  minute!’  shouted  Dolohov,  striking  the  bottle  on  the  window 
to  call  attention.  ‘Wait  a  minute,  Kuragin;  listen:  if  any  one  does  the 
same  thing,  I’ll  pay  him  a  hundred  imperials.  Do  you  understand?’ 

The  Englishman  nodded  without  making  it  plain  whether  he  intended 
to  take  this  new  bet  or  not. 

Anatole  persisted  in  keeping  hold  of  the  Englishman,  and  although 
the  latter,  nodding,  gave  him  to  understand  that  he  comprehended  fully, 
Anatole  translated  Dolohov’s  words  into  English.  A  thin,  youthful  hussar, 
who  had  been  losing  at  cards  that  evening,  slipped  up  to  the  window, 
poked  his  head  out  and  looked  down. 

‘Oo!  ...  00!  ...  00!’  he  said,  looking  out  of  window  at  the  pave¬ 
ment  below. 

‘Shut  up!’  cried  Dolohov,  and  he  pushed  the  officer  away,  so  that, 
tripping  over  his  spurs,  he  went  skipping  awkwardly  into  the  room. 

Setting  the  bottle  on  the  window-sill,  so  as  to  have  it  within  reach, 
Dolohov  climbed  slowly  and  carefully  into  the  window.  Lowering  his 
legs  over,  with  both  hands  spread  open  on  the  window-ledge,  he  tried 
the  position,  seated  himself,  let  his  hands  go,  moved  a  little  to  the  right, 
and  then  to  the  left,  and  took  the  bottle.  Anatole  brought  two  candles, 
and  set  them  on  the  window-ledge,  so  that  it  was  quite  light.  Dolohov’s 
back  in  his  white  shirt  and  his  curly  head  were  lighted  up  on  both  sides. 
All  crowded  round  the  window.  The  Englishman  stood  in  front.  Pierre 
smiled,  and  said  nothing.  One  of  the  party,  rather  older  than  the  rest, 
suddenly  came  forward  with  a  scared  and  angry  face,  and  tried  to  clutch 
Dolohov  by  his  shirt. 

‘Gentlemen,  this  is  idiocy;  he’ll  be  killed,’  said  this  more  sensible  man. 

Anatole  stopped  him. 

‘Don’t  touch  him;  you’ll  startle  him  and  he’ll  be  killed.  Eh?  .  .  .  What 
then, eh?’ 

Dolohov  turned,  balancing  himself,  and  again  spreading  his  hands  out. 

‘If  any  one  takes  hold  of  me  again,’  he  said,  letting  his  words  drop  one 
by  one  through  his  thin,  tightly  compressed  lips,  ‘I’ll  throw  him  down 
from  here.  Now  .  .  .’ 

Saying  ‘now,’  he  turned  again,  let  his  hands  drop,  took  the  bottle  and 
put  it  to  his  lips,  bent  his  head  back  and  held  his  disengaged  hand  up¬ 
wards  to  keep  his  balance.  One  of  the  footmen  who  had  begun  clearing 
away  the  broken  glass,  stopped  still  in  a  stooping  posture,  his  eyes  fixed 
on  the  window  and  Dolohov’s  back.  Anatole  stood  upright,  with  wide- 
open  eyes.  The  Englishman  stared  from  one  side,  pursing  up  his  lips. 
The  man  who  had  tried  to  stop  it,  had  retreated  to  the  corner  of  the 
room,  and  lay  on  the  sofa  with  his  face  to  the  wall.  Pierre  hid  his  face, 
and  a  smile  strayed  forgotten  upon  it,  though  it  was  full  of  terror  and 
fear.  All  were  silent.  Pierre  took  his  hands  from  his  eyes;  Dolohov  was 
still  sitting  in  the  same  position,  only  his  head  was  so  far  bent  back  that 
his  curls  touched  his  shirt  collar,  and  the  hand  with  the  bottle  rose 
higher  and  higher,  trembling  with  evident  effort.  Evidently  the  bottle 
was  nearly  empty,  and  so  was  tipped  higher,  throwing  the  head  back. 


2S 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


‘Why  is  it  so  long?’  thought  Pierre.  It  seemed  to  him  that  more  than  half 
an  hour  had  passed.  Suddenly  Dolohov  made  a  backward  movement  of 
the  spine,  and  his  arm  trembled  nervously;  this  was  enough  to  displace 
his  whole  body  as  he  sat  on  the  sloping  projection.  He  moved  all  over, 
and  his  arm  and  head  trembled  still  more  violently  with  the  strain.  One 
hand  rose  to  clutch  at  the  window-ledge,  but  it  dropped  again.  Pierre 
shut  his  eyes  once  more,  and  said  to  himself  that  he  would  never  open 
them  again.  Suddenly  he  was  aware  of  a  general  stir  about  him.  He 
glanced  up,  Dolohov  was  standing  on  the  window-ledge,  his  face  was 
pale  and  full  of  merriment. 


‘Empty!’ 


He  tossed  the  bottle  to  the  Englishman,  who  caught  it  neatly.  Dolohov 
jumped  down  from  the  window.  He  smelt  very  strongly  of  rum. 

‘Capital!  Bravo!  That’s  something  like  a  bet.  You’re  a  devil  of  a 
fellow!  ’  came  shouts  from  all  sides. 

The  Englishman  took  out  his  purse  and  counted  out  the  money.  Dolo¬ 
hov  frowned  and  did  not  speak.  Pierre  dashed  up  to  the  window. 

‘Gentlemen.  Who’ll  take  a  bet  with  me?  I’ll  do  the  same!’  he  shouted 
suddenly.  ‘I  don’t  care  about  betting;  see  here,  tell  them  to  give  me  a 
bottle.  I’ll  do  it.  .  .  .  Tell  them  to  give  it  here.’ 

‘Let  him,  let  him!’  said  Dolohov,  smiling. 

‘What,  are  you  mad?  No  one  would  let  you.  Why,  you  turn  gidd 
going  downstairs,’  various  persons  protested. 

‘I’ll  drink  it;  give  me  the  bottle  of  rum,’  roared  Pierre,  striking  tl 
table  with  a  resolute,  drunken  gesture,  and  he  climbed  into  the  windo\ 
They  clutched  at  his  arms;  but  he  was  so  strong  that  he  shoved  every  or 
far  away  who  came  near  him. 

‘No,  there’s  no  managing  him  like  that,’  said  Anatole.  ‘Wait  a  bit,  I: 
get  round  him.  .  .  .  Listen,  I’ll  take  your  bet,  but  for  to-morrow,  fc 
we’re  all  going  on  now  to  .  .  .’ 

‘Yes,  come  along,’  shouted  Pierre,  ‘come  along.  .  .  .  And  take  Mishh 
with  us.’  .  .  .  And  he  caught  hold  of  the  bear,  and  embracing  it  an 
lifting  it  up,  began  waltzing  round  the  room  with  it. 


Prince  Vassily  kept  the  promise  he  had  made  at  Anna  Pavlovna 
soiree  to  Princess  Drubetskoy,  who  had  petitioned  him  in  favour  of  h( 
only  son  Boris.  His  case  had  been  laid  before  the  Emperor,  and  thoug 
it  was  not  to  be  a  precedent  for  others,  he  received  a  commission  as  sut 
lieutenant  in  the  Guards  of  the  Semenovsky  regiment.  But  the  post  c 
an  adjutant  or  attache  in  Kutuzov’s  service  was  not  to  be  obtained  fc 
Boris  by  all  Anna  Mihalovna’s  efforts  and  entreaties.  Shortly  after  th 
gathering  at  Anna  Pavlovna’s,  Anna  Mihalovna  went  back  to  Moscov 
to  her  rich  relatives  the  Rostovs,  with  whom  she  stayed  in  Moscow.  1 
was  with  these  relations  that  her  adored  Borinka,  who  had  only  recentl 


VII 


WARANDPEACE  29 

entered  a  regiment  of  the  line,  and  was  nowT  at  once  transferred  to  the 
Guards  as  a  sub-lieutenant,  had  been  educated  from  childhood  and  had 
lived  for  years.  The  Guards  had  already  left  Petersburg  on  the  10th  of 
August,  and  her  son,  who  was  remaining  in  Moscow  to  get  his  equipment, 
was  to  overtake  them  on  the  road  to  Radzivilov. 

The  Rostovs  were  keeping  the  name-day  of  the  mother  and  the  younger 
daughter,  both  called  Natalya.  Ever  since  the  morning,  coaches  with  six 
horses  had  been  incessantly  driving  to  and  from  the  Countess  Rostov's 
big  house  in  Povarsky,  which  was  known  to  all  Moscow.  The  countess  and 
her  handsome  eldest  daughter  were  sitting  in  the  drawing-room  with 
their  visitors,  who  came  in  continual  succession  to  present  their  con¬ 
gratulations  to  the  elder  lady. 

The  countess  was  a  woman  with  a  thin  face  of  Oriental  cast,  forty-five 
years  old,  and  obviously  exhausted  by  child-bearing.  She  had  had  twelve 
children.  The  deliberate  slowness  of  her  movements  and  conversation, 
arising  from  weak  health,  gave  her  an  air  of  dignity  which  inspired 
respect.  Princess  Anna  Mihalovna  Drubetskoy,  as  an  intimate  friend  of 
the  family,  sat  with  them  assisting  in  the  work  of  receiving  and  enter¬ 
taining  their  guests.  The  younger  members  of  the  family  were  in  the 
back  rooms,  not  seeing  fit  to  take  part  in  receiving  visitors.  The  count  met 
his  visitors  and  escorted  them  to  the  door,  inviting  all  of  them  to  dinner. 

‘I  am  very,  very  grateful  to  you,  mon  cher’  or  ‘ma  chere,’  he  said 
to  every  one  without  exception  (making  not  the  slightest  distinction 
between  persons  of  higher  or  of  lower  standing  than  his  own),  ‘for  myself 
and  my  two  dear  ones  whose  name-day  we  are  keeping.  Mind  you  come 
to  dinner.  I  shall  be  offended  if  you  don’t,  mon  cher.  I  beg  you  most 
sincerely  from  all  the  family,  my  dear.’  These  words,  invariably  accom¬ 
panied  by  the  same  expression  on  his  full,  good-humoured,  clean-shaven 
face,  and  the  same  warm  pressure  of  the  hand,  and  repeated  short  bows, 
he  said  to  all  without  exception  or  variation.  When  he  had  escorted  one 
guest  to  the  hall,  the  count  returned  to  the  gentleman  or  lady  who  was 
still  in  the  drawing-room.  Moving  up  a  chair,  and  with  the  air  of  a 
man  fond  of  society  and  at  home  in  it,  he  would  sit  down,  his  legs  jauntily 
apart,  and  his  hands  on  his  knees,  and  sway  to  and  fro  with  dignity  as 
he  proffered  surmises  upon  the  weather,  gave  advice  about  health,  some¬ 
times  in  Russian,  sometimes  in  very  bad  but  complacent  French.  Then 
again  he  would  get  up,  and  with  the  air  of  a  man  weary  but  resolute  in 
the  performance  of  his  duty,  he  would  escort  guests  out,  stroking  up  his 
grey  hair  over  his  bald  patch,  and  again  he  would  urge  them  to  come  to 
dinner.  Sometimes  on  his  way  back  from  the  hall,  he  would  pass  through 
the  conservatory  and  the  butler’s  room  into  a  big  room  with  a  marble 
floor,  where  they  were  setting  a  table  for  eighty  guests;  and  looking  at 
the  waiters  who  were  bringing  in  the  silver  and  china,  setting  out  tables 
and  unfolding  damask  tablecloths,  he  would  call  up  Dmitry  Vassilyevitch, 
a  young  man  of  good  family,  who  performed  the  duties  of  a  steward  in 
his  household,  and  would  say:  ‘Now  then,  Mitenka,  mind  everything’s 
right.  That’s  it,  that’s  it,’  he  would  say,  looking  round  with  pleasure  at 


3o  WAR  AND  PEACE 

the  immense  table  opened  out  to  its  full  extent;  ‘the  great  thing  is  the 
service.  So,  so.’  .  .  .  And  he  went  off  again  with  a  sigh  of  satisfaction  to 
the  drawing-room. 

‘Marya  Lvovna  Karagin  and  her  daughter,’  the  countess’s  huge  foot¬ 
man  announced  in  a  deep  bass  at  the  drawing-room  door.  The  countess 
thought  a  moment,  and  took  a  pinch  from  a  golden  snuff-box  with  her 
husband’s  portrait  on  it. 

‘I’m  worn  out  with  these  callers,’  she  said;  ‘well,  this  is  the  last  one 
I’ll  see.  She’s  so  affected.  Show  her  up,’  she  said  in  a  dejected  tone,  as 
though  she  were  saying,  ‘Very  well,  finish  me  off  entirely!’ 

A  tall,  stout,  haughty-looking  lady  and  her  round-faced,  smiling  daugh¬ 
ter  walked  with  rustling  skirts  into  the  drawing-room. 

‘Dear  countess,  it  is  such  a  long  time  .  .  .  she  has  been  laid  up,  poor 
child  ...  at  the  Razumovskys’  ball,  and  the  Countess  Apraxin  ...  I 
was  so  glad,’  feminine  voices  chattered  briskly,  interrupting  one  another 
and  mingling  with  the  sound  of  rustling  skirts  and  the  scraping  of  chairs. 
Conversation  began  of  the  sort  which  is  kept  up  just  long  enough  for 
the  caller  to  get  up  at  the  first  pause,  rustling  her  skirts  and  with  a 
murmur  of  ‘I  am  so  charmed;  mamma’s  health  .  .  .  and  the  Countess 
Apraxin  .  .  .’  walk  out  again  with  the  same  rustle  to  the  hall  to  put  on 
cloak  or  overcoat  and  drive  away.  The  conversation  touched  on  the  chief 
items  of  news  in  the  town,  on  the  illness  of  the  wealthy  old  Count  Bezu- 
hov,  a  man  who  had  been  renowned  for  his  personal  beauty  in  the  days 
of  Catherine,  and  on  his  illegitimate  son,  Pierre,  who  had  behaved  so 
improperly  at  a  soiree  at  Anna  Pavlovna’s.  ‘I  am  very  sorry  for  the  poor 
count,’  declared  the  visitor;  ‘his  health  in  such  a  precarious  state,  and 
now  this  distress  caused  him  by  his  son;  it  will  be  the  death  of  him! ’ 

‘Why,  what  has  happened?’  asked  the  countess,  as  though  she  did 
not  know  what  was  meant,  though  she  had  heard  about  the  cause  of 
Count  Bezuhov’s  distress  fifteen  times  already. 

‘This  is  what  comes  of  modern  education!  When  he  was  abroad,2  the  i 
visitor  pursued,  ‘this  young  man  was  left  to  his  own  devices,  and  now  in 
Petersburg,  they  say,  he  has  been  doing  such  atrocious  things  that  he  has 
been  sent  away  under  police  escort.’ 

‘Really!’  said  the  countess. 

‘He  has  made  a  bad  choice  of  his  companions,’  put  in  Princess  Anna 
Mihalovna.  ‘Prince  Vassily’s  son — he  and  a  young  man  called  Dolohov, 
they  say — God  only  knows  the  dreadful  things  they’ve  been  doing.  And 
both  have  suffered  for  it.  Dolohov  has  been  degraded  to  the  rank  of  a  I 
common  soldier,  while  Bezuhov’s  son  has  been  banished  to  Moscow.  As  to , 
Anatole  Kuragin  ...  his  father  managed  to  hush  it  up  somehow.  But  he ! 
has  been  sent  out  of  Petersburg  too.’ 

‘Why,  what  did  they  do?’  asked  the  countess. 

‘They’re  perfect  ruffians,  especially  Dolohov,’  said  the  visitor.  ‘He’s 
the  son  of  Marya  Ivanovna  Dolohov,  such  a  worthy  woman,  you  know, 
but  there!  Only  fancy,  the  three  of  them  had  got  hold  of  a  bear  somewhere, 
put  it  in  a  carriage  with  them,  and  were  taking  it  to  some  actress’s.  The,: 


WAR  AND  PEACE  '31 

police  ran  up  to  stop  them.  They  took  the  police  officer,  tied  him  back  to 
back  to  the  bear,  and  dropped  the  bear  into  the  Moika:  the  bear  swam 
with  the  police  officer  on  him.’ 

‘A  pretty  figure  he  must  have  looked,  ma  chore,’  cried  the  count,  helpless 
with  laughter. 

‘Ah,  such  a  horror!  What  is  there  to  laugh  at  in  it,  count?’ 

But  the  ladies  could  not  help  laughing  at  it  themselves. 

‘It  was  all  they  could  do  to  rescue  the  unlucky  man,’  the  visitor  went  on. 
‘And  that’s  the  intellectual  sort  of  amusement  the  son  of  Count  Kirill 
Vladimirovitch  Bezuhov  indulges  in!’  she  added.  ‘And  people  said  he  was 
so  well  educated  and  clever.  That’s  how  foreign  education  turns  out.  I  hope 
no  one  will  receive  him  here,  in  spite  of  his  great  wealth.  They  tried  to 
introduce  him  to  me.  I  gave  an  absolute  refusal :  I  have  daughters.’ 

‘What  makes  you  say  the  young  man  is  so  wealthy?’  asked  the  countess, 
turning  away  from  the  girls,  who  at  once  looked  as  though  they  did  not 
hear. ‘He  has  none  but  illegitimate  children.  I  believe  that  .  .  .  Pierre  too 
is  illegitimate.’ 

The  visitor  waved  her  hand.  ‘He  has  a  score  of  them,  I  suppose.’ 

Princess  Anna  Mihalovna  interposed,  obviously  wishing  to  show  her 
connections  and  intimate  knowledge  with  every  detail  in  society. 

‘This  is  how  the  matter  stands,’  she  said  meaningly,  speaking  in  a  half 
whisper.  ‘Count  Kirill  Vladimirovitch’s  reputation  we  all  know.  ...  He 
has  lost  count  of  his  own  children,  indeed,  but  this  Pierre  was  his  favourite.’ 

‘How  handsome  the  old  man  was,’  said  the  countess,  ‘only  last  year!  A 
finer-looking  man  I  have  never  seen.’ 

‘Now  he’s  very  much  altered,’  said  Anna  Mihalovna.  ‘Well,  I  was  just 
saying,’  she  went  on,  ‘the  direct  heir  to  all  the  property  is  Prince  Vassily 
through  his  wife,  but  the  father  is  very  fond  of  Pierre,  has  taken  trouble 
over  his  education,  and  he  has  written  to  the  Emperor  ...  so  that  no 
one  can  tell,  if  he  dies  (he’s  so  ill  that  it’s  expected  any  moment,  and  Lor- 
rain  has  come  from  Petersburg),  whom  that  immense  property  will  come 
to,  Pierre  or  Prince  Vassily.  Forty  thousand  serfs  and  millions  of  money. 
I  know  this  for  a  fact,  for  Prince  Vassily  himself  told  me  so.  And  indeed 
Kirill  Vladimirovitch  happens  to  be  a  third  cousin  of  mine  on  my  mother’s 
side,  and  he’s  Boris’s  godfather  too,’  she  added,  apparently  attaching  no 
importance  to  this  circumstance. 

‘Prince  Vassily  arrived  in  Moscow  yesterday.  He’s  coming  on  some 
inspection  business,  so  I  was  told,’  said  the  visitor. 

‘Yes,  between  ourselves,’  said  the  princess,  ‘that’s  a  pretext;  he  has 
come  simply  to  see  Prince  Kirill  Vladimirovitch,  hearing  he  was  in  such 
a  serious  state.’ 

‘But,  really,  via  chere,  that  was  a  capital  piece  of  fun,’  said  the  count; 
and  seeing  that  the  elder  visitor  did  not  hear  him,  he  turned  to  the  young 
ladies.  ‘A  funny  figure  the  police  officer  must  have  looked;  I  can  just 
fancy  him.’ 

And  showing  how  the  police  officer  waved  his  arms  about,  he  went  off 
again  into  his  rich  bass  laugh,  his  sides  shaking  with  mirth,  as  people  do 


32 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

laugh  who  always  eat  and,  still  more,  drink  well.  ‘Then  do,  please,  come 
to  dinner  with  us,’  he  said. 


VIII 

A  silence  followed.  The  countess  looked  at  her  guest,  smiling  affably,  but 
still  not  disguising  the  fact  that  she  would  not  take  it  at  all  amiss  now  if 
the  guest  were  to  get  up  and  go.  The  daughter  was  already  fingering  at 
the  folds  of  her  gown  and  looking  interrogatively  at  her  mother,  when 
suddenly  they  heard  in  the  next  room  several  girls  and  boys  running  to 
the  door,  and  the  grating  sound  of  a  chair  knocked  over  and  a  girl  of 
thirteen  ran  in,  hiding  something  in  her  short  muslin  petticoat,  and  stopped 
short  in  the  middle  of  the  room.  She  had  evidently  bounded  so  far  by 
mistake,  unable  to  stop  in  her  flight.  At  the  same  instant  there  appeared 
in  the  doorway  a  student  with  a  crimson  band  on  his  collar,  a  young  officer 
in  the  Guards,  a  girl  of  fifteen  and  a  fat,  rosy-cheeked  boy  in  a  child’s 
smock. 

The  prince  jumped  up,  and  swaying  from  side  to  side,  held  his  arms 
out  wide  round  the  little  girl. 

‘Ah,  here  she  is!  ’  he  cried,  laughing.  ‘Our  little  darling  on  her  fete  day!  ’ 

‘My  dear,  there  is  a  time  for  everything,’  said  the  countess,  affecting- 
severity.  ‘You’re  always  spoiling  her,  Elk,’  she  added  to  her  husband. 

‘Bonjour,  ma  chere,  je  vous  jelicit said  the  visitor.  ‘Quelle  delicieuse 
enjantl’  she  added,  turning  to  her  mother. 

The  dark-eyed  little  girl,  plain,  but  full  of  life,  with  her  wide  mouth,  her 
childish  bare  shoulders,  which  shrugged  and  panted  in  her  bodice  from 
her  rapid  motion,  her  black  hair  brushed  back,  her  slender  bare  arms  and 
little  legs  in  lace-edged  long  drawers  and  open  slippers,  was  at  that  charm¬ 
ing  stage  when  the  girl  is  no  longer  a  child,  while  the  child  is  not  yet  a 
young  girl.  Wriggling  away  from  her  father,  she  ran  up  to  her  mother, 
and  taking  no  notice  whatever  of  her  severe  remarks,  she  hid  her  flushed 
face  in  her  mother’s  lace  kerchief  and  broke  into  laughter.  As  she  laughed 
she  uttered  some  incoherent  phrases  about  the  doll,  which  was  poking  out 
from  her  petticoat. 

‘Do  you  see?  .  .  .  My  doll  .  .  .  Mimi  .  .  .  you  see  .  .  .’  And 
Natasha  could  say  no  more,  it  all  seemed  to  her  so  funny.  She  sank  on 
her  mother’s  lap,  and  went  off  into  such  a  loud  peal  of  laughter  that  every 
one,  even  the  prim  visitor,  could  not  help  laughing  too. 

‘Come,  run  along,  run  along  with  your  monstrosity!’  said  her  mother, 
pushing  her  daughter  off  with  a  pretence  of  anger.  ‘This  is  my  younger 
girl,’  she  said  to  the  visitor.  Natasha,  pulling  her  face  away  from  her 
mother’s  lace  kerchief  for  a  minute,  peeped  down  at  her  through  tears  of 
laughter,  and  hid  her  face  again. 

The  visitor,  forced  to  admire  this  domestic  scene,  thought  it  suitable 
to  take  some  part  in  it. 

‘Tell  me,  my  dear,’  she  said,  addressing  Natasha,  ‘how  did  you  come  by 
your  Mimi?  Your  daughter,  I  suppose?’ 


WARANDPEACE  33 

Natasha  did  not  like  the  tone  of  condescension  to  childish  things  with 
which  the  visitor  had  spoken  to  her.  She  made  no  answer,  but  stared 
solemnly  at  her. 

Meanwhile  all  the  younger  generation,  Boris,  the  officer,  Anna  Mihal- 
ovna’s  son;  Nikolay,  the  student,  the  count’s  elder  son;  Sonya,  the  count’s 
niece;  and  little  Petya,  his  younger  son,  had  all  placed  themselves  about 
the  drawing-room,  and  were  obviously  trying  to  restrain  within  the  bounds 
of  decorum  the  excitement  and  mirth  which  was  brimming  over  in  their 
faces.  Clearly  in  the  back  part  of  the  house,  from  which  they  had  dashed 
out  so  impetuously,  the  conversation  had  been  more  amusing  than  the 
small-talk  in  the  drawing-room  of  the  scandal  of  the  town,  the  weather,  and 
Countess  Apraxin.  Now  and  then  they  glanced  at  one  another  and  could 
hardly  suppress  their  laughter. 

The  two  young  men,  the  student  and  the  officer,  friends  from  childhood, 
were  of  the  same  age,  and  both  good-looking,  but  not  like  each  other. 
Boris  was  a  tall,  fair-haired  lad  with  delicate,  regular  features,  and  a  look 
of  composure  on  his  handsome  face.  Nikolay  was  a  curly-headed  youth, 
not  tall,  with  an  open  expression.  On  his  upper  lip  there  were  already 
signs  of  a  black  moustache  coming,  and  his  whole  face  expressed  impul¬ 
siveness  and  enthusiasm.  Nikolay  flushed  red  as  he  came  into  the  drawing¬ 
room.  He  was  unmistakably  trying  to  find  something  to  say,  and  unable 
to  find  anything.  Boris,  on  the  contrary,  was  at  home  immediately  and 
talked  easily  and  playfully  of  the  doll  Mimi,  saying  that  he  had  known 
her  as  a  young  girl  before  her  nose  was  broken,  and  she  had  grown  older 
during  the  five  years  he  remembered  her,  and  how  her  head  was  cracked 
right  across  the  skull.  As  he  said  this  he  looked  at  Natasha.  Natasha 
turned  away  from  him,  glanced  at  her  younger  brother,  who,  with  a  scowl 
on  his  face,  was  shaking  with  noiseless  laughter,  and  unable  to  restrain 
herself,  she  skipped  up  and  flew  out  of  the  room  as  quickly  as  her  swift 
little  legs  could  carry  her.  Boris  did  not  laugh. 

‘You  were  meaning  to  go  out,  mamma,  weren’t  you?  Do  you  want  the 
carriage?’  he  said,  addressing  his  mother  with  a  smile. 

‘Yes,  go  along  and  tell  them  to  get  it  ready,’  she  said,  smiling.  Boris 
walked  slowly  to  the  door  and  went  after  Natasha.  The  stout  boy  ran 
wrathfully  after  them,  as  though  resenting  the  interruption  of  his  pursuits. 


IX 

Of  the  young  people,  not  reckoning  the  countess’s  elder  daughter  (who  was 
four  years  older  than  her  sister  and  behaved  quite  like  a  grown-up  person) 
and  the  young  lady  visitor,  there  were  left  in  the  drawing-room  Nikolay 
and  Sonya,  the  niece.  Sonya  was  a  slender,  miniature  brunette,  with  soft 
eyes  shaded  by  long  lashes,  thick  black  hair  twisted  in  two  coils  round 
her  head,  and  a  skin  of  a  somewhat  sallow  tint,  particularly  marked  on 
her  bare,  thin,  but  shapely,  muscular  arms  and  neck.  The  smoothness  of 
her  movements,  the  softness  and  flexibility  of  her  little  limbs,  and  some- 


34  WAR  AND  PEACE 

thing  of  slyness  and  reserve  in  her  manner,  suggested  a  lovely  half-grown 
kitten,  which  would  one  day  be  a  charming  cat.  Apparently  she  thought 
it  only  proper  to  show  an  interest  in  the  general  conversation  and  to  smile. 
But  against  her  own  will,  her  eyes  turned  under  their  thick,  long  lashes  to 
her  cousin,  who  was  going  away  into  the  army,  with  such  girlish,  passionate 
adoration,  that  her  smile  could  not  for  one  moment  impose  upon  any 
one,  and  it  was  clear  that  the  kitten  had  only  perched  there  to  skip  off  more 
energetically  than  ever  and  to  play  with  her  cousin  as  soon  as  they  could, 
like  Boris  and  Natasha,  get  out  of  the  drawing-room. 

‘Yes,  ma  chere,’  said  the  old  count,  addressing  the  visitor  and  pointing 
to  his  Nikolay;  ‘here  his  friend  Boris  has  received  his  commission  as  an 
officer,  and  he’s  so  fond  of  him  he  doesn’t  want  to  be  left  behind,  and  is 
giving  up  the  university  and  his  poor  old  father  to  go  into  the  army,  ma 
chere.  And  there  was  a  place  all  ready  for  him  in  the  archives  department, 
and  all.  Isn’t  that  friendship  now?’  said  the  count  interrogatively. 

‘But  they  do  say  that  war  has  been  declared,  you  know,’  said  the  visitor. 

‘They’ve  been  saying  so  a  long  while,’  said  the  count.  ‘They’ll  say  so 
again  and  again,  and  so  it  will  remain.  There’s  friendship  for  you,  via 
chere!’  he  repeated.  ‘He’s  going  into  the  hussars.’ 

The  visitor,  not  knowing  what  to  say,  shook  her  head. 

‘It’s  not  from  friendship  at  all,’  answered  Nikolay,  flushing  hotfy,  and 
denying  it  as  though  it  were  some  disgraceful  imputation.  ‘Not  friendship 
at  all,  but  simply  I  feel  drawn  to  the  military  service.’ 

He  looked  round  at  his  cousin  and  the  young  lady  visitor;  both  looked 
at  him  with  a  smile  of  approval. 

‘Schubert’s  dining  with  us  to-night,  the  colonel  of  the  Pavologradsky 
regiment  of  hussars.  He  has  been  here  on  leave,  and  is  taking  him  with  i 
him.  There’s  no  help  for  it,’  said  the  count,  shrugging  his  shoulders  and 
speaking  playfully  of  what  evidently  was  a  source  of  much  distress  to 
him. 

‘I’ve  told  you  already,  papa,’  said  his  son,  ‘that  if  you’re  unwilling  to 
let  me  go,  I’ll  stay.  But  I  know  I’m  no  good  for  anything  except  in  the  i 
army.  I’m  not  a  diplomatist,  or  a  government  clerk.  I’m  not  clever  at 
disguising  my  feelings,’  he  said,  glancing  repeatedly  with  the  coquetry  of 
handsome  youth  at  Sonya  and  the  young  lady. 

The  kitten,  her  eyes  riveted  on  him,  seemed  on  the  point  of  breaking  \ 
into  frolic,  and  showing  her  cat-like  nature. 

‘Well,  well,  it’s  all  right!’  said  the  old  count;  ‘he  always  gets  so  hot. 
Bonaparte’s  turned  all  their  heads;  they’re  all  dreaming  of  how  he  rose 
from  a  lieutenant  to  be  an  emperor.  Well,  and  so  may  it  turn  out  again,  ! 
please  God,’  he  added,  not  noticing  the  visitor’s  sarcastic  smile. 

While  their  elders  began  talking  about  Bonaparte,  Julie,  Madame  Kara- 
gin’s  daughter,  turned  to  young  Rostov. 

‘What  a  pity  you  weren’t  at  the  Arharovs’  on  Thursday.  I  was  so  dull 
without  you,’  she  said,  giving  him  a  tender  smile.  The  youth,  highly  flat¬ 
tered,  moved  with  a  coquettish  smile  nearer  her,  and  entered  into  a  con- i  \ 
versation  apart  with  the  smiling  Julie,  entirely  unaware  that  his  uncon- 


WARANDPEACE  35 

scious  smile  had  dealt  a  jealous  stab  to  the  heart  of  Sonya,  who  was 
flushing  crimson  and  assuming  a  forced  smile.  In  the  middle  of  his  talk 
with  Julie  he  glanced  round  at  her.  Sonya  gave  him  an  intensely  furious 
look,  and,  hardly  able  to  restrain  her  tears,  though  there  was  still  a  con¬ 
strained  smile  on  her  lips,  she  got  up  and  went  out  of  the  room.  All  Niko¬ 
lay’s  animation  was  gone.  He  waited  for  the  first  break  in  the  conversation, 
and,  with  a  face  of  distress,  walked  out  of  the  room  to  look  for  Sonya. 

‘How  all  the  young  things  wear  their  hearts  on  their  sleeves!  ’  said  Anna 
Mihalovna,  pointing  to  Nikolay’s  retreating  figure.  ‘Cousinage,  dangereux 
voisinage,’  she  added. 

‘Yes,’  said  the  countess,  when  the  sunshine  that  had  come  into  the 
drawing-room  with  the  young  people  had  vanished.  She  was,  as  it  were, 
replying  to  a  question  which  no  one  had  put  to  her,  but  which  was  always 
in  her  thoughts:  ‘What  miseries,  what  anxieties  one  has  gone  through  for 
the  happiness  one  has  in  them  now!  And  even  now  one  feels  really  more 
dread  than  joy  over  them.  One’s  always  in  terror!  At  this  age  particular^ 
1  when  there  are  so  many  dangers  both  for  girls  and  boys.’ 

‘Everything  depends  on  bringing  up,’  said  the  visitor. 

‘Yes,  you  are  right,’  the  countess  went  on.  ‘So  far  I  have  been,  thank 
God,  my  children’s  friend  and  have  enjoyed  their  full  confidence,’  said 
the  countess,  repeating  the  error  of  so  many  parents,  who  imagine  their 
children  have  no  secrets  from  them.  ‘I  know  I  shall  always  be  first  in  my 
children’s  confidence,  and  that  Nikolay,  if,  with  his  impulsive  character, 
he  does  get  into  mischief  (boys  will  be  boys)  it  won’t  be  like  these  Peters¬ 
burg  young  gentlemen.’ 

‘Yes,  they’re  capital  children,  capital  children,’  assented  the  count,  who 
always  solved  all  perplexing  questions  by  deciding  that  everything  was 
capital.  ‘Fancy  now,  his  taking  it  into  his  head  to  be  an  hussar!  But  what 
can  one  expect,  ma  chere!’ 

‘What  a  sweet  little  thing  your  younger  girl  is!’  said  the  visitor.  ‘Full 
of  fun  and  mischief!’ 

‘Yes,  that  she  is,’  said  the  count.  ‘She  takes  after  me!  And  such  a 
voice;  though  she’s  my  daughter,  it’s  the  truth  I’m  telling  you,  she’ll  be 
a  singer,  another  Salomini.  We’ve  engaged  an  Italian  to  give  her  lessons.’ 

‘Isn’t  it  too  early?  They  say  it  injures  the  voice  to  train  it  at  that  age.’ 

‘Oh,  no!  Too  early!’  said  the  count.  ‘Why,  our  mothers  used  to  be 
married  at  twelve  and  thirteen.’ 

‘Well,  she’s  in  love  with  Boris  already!  What  do  you  say  to  that?’  said 
the  countess,  smiling  softly  and  looking  at  Boris’s  mother.  And  ap¬ 
parently  in  reply  to  the  question  that  was  always  in  her  mind,  she  went 
on:  ‘Why,  you  know,  if  I  were  strict  with  her,  if  I  were  to  forbid  her  .  .  . 
.  God  knows  what  they  might  not  be  doing  in  secret’  (the  countess  meant 
that  they  might  kiss  each  other) ,  ‘but  as  it  is  I  know  every  word  she  utters. 
1  She’ll  come  to  me  this  evening  and  tell  me  everything  of  herself.  I  spoil 
.  her,  perhaps,  but  I  really  believe  it’s  the  best  way.  I  brought  my  elder 
.  girl  up  more  strictly.’ 

‘Yes,  I  was  brought  up  quite  differently/  said  the  elder  girl,  the  hand- 


36  WAR  AND  PEACE 

some  young  Countess  Vera;  and  she  smiled.  But  the  smile  did  not  im¬ 
prove  Vera’s  face;  on  the  contrary  her  face  looked  unnatural,  and  there¬ 
fore  unpleasing.  Vera  was  good-looking;  she  was  not  stupid,  was  clever 
at  her  lessons,  and  well  educated;  she  had  a  pleasant  voice,  and  what 
she  said  was  true  and  appropriate.  But,  strange  to  say,  every  one— both 
the  visitor  and  the  countess — looked  at  her,  as  though  wondering  why 
she  had  said  it,  and  conscious  of  a  certain  awkwardness. 

‘People  are  always  too  clever  with  their  elder  children;  they  try  to 
do  something  exceptional  with  them,’  said  the  visitor. 

‘We  won’t  conceal  our  errors,  ma  chere!  My  dear  countess  was  too 
clever  with  Vera,’  said  the  count.  ‘But  what  of  it?  she  has  turned  out 
capitally  all  the  same,’  he  added,  with  a  wink  of  approval  to  Vera. 

The  guests  got  up  and  went  away,  promising  to  come  to  dinner. 

‘What  manners!  Staying  on  and  on!’  said  the  countess,  when  she  had 
seen  her  guests  out. 

X 

When  Natasha  ran  out  of  the  drawing-room  she  only  ran  as  far  as  the 
conservatory.  There  she  stopped  listening  to  the  talk  in  the  drawing¬ 
room,  and  waiting  for  Boris  to  come  out.  She  was  beginning  to  get  im¬ 
patient,  and  stamping  her  foot  was  almost  ready  to  cry  at  his  not  coming 
at  once,  when  she  heard  the  young  man’s  footsteps  coming  out  discreetly, 
not  too  slowly  nor  too  quickly.  Natasha  darted  swiftly  away  and  hid 
among  the  tubs  of  shrubs. 

Boris  stood  still  in  the  middle  of  the  room,  looked  round  him,  brushed 
a  speck  of  dirt  off  the  sleeve  of  his  uniform,  and  going  up  to  the  looking- 
glass  examined  his  handsome  face.  Natasha,  keeping  quiet,  peeped  out 
of  her  hiding-place,  waiting  to  see  what  he  would  do.  He  stood  a  little 
while  before  the  glass,  smiled  at  his  reflection,  and  walked  towards  the 
other  door.  Natasha  was  on  the  point  of  calling  to  him,  but  she  changed 
her  mind.  ‘Let  him  look  for  me,’  she  said  to  herself.  Boris  had  only  just 
gone  out,  when  at  the  other  door  Sonya  came  in,  flushed  and  muttering 
something  angrily  though  her  tears.  Natasha  checked  her  first  impulse 
to  run  out  to  her,  and  remained  in  her  hiding-place,  as  it  were  under  the 
invisible  cap,  looking  on  at  what  was  going  on  in  the  world.  She  began 
to  feel  a  peculiar  novel  sort  of  enjoyment  in  it.  Sonya  was  murmuring 
something  as  she  looked  towards  the  drawing-room  door.  The  door 
opened  and  Nikolay  came  in. 

‘Sonya!  what  is  the  matter?  how  can  you?’  said  Nikolay,  running  up 
to  her. 

‘Nothing,  nothing,  leave  me  alone!’  Sonya  was  sobbing. 

‘No,  I  know  what  it  is.’ 

‘Very  well,  you  do,  so  much  the  better  then,  and  you  can  go  back  to 
her.’ 

‘So-o-onya!  one  word!  How  can  you  torture  me  and  yourself  for  a 


WARANDPEACE  37 

mere  fancy?’  said  Nikolay,  taking  her  hand.  Sonya  did  not  pull  her 
hand  away,  and  left  off  crying. 

Natasha,  not  stirring  and  hardly  breathing,  looked  with  shining  eyes 
from  her  hiding-place.  ‘What’s  coming  now?’  she  thought. 

‘Sonya!  I  care  for  nothing  in  the  whole  world!  You’re  everything  to 
me,’  said  Nikolay.  ‘I’ll  prove  it  to  you.’ 

‘I  don’t  like  you  to  talk  like  that.’ 

‘Well,  I  won’t  then;  come,  forgive  me,  Sonya.’  He  drew  her  to  him 
and  kissed  her. 

‘Oh,  that’s  nice,’  thought  Natasha,  and  when  Sonya  and  Nikolay  had 
gone  out  of  the  room  she  followed  them  and  called  Boris  to  her. 

‘Boris,  come  here,’  she  said  with  a  sly  and  significant  look.  ‘I’ve  some¬ 
thing  I  want  to  tell  you.  Here,  here,’  she  said,  and  she  led  him  into  the 
conservatory,  to  the  place  where  she  had  hidden  between  the  tubs.  Boris 
followed  her,  smiling. 

‘What  is  the  something?’  he  inquired.  She  was  a  little  embarrassed; 
she  looked  round  her,  and  seeing  her  doll  flung  down  on  a  tub  she  picked 
it  up. 

‘Kiss  the  doll,’  she  said.  Boris  looked  with  observant,  affectionate  eyes 
at  her  eager  face  and  made  no  answer.  ‘Don't  you  want  to?  Well,  then 
come  here,’  she  said,  and  went  further  in  among  the  shrubs  and  tossed 
away  the  doll.  ‘Closer,  closer!’  she  whispered.  She  caught  hold  of  the 
young  officer’s  arms  above  the  cuff,  and  her  flushed  face  had  a  look  of 
solemnity  and  awe. 

‘Would  you  like  to  kiss  me?’  she  whispered,  hardly  audibly,  peeping 
up  at  him  from  under  her  eyelids,  smiling  and  almost  crying  with  ex¬ 
citement. 

Boris  reddened.  ‘How  absurd  you  are!’  he  said,  bending  down  to  her, 
flushing  redder  still,  but  doing  nothing,  waiting  what  would  come  next. 
Suddenly  she  jumped  on  to  a  tub,  so  that  as  she  stood  she  was  taller 
than  he,  flung  both  arms  round  him  so  that  her  slender,  bare  arms  clasped 
him  above  his  neck,  and  flinging  back  her  hair  with  a  toss  of  her  head, 
she  kissed  him  just  on  his  lips. 

She  slipped  away  among  the  flower-pots  on  the  other  side,  and  stood 
with  hanging  head. 

‘Natasha,’  he  said,  ‘you  know  I  love  you,  but - ’ 

‘You’re  in  love  with  me,’  Natasha  broke  in. 

‘Yes  I  am,  but,  please,  don’t  let  us  do  like  that.  ...  In  another  four 
years  .  .  .  Then  I  shall  ask  for  your  hand.’ Natasha  pondered  a  moment. 

‘Thirteen,  fourteen,  fifteen,  sixteen  .  .  .’  she  said,  counting  on  her 
thin  little  fingers. 

‘Very  well.  Then  it’s  settled?’  And  her  excited  face  beamed  with  a 
smile  of  delight  and  relief. 

‘Settled! ’  said  Boris. 

‘For  ever?’  said  the  little  girl.  ‘Till  death?’  And  taking  his  arm,  with 
a  happy  face  she  walked  quietly  beside  him  into  the  next  room. 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


33 


XI 

The  countess  was  so  tired  from  seeing  visitors  that  she  gave  orders  that 
she  would  see  no  one  else,  and  the  doorkeeper  was  told  to  be  sure  and 
invite  to  dinner  every  one  who  should  call  with  congratulations.  The 
countess  was  longing  for  a  tete-a-tete  talk  with  the  friend  of  her  child¬ 
hood,  Anna  Mihalovna,  whom  she  had  not  seen  properly  since  she  had 
arrived  from  Petersburg.  Anna  Mihalovna,  with  her  tear-worn  and 
amiable  face,  moved  closer  up  to  the  countess’s  easy-chair. 

‘With  you  I  will  be  perfectly  open,’  said  Anna  Mihalovna.  ‘We  haven’t 
many  old  friends  left.  That’s  how  it  is  I  value  your  friendship  so.’ 

Anna  Mihalovna  looked  at  Vera  and  stopped.  The  countess  pressed 
her  friend’s  hand. 

‘Vera,’  said  the  countess  to  her  eldest  daughter,  unmistakably  not  her 
favourite,  ‘how  is  it  you  have  no  notion  about  anything?  Don’t  you 
feel  that  you’re  not  wanted  here?  Go  to  your  sister  or  .  .  .’ 

The  handsome  young  countess  smiled  scornfully,  apparently  not  in 
the  least  mortified. 

‘If  you  had  told  me,  mamma,  I  would  have  gone  away  long  ago,’  she 
said,  and  went  off  towards  her  own  room.  But  passing  through  the  divan- 
room,  she  noticed  two  couples  sitting  symmetrically  in  the  two  windows. 
She  stopped  and  smiled  contemptuously  at  them.  Sonya  was  sitting  close 
beside  Nikolay,  who  was  copying  out  some  verses  for  her,  the  first  he 
had  ever  written.  Boris  and  Natasha  were  sitting  in  the  other  window, 
and  were  silent  when  Vera  came  in.  Sonya  and  Natasha  looked  at  Vera 
with  guilty,  happy  faces. 

It  was  an  amusing  and  touching  sight  to  see  these  little  girls  in  love, 
but  the  sight  of  them  did  not  apparently  arouse  any  agreeable  feeling  in 
Vera.  ‘How  often  have  I  asked  you,’  she  said,  ‘not  to  take  my  things? 
you  have  a  room  of  your  own.’  She  took  the  inkstand  away  from  Nikolay. 

‘One  minute,  one  minute,’  he  said,  dipping  his  pen  in. 

‘You  always  manage  to  do  things  just  at  the  wrong  moment,’  said 
Vera.  ‘First  you  burst  into  the  drawing-room  so  that  every  one  was 
ashamed  of  you.’  Although  or  just  because  what  she  said  was  perfectly 
true,  no  one  answered;  all  the  four  simply  looked  at  one  another.  She 
lingered  in  the  room  with  the  inkstand  in  her  hand.  ‘And  what  sort  o ? 
secrets  can  you  have  at  your  age,  Natasha  and  Boris,  and  you  two!  — 
it’s  all  simply  silly  nonsense!’ 

‘Well,  what  has  it  to  do  with  you,  Vera?’  Natasha  said  in  defence, 
speaking  very  gently.  She  was  evidently  more  good-humoured  and 
affectionate  than  usual  that  day  with  every  one. 

‘It’s  very  silly,’  said  Vera;  ‘I  am  ashamed  of  you.  What  sort  of 
secret  .  .  .’ 

‘Every  one  has  secrets.  We  don’t  interfere  with  you  and  Berg,’  said 
Natasha,  getting  warmer. 

‘I  should  think  you  didn’t  interfere,’  said  Vera,  ‘because  there  could 


WARANDPEACE  39 

be  no  harm  in  any  conduct  of  mine.  But  I  shall  tell  mamma  how  you 
behave  with  Boris.’ 

‘Natalya  Ilyinishna  behaves  very  well  to  me,’  said  Boris.  ‘I  have 
nothing  to  complain  of,’  he  said. 

‘Leave  off,  Boris,  you’re  such  a  diplomatist’  (the  word  diplomatist 
was  much  in  use  among  the  children  in  the  special  sense  they  attached 
to  the  word).  ‘It’s  tiresome,  really,’  said  Natasha,  in  a  mortified  and 
shaking  voice;  ‘why  does  she  set  upon  me?’ 

‘You’ll  never  understand  it,’  she  said,  addressing  Vera,  ‘because  you’ve 
never  cared  for  any  one;  you’ve  no  heart;  you’re  simply  Madame  de 
Genlis’  (this  nickname,  considered  most  offensive,  had  been  given  to 
Vera  by  Nikolay),  ‘and  your  greatest  delight  is  in  getting  other  people 
into  trouble.  You  can  flirt  with  Berg,  as  much  as  you  like,’  she  said 
quickly. 

‘Well,  I’m  not  likely  to  run  after  a  young  man  before  visitors.  .  . 

‘Well,  she  has  gained  her  object!’  Nikolay  put  in;  ‘she  has  said 
something  nasty  to  every  one,  and  upset  everybody.  Let’s  go  into  the 
nursery.’ 

All  four  rose,  like  a  flock  of  scared  birds,  and  went  out  of  the  room. 

‘You’ve  said  nasty  things  to  me,  and  I  said  nothing  to  any  one,’  said 
Vera. 

‘Madame  de  Genlis!  Madame  de  Genlis!  ’  cried  laughing  voices  through 
the  door. 

The  handsome  girl  who  produced  such  an  irritating  and  unpleasant 
effect  on  every  one  smiled;  and,  obviously  unaffected  by  what  had  been 
said  to  her,  she  went  up  to  the  looking-glass  and  put  her  scarf  and  her 
hair  tidy.  Looking  at  her  handsome  face,  she  seemed  to  become  colder 
and  more  composed  than  ever. 


In  the  drawing-room  the  conversation  was  still  going  on. 

‘Ah,  chere said  the  countess,  ‘in  my  life,  too,  everything  is  not  rose- 
coloured.  Do  you  suppose  I  don’t  see  that,  in  the  way  we  are  going  on, 
our  fortune  can’t  last  long?  And  it’s  all  the  club  and  his  good-nature. 
When  we’re  in  the  country  we  have  no  rest  from  it, — it’s  nothing  but 
theatricals,  hunting  parties,  and  God  knows  what.  But  we  won’t  talk  of 
me.  Come,  tell  me  how  you  managed  it  all.  I  often  wonder  at  you, 
Annette,  the  way  you  go  racing  off  alone,  at  your  age,  to  Moscow,  and 
to  Petersburg,  to  all  the  ministers,  and  all  the  great  people,  and  know 
how  to  get  round  them  all  too.  I  admire  you,  really!  Well,  how  was  it 
arranged?  Why,  I  could  never  do  it.’ 

‘Ah,  my  dear!’  answered  Princess  Anna  Mihalovna,  ‘God  grant  that 
you  never  know  what  it  is  to  be  left  a  widow,  with  no  one  to  support 
you,  and  a  son  whom  you  love  to  distraction.  One  learns  how  to  do 
anything,’  she  said  with  some  pride.  ‘My  lawsuit  trained  me  to  it.  If  I 
want  to  see  one  of  these  great  people,  I  write  a  note:  “Princess  so-and-so 
wishes  to  see  so-and-so,”  and  I  go  myself  in  a  hired  cab  two  or  three 


40  WARANDPEACE 

times — four,  if  need  be — till  I  get  what  I  want.  I  don’t  mind  what  they 
think  of  me.’ 

‘Well,  tell  me,  then,  whom  did  you  interview  for  Borinka?’  asked  the 
countess.  ‘Here’s  your  boy  an  officer  in  the  Guards,  while  my  Nikolinka’s 
going  as  an  ensign.  There’s  no  one  to  manage  things  for  him.  Whose 
help  did  you  ask?’ 

‘Prince  Vassily’s.  He  was  so  kind.  Agreed  to  do  everything  immedi¬ 
ately;  put  the  case  before  the  Emperor,’  said  Princess  Anna  Mihalovna 
enthusiastically,  entirely  forgetting  all  the  humiliation  she  had  been 
through  to  attain  her  object. 

‘And  how  is  he?  beginning  to  get  old,  Prince  Vassily?’  inquired  the 
countess.  ‘I  have  never  seen  him  since  our  theatricals  at  the  Rumyant- 
sovs’,  and  I  dare  say  he  has  forgotten  me.  He  paid  me  attentions,’  the 
countess  recalled  with  a  smile. 

‘He’s  just  the  same,’  answered  Anna  Mihalovna,  ‘so  affable,  brimming 
over.  Greatness  has  not  turned  his  head.  “I  am  sorry  I  can  do  so  little 
for  you,  Princess,”  he  said  to  me;  “I’m  at  your  command.”  Yes,  he’s 
a  splendid  man,  and  very  good  to  his  relatives.  But  you  know,  Natalie, 
my  love  for  my  boy.  I  don’t  know  what  I  would  not  do  to  make  him 
happy.  And  my  means  are  so  scanty,’  pursued  Anna  Mihalovna,  drop¬ 
ping  her  voice  mournfully,  ‘that  now  I  am  in  a  most  awful  position.  My 
wretched  lawsuit  is  eating  up  all  I  have,  and  making  no  progress.  I  have 
not,  can  you  conceive  it,  literally,  not  sixpence  in  the  world,  and  I  don’t 
know  how  to  get  Boris’s  equipment.’  She  took  out  her  handkerchief  and 
shed  tears.  ‘I  must  have  five  hundred  roubles,  and  I  have  only  a  twenty- 
five  rouble  note.  I’m  in  such  a  position.  .  .  .  My  one  hope  now  is  in 
Prince  Kirill  Vladimirovitch  Bezuhov.  If  he  will  not  come  to  the  help 
of  his  godson — you  know  he  is  Boris’s  godfather — and  allow  him  some¬ 
thing  for  his  maintenance,  all  my  efforts  will  have  been  in  vain;  I  shall 
have  nothing  to  get  his  equipment  with.’ 

The  countess  deliberated  in  tearful  silence. 

‘I  often  think — perhaps  it’s  a  sinful  thought,’  said  the  princess — ‘but 
I  often  think:  here  is  Prince  Kirill  Vladimirovitch  Bezuhov  living  all 
alone  .  .  .  that  immense  fortune  .  .  .  and  what  is  he  living  for?  Life 
is  a  burden  to  him,  while  Boris  is  only  just  beginning  life.’ 

‘He  will  be  sure  to  leave  something  to  Boris,’  said  the  countess. 

‘God  knows,  chere  amie!  These  wealthy  grand  people  are  such  egoists. 
But  still  I’m  going  to  see  him  at  once  with  Boris,  and  I  will  tell  him  plainly 
the  state  of  the  case.  People  may  think  what  they  choose  of  me,  I  really 
don’t  care,  when  my  son’s  fate  depends  on  it.’  The  princess  got  up.  ‘It’s 
now  two  o’clock,  and  you  dine  at  four.  I  shall  have  time  to  drive  there 
and  back.’ 

And  with  the  air  of  a  Petersburg  lady,  used  to  business,  and  knowing 
how  to  make  use  of  every  moment,  Anna  Mihalovna  sent  for  her  son, 
and  with  him  went  out  into  the  hall. 

‘Good-bye,  my  dear,’  she  said  to  the  countess,  who  accompanied  her 


WARANDPEACE  41 

to  the  door.  ‘Wish  me  good-luck,’  she  added  in  a  whisper  unheard  by 
her  son. 

‘You’re  going  to  Prince  Kirill  Vladimirovitch’s,  ma  chere?’  said  the 
count,  coming  out  of  the  dining-room  into  the  hall.  ‘If  he’s  better,  invite 
Pierre  to  dine  with  us.  He  has  been  here;  used  to  dance  with  the  children. 
Be  sure  you  invite  him,  ma  cliere.  Now  do  come  and  look  how  Taras  has 
surpassed  himself  to-day.  He  says  Count  Orlov  never  had  such  a  dinner 
as  we’re  going  to  have  to-day.’ 


XII 

‘Mon  cher  Boris,’  said  Anna  Mihalovna  as  the  Countess  Rostov’s  car¬ 
riage  drove  along  the  street  strewn  with  straw  and  into  the  wide  court¬ 
yard  of  Count  Kirill  Vladimirovitch  Bezuhov’s  house.  ‘Mon  cher  Boris’ 
said  the  mother,  putting  her  hand  out  from  under  her  old  mantle,  and 
laying  it  on  her  son’s  hand  with  a  timid,  caressing  movement,  ‘be  nice, 
be  attentive.  Count  Kirill  Vladimirovitch  is  after  all  your  godfather,  and 
your  future  depends  on  him.  Remember  that,  mon  cher,  be  charming, 
as  you  know  so  well  how  to  be.  .  .  .’ 

‘If  I  knew  anything  would  come  of  it  but  humiliation,’  her  son 
answered  coldly.  ‘But  I  have  promised,  and  I  will  do  it  for  your  sake.’ 

Although  the  carriage  was  standing  at  the  entrance,  the  hall-porter, 
scanning  the  mother  and  son  (they  had  not  sent  in  their  names,  but  had 
walked  straight  in  through  the  glass  doors  between  two  rows  of  statues 
in  niches),  and  looking  significantly  at  the  old  mantle,  inquired  whom 
they  wanted,  the  princesses  or  the  count;  and  hearing  that  they  wanted 
to  see  the  count,  said  that  his  excellency  was  worse  to-day,  and  his 
excellency  could  see  no  one. 

‘We  may  as  well  go  away,’  the  son  said  in  French. 

‘Mon  ami!’  said  the  mother  in  a  voice  of  entreaty,  again  touching  her 
son’s  hand,  as  though  the  contact  might  soothe  or  rouse  him.  Boris  said 
no  more,  but  without  taking  off  his  overcoat,  looked  inquiringly  at  his 
mother. 

‘My  good  man,’  Anna  Mihalovna  said  ingratiatingly,  addressing  the 
hall-porter,  ‘I  know  that  Count  Kirill  Vladimirovitch  is  very  ill  .  .  . 
that  is  why  I  am  here.  ...  I  am  a  relation.  ...  I  shall  not  disturb 
him,  my  good  man.  ...  I  need  only  see  Prince  Vassily  Sergyevitch; 
he’s  staying  here,  I  know.  Announce  us,  please.’ 

The  hall-porter  sullenly  pulled  the  bell-rope  that  rang  upstairs  and 
turned  away. 

‘Princess  Drubetskoy  to  see  Prince  Vassily  Sergyevitch,’  he  called  to 
a  footman  in  stockings,  slippers  and  a  frockcoat,  who  ran  down  from 
above,  and  looked  down  from  the  turn  in  the  staircase. 

The  mother  straightened  out  the  folds  of  her  dyed  silk  gown,  looked 
at  herself  in  the  full-length  Venetian  looking-glass  on  the  wall,  and  boldly 
walked  up  on  the  stair  carpet  in  her  shabby,  shapeless  shoes. 


42 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘My  dear,  you  promised  me,’  she  turned  again  to  her  son,  rousing  him 
by  a  touch  on  his  arm.  The  son,  with  his  eyes  on  the  floor,  walked  sub¬ 
missively  after  her. 

They  went  into  a  large  room,  from  which  a  door  led  to  the  apartments 
that  had  been  assigned  to  Prince  Vassily. 

At  the  moment  when  the  mother  and  son  reached  the  middle  of  the 
room  and  were  about  to  ask  their  way  of  an  old  footman,  who  had  darted 
out  at  their  entrance,  the  bronze  handle  of  one  of  the  doors  turned,  and 
Prince  Vassily,  dressed  in  a  house  jacket  of  velvet,  with  one  star,  came 
out,  accompanying  a  handsome,  black-haired  man.  This  man  was  the 
celebrated  Petersburg  doctor,  Lorrain. 

Tt  is  positive,  then?’  said  the  Prince. 

‘Prince,  err  are  est  humanum,’  answered  the  doctor,  lisping,  and  pro¬ 
nouncing  the  Latin  words  with  a  French  accent. 

‘Very  well,  very  well  .  .  .’ 

Perceiving  Anna  Mihalovna  and  her  son,  Prince  Vassily  dismissed  the 
doctor  with  a  bow,  and  in  silence,  with  an  air  of  inquiry,  advanced  to 
meet  them.  The  son  noticed  how  an  expression  of  intense  grief  came  at 
once  into  his  mother’s  eyes,  and  he  smiled  slightly. 

‘Yes,  in  what  distressing  circumstances  we  were  destined  to  meet  again, 
prince.  .  .  .  Tell  me  how  is  our  dear  patient?’  she  said,  apparently  not 
observing  the  frigid,  offensive  glance  that  was  fixed  on  her.  Prince  Vassily 
stared  at  her,  then  at  Boris  with  a  look  ox  inquiry  that  amounted  to  per¬ 
plexity.  Boris  bowed  politely.  Prince  Vassily,  without  acknowledging  his 
bow,  turned  away  to  Anna  Mihalovna,  and  to  her  question  he  replied 
by  a  movement  of  the  head  and  lips,  indicative  of  the  worst  fears  for 
the  patient. 

‘Is  it  possible?’  cried  Anna  Mihalovna.  ‘Ah,  this  is  terrible!  It  is  dread¬ 
ful  to  think  .  .  .  This  is  my  son,’  she  added,  indicating  Boris.  ‘Pie  wanted 
to  thank  you  in  person.’ 

Boris  once  more  made  a  polite  bow. 

‘Believe  me,  prince,  a  mother’s  heart  will  never  forget  what  you  have 
done  for  us.’ 

‘I  am  glad  I  have  been  able  to  do  you  any  service,  my  dear  Anna 
Mihalovna,’  said  Prince  Vassily,  pulling  his  lace  frill  straight,  and  in 
voice  and  manner  manifesting  here  in  Moscow,  before  Anna  Mihalovna, 
who  was  under  obligation  to  him,  an  even  greater  sense  of  his  own 
dignity  than  in  Petersburg  at  Anna  Pavlovna’s  soiree. 

‘Try  to  do  your  duty  in  the  service,  and  to  be  worthy  of  it,’  he  added, 
turning  severely  to  him. ‘I  am  glad  .  .  .  you  are  here  on  leave?’ he  asked 
in  his  expressionless  voice. 

‘I  am  awaiting  orders,  your  excellency,  to  join  my  new  regiment,’ 
answered  Boris,  showing  no  sign  either  of  resentment  at  the  prince’s 
abrupt  manner,  nor  of  desire  to  get  into  conversation,  but  speaking  with 
such  respectful  composure  that  the  prince  looked  at  him  attentively. 

‘You  are  living  with  your  mother?’ 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


43 

‘I  am  living  at  Countess  Rostov’s,’  said  Boris,  again  adding:  ‘your 
excellency.’ 

‘The  Ilya  Rostov,  who  married  Natalie  Shinshin,’  said  Anna  Mihal- 
ovna. 

T  know,  I  know,’  said  Prince  Vassily  in  his  monotonous  voice.  ‘I  have 
never  been  able  to  understand  how  Natalie  Shinshin  could  make  up  her 
mind  to  marry  that  unlicked  bear.  A  completely  stupid  and  ridiculous 
person.  And  a  gambler  too,  I  am  told.’ 

‘But  a  very  worthy  man,  prince,’  observed  Anna  Mihalovna,  with  a 
pathetic  smile,  as  though  she  too  recognised  that  Count  Rostov  deserved 
this  criticism,  but  begged  him  not  to  be  too  hard  on  the  poor  old  fellow. 
‘What  do  the  doctors  say?’  asked  the  princess,  after  a  brief  pause,  and 
again  the  expression  of  deep  distress  reappeared  on  her  tear-worn  face. 

‘There  is  little  hope,’  said  the  prince. 

‘And,  I  was  so  longing  to  thank  uncle  once  more  for  all  his  kindness 
to  me  and  to  Boris.  He  is  his  godson,’  she  added  in  a  tone  that  suggested 
that  Prince  Vassily  would  be  highly  delighted  to  hear  this  fact. 

Prince  Vassily  pondered  and  frowned.  Anna  Mihalovna  saw  he  was 
afraid  of  finding  in  her  a  rival  with  claims  on  Count  Bezuhov’s  will.  She 
hastened  to  reassure  him.  ‘If  it  were  not  for  my  genuine  love  and  devotion 
for  uncle,’  she  said,  uttering  the  last  word  with  peculiar  assurance  and 
carelessness,  ‘I  know  his  character, — generous,  upright;  but  with  only 
the  princesses  about  him.  .  .  .  They  are  young.  .  .  .’  She  bent  her  head 
and  added  in  a  whisper:  ‘Has  he  performed  his  last  duties,  prince?  How 
priceless  are  these  last  moments!  He  is  as  bad  as  he  could  be,  it  seems: 
it  is  absolutely  necessary  to  prepare  him,  if  he  is  so  ill.  We  women, 
prince,’  she  smiled  tenderly,  ‘always  know  how  to  say  these  things.  I 
absolutely  must  see  him.  Hard  as  it  will  be  for  me,  I  am  used  to  suf¬ 
fering.’ 

The  prince  evidently  understood,  and  understood  too,  as  he  had  at 
Anna  Pavlovna’s,  that  it  was  no  easy  task  to  get  rid  of  Anna  Mihalovna. 

‘Would  not  this  interview  be  trying  for  him,  chere  Anna  Mihalovna,’ 
he  said.  ‘Let  us  wait  till  the  evening;  the  doctors  have  predicted  a 
crisis.’ 

‘But  waiting’s  out  of  the  question,  prince,  at  such  a  moment.  Think, 
it  is  a  question  of  saving  his  soul.  Ah!  how  terrible,  the  duties  of  a 
Christian.  .  .  .’ 

The  door  from  the  inner  rooms  opened,  and  one  of  the  count’s  nieces 
entered  with  a  cold  and  forbidding  face,  and  a  long  waist  strikingly  out 
of  proportion  with  the  shortness  of  her  legs. 

Prince  Vassily  turned  to  her.  ‘Well,  how  is  he?’ 

‘Still  the  same.  What  can  you  expect  with  this  noise?  .  .  said  the 
princess,  scanning  Anna  Mihalovna,  as  a  stranger. 

‘Ah,  dear,  I  did  not  recognise  you,’  said  Anna  Mihalovna,  with  a 
delighted  smile,  and  she  ambled  lightly  up  to  the  count’s  niece.  ‘I  have 
just  come,  and  I  am  at  your  service  to  help  in  nursing  my  uncle.  I 


44  WARANDPEACE 

imagine  what  you  have  been  suffering,’  she  added,  sympathetically  turn¬ 
ing  her  eyes  up. 

The  princess  made  no  reply,  she  did  not  even  smile,  but  walked  straight 
away.  Anna  Mihalovna  took  off  her  gloves,  and  entrenched  herself  as  it 
were  in  an  armchair,  inviting  Prince  Vassily  to  sit  down  beside  her. 

‘Boris!’  she  said  to  her  son,  and  she  smiled  at  him,  ‘I  am  going  in  to 
the  count,  to  poor  uncle,  and  you  can  go  to  Pierre,  vion  ami,  meanwhile, 
and  don’t  forget  to  give  him  the  Rostovs’  invitation.  They  ask  him  to 
dinner.  I  suppose  he  won’t  go?’  she  said  to  the  prince. 

‘On  the  contrary,’  said  the  prince,  visibly  cast  down.  ‘I  should  be  very 
glad  if  you  would  take  that  young  man  off  my  hands.  ...  He  sticks  on 
here.  The  count  has  not  once  asked  for  him.’ 

He  shrugged  his  shoulders.  A  footman  conducted  the  youth  down¬ 
stairs  and  up  another  staircase  to  the  apartments  of  Pyotr  Kirillovitch, 

XIII 

Pierre  had  not  succeeded  in  fixing  upon  a  career  in  Petersburg,  and 
really  had  been  banished  to  Moscow  for  disorderly  conduct.  The  story 
told  about  him  at  Count  Rostov’s  was  true.6 Pierre  had  assisted  in  tying 
the  police  officer  to  the  bear.  He  had  arrived  a  few  days  previously,  stop-  1 
ping  as  he  always  did  at  his  father’s  house.  Though  he  had  assumed 
that  his  story  would  be  already  known  at  Moscow,  and  that  the  ladies 
who  were  about  his  father,  always  unfavourably  disposed  to  him,  would 
profit  by  this  opportunity  of  turning  the  count  against  him,  he  went  on 
the  day  of  his  arrival  to  his  father’s  part  of  the  house.  Going  into  the  | 
drawing-room,  where  the  princesses  usually  sat,  he  greeted  the  ladies, 
two  of  whom  were  sitting  at  their  embroidery  frames,  while  one  read  | 
aloud.  There  were  three  of  them.  The  eldest,  a  trim,  long-waisted,  severe 
maiden-lady,  the  one  who  had  come  out  to  Anna  Mihalovna,  was  read¬ 
ing.  The  younger  ones,  both  rosy  and  pretty,  were  only  to  be  distinguished 
by  the  fact  that  one  of  them  had  a  little  mole  which  made  her  much 
prettier.  They  were  both  working  at  their  embroidery  frames.  Pierre 
was  received  like  a  man  risen  from  the  dead  or  stricken  with  plague. 
The  eldest  princess  paused  in  her  reading  and  stared  at  him  in  silence 
with  dismay  in  her  eyes.  The  second  assumed  precisely  the  same  ex¬ 
pression.  The  youngest,  the  one  with  the  mole,  who  was  of  a  mirthful 
and  laughing  disposition,  bent  over  her  frame,  to  conceal  a  smile,  prob- 
ably  evoked  by  the  amusing  scene  she  foresaw  coming.  She  pulled  her 
embroidery  wool  out  below,  and  bent  down  as  though  examining  the 
pattern,  hardly  able  to  suppress  her  laughter. 

‘Good  morning,  cousin,’  said  Pierre.  ‘You  don’t  know  me?’ 

‘I  know  you  only  too  well,  only  too  well.’ 

‘How  is  the  count?  Can  I  see  him?’  Pierre  asked,  awkwardly  as  al¬ 
ways,  but  not  disconcerted.  r 


WARANDPEACE  45 

‘The  count  is  suffering  both  physically  and  morally,  and  your  only 
anxiety  seems  to  be  to  occasion  him  as  much  suffering  as  possible.’ 

‘Can  I  see  the  count?’  repeated  Pierre. 

‘Hm  ...  if  you  want  to  kill  him,  to  kill  him  outright,  you  can  see 
him.  Olga,  go  and  see  if  uncle’s  broth  is  ready — it  will  soon  be  time  for 
it,’  she  added,  to  show  Pierre  they  were  busy,  and  busy  in  seeing  after 
his  father’s  comfort,  while  he  was  obviously  only  busy  in  causing  him 
discomfort. 

Olga  went  out.  Pierre  stood  still  a  moment,  looked  at  the  sisters  and 
bowing  said:  ‘Then  I  will  go  to  my  room.  When  I  can  see  him,  you  will 
tell  me.’  He  went  away  and  heard  the  ringing  but  not  loud  laugh  of  the 
sister  with  the  mole  behind  him. 

The  next  day  Prince  Vassily  had  come  and  settled  in  the  count’s  house. 
He  sent  for  Pierre  and  said  to  him: 

‘My  dear  fellow,  if  you  behave  here  as  you  did  at  Petersburg,  you  will 
come  to  a  very  bad  end;  that’s  all  I  have  to  say  to  you.  The  count  is 
very,  very  ill;  you  must  not  see  him.’ 

Since  then  Pierre  had  not  been  disturbed,  and  he  spent  the  whole  day 
alone  in  his  room  upstairs. 

At  the  moment  when  Boris  came  in,  Pierre  was  walking  up  and  down 
his  room,  stopping  now  and  then  in  the  corners,  making  menacing  ges¬ 
tures  at  the  wall,  as  though  thrusting  some  invisible  enemy  through  with 
a  lance,  then  he  gazed  sternly  over  his  spectacles,  then  pacing  up  and 
down  again,  murmuring  indistinct  words,  shrugging  his  shoulders  and 
gesticulating, 

‘England’s  day  is  over!’  he  said,  scowling  and  pointing  at  some  one 
with  his  finger.  ‘Mr.  Pitt,  as  a  traitor  to  the  nation  and  to  the  rights  of 
man,  is  condemned  .  .  .’  he  had  not  time  to  deliver  Pitt’s  sentence, 
imagining  himself  at  that  moment  Napoleon,  and  having  in  the  person 
of  his  hero  succeeded  in  the  dangerous  crossing  of  the  Channel  and  in 
the  conquest  of  London,  when  he  saw  a  graceful,  handsome  young  officer 
come  in.  He  stood  still.  Pierre  had  seen  Boris  last  as  a  boy  of  fourteen, 
and  did  not  remember  him  in  the  least.  But  in  spite  of  that  he  took  his 
hand  in  his  characteristically  quick  and  warm-hearted  manner,  and  smiled 
cordially  at  him. 

‘You  remember  me?’  Boris  said  calmly  with  a  pleasant  smile.  ‘I  have 
come  with  my  mother  to  see  the  count,  but  it  seems  he  is  not  quite  well.’ 

‘Yes,  he  is  ill,  it  seems.  People  are  always  bothering  him,’  answered 
Pierre,  trying  to  recall  who  this  youth  might  be. 

Boris  perceived  that  Pierre  did  not  know  him,  but  did  not  think  fit 
to  make  himself  known,  and  without  the  slightest  embarrassment  looked 
him  straight  in  the  face. 

‘Count  Rostov  asks  you  to  come  to  dinner  with  him  to-day,’  he  said, 
after  a  rather  long  silence  somewhat  disconcerting  for  Pierre. 

‘Ah,  Count  Rostov,’  began  Pierre,  delighted.  ‘So  you  are  his  son,  Ilya? 
Can  you  believe  it,  for  the  first  moment  I  did  not  recognise  you.  Do  you 


46  WAR  AND  PEACE 

remember  how  we  used  to  slide  on  the  Sparrow  Hills  with  Madame 
Jacquot  .  .  .  long  ago?’ 

‘You  are  mistaken,’  said  Boris,  deliberately,  with  a  bold  and  rather 
sarcastic  smile.  ‘I  am  Boris,  the  son  of  Princess  Anna  Mihalovna  Drubet- 
skoy.  It  is  the  father  of  the  Rostovs  who  is  called  Ilya,  the  son’s  Nikolay. 
And  I  don’t  know  any  Madame  Jacquot.’ 

Pierre  shook  his  hands  and  head,  as  though  flies  or  bees  were  swarm¬ 
ing  upon  him. 

‘Ah,  how  is  it!  I’ve  mixed  it  all  up.  There  are  such  a  lot  of  relatives 
in  Moscow!  You  are  Boris  .  .  .  yes.  Well,  now,  we  have  got  it  clear. 
Tell  me,  what  do  you  think  of  the  Boulogne  expedition?  Things  will  go 
badly  with  the  English,  you  know,  if  Napoleon  gets  across  the  Channel. 
I  believe  that  the  expedition  is  very  possible.  If  only  Villeneuve  doesn’t 
make  a  mess  of  it!  ’ 

Boris  knew  nothing  at  all  about  the  Boulogne  expedition,  and  it  was 
the  first  time  he  had  heard  of  Villeneuve. 

‘Here  in  Moscow  we  are  more  interested  in  dinner  parties  and  scandal 
than  in  politics,’  he  said  in  his  self-possessed,  sarcastic  tone.  ‘I  know 
nothing  and  think  nothing  about  it.  Moscow’s  more  engrossed  in  scandal 
than  anything,’  he  went  on.  ‘Just  now  they  are  all  talking  about  you 
and  about  the  count.’ 

Pierre  smiled  his  kindly  smile,  as  though  afraid  for  his  companion’s 
sake  that  he  might  say  something  he  would  regret.  But  Boris  spoke  dis¬ 
tinctly,  clearly  and  drily,  looking  straight  into  Pierre’s  face. 

‘There’s  nothing  else  to  do  in  Moscow  but  talk  scandal,’  he  went  on. 
‘Every  one’s  absorbed  in  the  question  whom  the  count  will  leave  his 
fortune  to,  though  perhaps  he  will  outlive  us  all,  as  I  sincerely  hope  he 
may.’ 

‘Yes,  all  that’s  very  horrid,’  Pierre  interposed,  ‘very  horrid.’  Pierre 
was  still  afraid  this  officer  would  inadvertently  drop  into  some  remark 
disconcerting  for  himself. 

‘And  it  must  seem  to  you,’  said  Boris,  flushing  slightly,  but  not  chang¬ 
ing  his  voice  or  attitude,  ‘it  must  seem  to  you  that  every  one’s  thinking 
of  nothing  but  getting  something  from  him.’ 

‘That’s  just  it,’  thought  Pierre. 

‘And  that’s  just  what  I  want  to  say  to  you  to  prevent  misunderstand¬ 
ings,  that  you  are  very  much  mistaken  if  you  reckon  me  and  my  mother 
among  those  people.  We  are  very  poor,  but  I — at  least  I  speak  for 
myself — just  because  your  father  is  rich,  I  don’t  consider  myself  a  rela¬ 
tion  of  his,  and  neither  I  nor  my  mother  would  ever  ask  him  for  anything 
or  take  anything  from  him.’ 

It  was  a  long  while  before  Pierre  understood,  but,  when  he  did  under¬ 
stand,  he  jumped  up  from  the  sofa,  seized  Boris’s  hand  with  his  charac¬ 
teristic  quickness  and  awkwardness,  and  blushing  far  more  than  Boris, 
began  speaking  with  a  mixed  sensation  of  shame  and  annoyance. 

‘Well,  this  is  strange!  Do  you  suppose  I  .  .  .  how  you  could  think 
...  I  know  very  well  .  .  .’ 


47 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

But  Boris  again  interrupted  him. 

‘I  am  glad  I  have  told  you  everything  frankly.  Perhaps  you  dislike  it: 
you  must  excuse  me,’  he  said,  trying  to  put  Pierre  at  his  ease  instead  of 
being  put  at  his  ease  by  him;  ‘but  I  hope  I  have  not  offended  you.  I 
make  it  a  rule  to  say  everything  quite  plainly.  .  .  .  Then  what  message 
am  I  to  take?  You  will  come  to  dinner  at  the  Rostovs’?’  And  Boris,  with 
an  evident  sense  of  having  discharged  an  onerous  duty,  having  extricated 
himself  from  an  awkward  position,  and  put  somebody  else  into  one, 
became  perfectly  pleasant  again. 

‘No,  let  me  tell  you,’  said  Pierre,  regaining  his  composure,  ‘you  are  a 
wonderful  person.  What  you  have  just  said  was  very  fine,  very  fine.  Of 
course  you  don’t  know  me,  it’s  so  long  since  we’ve  seen  each  other  .  .  . 
we  were  children.  .  .  .  You  might  suppose  I  should  ...  I  understand, 
I  quite  understand.  I  shouldn’t  have  done  it,  I  shouldn’t  have  had  the 
courage,  but  it’s  splendid.  I’m  very  glad  I  have  made  your  acquaintance. 
A  queer  idea,’  he  added,  pausing  and  smiling,  ‘you  must  have  had  of 
me.’  He  laughed.  ‘But  what  of  it?  Let  us  know  each  other  better,  please!  ’ 
He  pressed  Boris’s  hand.  ‘Do  you  know  I’ve  not  once  seen  the  count?  He 
has  not  sent  for  me  ...  I  am  sorry  for  him,  as  a  man  .  .  .  But  what 
can  one  do?’ 

‘And  so  you  think  Napoleon  will  succeed  in  getting  his  army  across?’ 
Boris  queried,  smiling. 

Pierre  saw  that  Boris  was  trying  to  change  the  conversation,  and  so 
he  began  explaining  the  advantages  and  difficulties  of  the  Boulogne 
expedition. 

A  footman  came  in  to  summon  Boris  to  the  princess.  The  princess  was 
going.  Pierre  promised  to  come  to  dinner  in  order  to  see  more  of  Boris, 
and  pressed  his  hand  warmly  at  parting,  looking  affectionately  into  his 
face  over  his  spectacles. 

When  he  had  gone,  Pierre  walked  for  some  time  longer  up  and  down 
his  room,  not  thrusting  at  an  unseen  foe,  but  smiling  at  the  recollection 
of  that  charming,  intelligent,  and  resolute  young  man. 

As  so  often  happens  with  young  people,  especially  if  they  are  in  a 
position  of  loneliness,  he  felt  an  unreasonable  tenderness  for  this  youth, 

'  and  he  firmly  resolved  to  become  friends  with  him. 

Prince  Vassily  accompanied  the  princess  to  the  hall.  The  princess  was 
holding  her  handkerchief  to  her  eyes,  and  her  face  was  tearful. 

‘It  is  terrible,  terrible!’  she  said;  ‘but  whatever  it  costs  me,  I  will  do 
my  duty.  I  will  come  to  stay  the  night.  He  can’t  be  left  like  this.  Every 
minute  is  precious.  I  can’t  understand  why  his  nieces  put  it  off.  Maybe 
God  will  help  me  to  find  a  way  to  prepare  him.  Adieu,  prince,  may  God 
support  you  .  .  .’ 

‘Adieu,  my  kind  friend,’  answered  Prince  Vassily,  turning  away  from 
her. 

‘Oh,  he  is  in  an  awful  position!  ’  said  the  mother  to  her  son,  when  they 
were  sitting  in  the  carriage  again.  ‘He  scarcely  knows  any  one.’ 

‘I  don’t  understand,  mamma,  what  his  attitude  is  as  regards  Pierre.’ 


48 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘The  will  will  make  all  that  plain,  my  dear;  our  fate,  too,  hangs  upon 
it  .  . 

‘But  what  makes  you  think  he  will  leave  us  anything?’ 

‘Oh,  my  dear!  He  is  so  rich,  and  we  are  so  poor.’ 

‘Well,  that’s  hardly  a  sufficient  reason,  mamma.’ 

‘Oh,  my  God,  how  ill  he  is,  how  ill  he  is!  ’  cried  his  mother. 


XIV 

When  Anna  Mihalovna  had  driven  off  with  her  son  to  Count  Kirill 
Vladimirovitch  Bezuhov’s,  Countess  Rostov  sat  a  long  while  alone,  put¬ 
ting  her  handkerchief  to  her  eyes.  At  last  she  rang  the  bell. 

‘What  does  it  mean?’  she  said  angrily  to  the  maid,  who  had  kept  her 
waiting  a  few  minutes;  ‘don’t  you  care  for  my  service,  eh?  I’ll  find  you 
another  place,  if  so.’ 

The  countess  was  distressed  at  the  troubles  and  degrading  poverty  of  j 
her  friend,  and  so  out  of  humour,  which  always  found  expression  in  such 
remarks  to  her  servants. 

‘I’m  very  sorry,’  said  the  maid. 

‘Ask  the  count  to  come  to  me.’ 

The  count  came  waddling  in  to  see  his  wife,  looking,  as  usual,  rather 
guilty. 

‘Well,  little  countess!  What  a  saute  of  woodcocks  and  Madeira  we’re 
to  have,  ma  chere!  I’ve  tried  it;  I  did  well  to  give  a  thousand  roubles  for 
Taras.  He’s  worth  it!  ’ 

He  sat  down  by  his  wife,  setting  his  elbow  jauntily  on  his  knee,  and 
ruffling  up  his  grey  hair.  ‘What  are  your  commands,  little  countess?’ 

‘It’s  this,  my  dear — why,  what  is  this  mess  on  you  here?’  she  said, 
pointing  to  his  waistcoat.  ‘It’s  the  saute,  most  likely,’  she  added,  smiling. 
‘It’s  this,  my  dear,  I  want  some  money.’  Her  face  became  gloomy 

‘Ah,  little  countess!  .  .  .’  And  the  count  fidgeted  about,  pulling  out 
his  pocket-book. 

‘I  want  a  great  deal,  count.  I  want  five  hundred  roubles.’  And  taking 
out  her  cambric  handkerchief  she  wiped  her  husband’s  waistcoat. 

‘This  minute,  this  minute.  Hey,  who’s  there?’  he  shouted,  as  men  only 
shout  who  are  certain  that  those  they  call  will  run  headlong  at  their 
summons.  ‘Send  Mitenka  to  me!’ 

Mitenka,  the  young  man  of  noble  family  who  had  been  brought  up 
in  the  count’s  house,  and  now  had  charge  of  all  his  money  affairs,  walked 
softly  into  the  room. 

‘Here,  my  dear  boy,’  said  the  count  to  the  young  man.  who  came  up 
respectfully.  ‘Bring  me,’  he  thought  a  moment,  ‘yes,  seven  hundred 
roubles,  yes.  And  mind,  don’t  bring  me  such  torn  and  dirty  notes  as  Iasi 
time;  nice  ones  now,  for  the  countess.’  ( 

‘Yes,  Mitenka,  clean  ones,  please,’  said  the  countess  with  a  depressed  , 
sigh.  i 


WAR  AND  *PEACE  49 

‘Your  excellency,  when  do  you  desire  me  to  get  the  money?’  said 
Mitenka.  ‘Your  honour  ought  to  know  .  .  .  But  don’t  trouble,’  he 
added,  noticing  that  the  count  was  beginning  to  breathe  rapidly  and 
heavily,  which  was  always  the  sign  of  approaching  anger.  ‘I  was  forget¬ 
ting  .  .  .  This  minute  do  you  desire  me  to  bring  them?’ 

‘Yes,  yes,  just  so,  bring  them.  Give  them  to  the  countess.  What  a 
treasure  that  Mitenka  is,’  added  the  count,  smiling,  when  the  young 
man  had  gone  out.  ‘He  doesn’t  know  the  meaning  of  impossible.  That’s 
a  thing  I  can’t  bear.  Everything’s  possible.’ 

‘Ah,  money,  count,  money,  what  a  lot  of  sorrow  it  causes  in  the 
world!’  said  the  countess.  ‘This  money  I  am  in  great  need  of.’ 

‘You  are  a  terrible  spendthrift,  little  countess,  we  all  know,’  said  the 
count,  and  kissing  his  wife’s  hand  he  went  away  again  to  his  own  room. 

When  Anna  Mihalovna  came  back  from  the  Bezuhovs’,  the  money  was 
already  on  the  countess’s  little  table,  all  in  new  notes,  under  her  pocket- 
handkerchief.  Anna  Mihalovna  noticed  that  the  countess  was  fluttered 
about  something. 

‘Well,  my  dear?’  queried  the  countess. 

‘Ah,  he  is  in  a  terrible  condition!  One  would  not  recognise  him,  he  is 
so  ill,  so  ill;  I  was  there  only  a  minute,  and  did  not  say  two  words.’ 

‘Annette,  for  God’s  sake  don’t  refuse  me,’  the  countess  said  suddenly 
with  a  blush,  which  was  strangely  incongruous  with  her  elderly,  thin, 
and  dignified  face,  taking  the  money  from  under  her  handkerchief.  Anna 
Mihalovna  instantly  grasped  the  situation,  and  was  already  bending 
over  to  embrace  the  countess  at  the  appropriate  moment. 

‘This  is  for  Boris,  from  me,  for  his  equipment  .  .  .’ 

Anna  Mihalovna  was  already  embracing  her  and  weeping.  The  countess 
wept  too.  They  wept  because  they  were  friends,  and  because  they  were 
soft-hearted,  and  that  they,  who  had  been  friends  in  youth,  should  have 
to  think  of  anything  so  base  as  money,  and  that  their  youth  was  over. 
.  .  .  But  the  tears  of  both  were  sweet  to  them.  .  .  . 

XV 

Countess  Rostov,  with  her  daughters  and  the  greater  number  of  the 
guests,  was  sitting  in  the  drawing-room.  The  count  led  the  gentlemen  of 
the  party  to  his  room,  calling  their  attention  to  his  connoisseur’s  collec¬ 
tion  of  Turkish  pipes.  Now  and  then  he  went  out  and  inquired,  had  she 
come  yet?  They  were  waiting  for  Marya  Dmitryevna  Ahrosimov,  known 
in  society  as  le  terrible  dragon,  a  lady  who  owed  her  renown  not  to  her 
wealth  or  her  rank,  but  to  her  mental  directness  and  her  open,  uncon¬ 
ventional  behaviour.  Marya  Dmitryevna  was  known  to  the  imperial 
family;  she  was  known  to  all  Moscow  and  all  Petersburg,  and  both 
cities,  while  they  marvelled  at  her,  laughed  in  their  sleeves  at  her  rude¬ 
ness,  and  told  good  stories  about  her,  nevertheless,  all  without  exception 
respected  and  feared  her. 


So  WARANDPEACE 

In  the  count’s  room,  full  of  smoke,  there  was  talk  of  the  war,  which 
nad  been  declared  in  a  manifesto,  and  of  the  levies  of  troops.  The  mani¬ 
festo  no  one  had  yet  read,  but  every  one  knew  of  its  appearance.  The 
count  was  sitting  on  an  ottoman  with  a  man  smoking  and  talking  on 
each  side  of  him.  The  count  himself  was  neither  smoking  nor  talking,, 
but,  with  his  head  cocked  first  on  one  side  and  then  on  the  other,  gazed; 
with  evident  satisfaction  at  the  smokers,  and  listened  to  the  argument 
he  had  got  up  between  his  two  neighbours. 

One  of  these  two  was  a  civilian  with  a  thin,  wrinkled,  bilious,  close- 
shaven  face,  a  man  past  middle  age,  though  dressed  like  the  most 
fashionable  young  man.  He  sat  with  his  leg  up  on  the  ottoman,  as  though 
he  were  at  home,  and  with  the  amber  mouthpiece  in  the  side  of  his  mouth, 
he  smoked  spasmodically,  puckering  up  his  face.  This  was  an  old  bachelor, 
Shinshin,  a  cousin  of  the  countess’s,  famed  in  Moscow  drawing-rooms  for 
his  biting  wit.  He  seemed  supercilious  in  his  manner  to  his  companion, 
a  fresh,  rosy  officer  of  the  Guards,  irreproachably  washed  and  brushed 
and  buttoned.  He  held  his  pipe  in  the  middle  of  his  mouth,  and  drawing 
in  a  little  smoke,  sent  it  coiling  in  rings  out  of  his  fine  red  lips.  He  was 
the  Lieutenant  Berg,  an  officer  in  the  Semenovsky  regiment  with  whom 
Boris  was  to  go  away,  and  about  whom  Natasha  had  taunted  Vera, 
calling  Berg  her  suitor.  The  count  sat  between  these  two  listening  in¬ 
tently  to  them.  The  count’s  favourite  entertainment,  next  to  playing 
boston,  of  which  he  was  very  fond,  was  that  of  listening  to  conversation, 
especially  when  he  had  succeeded  in  getting  up  a  dispute  between  two 
talkative  friends. 

‘Come,  how  is  it,  mon  tres  honorable  Alphonse  Karlitch,’  said  Shinshin, 
chuckling,  and  using  a  combination  of  the  most  popular  Russian  col¬ 
loquialisms  and  the  most  recherches  French  expressions,  which  consti¬ 
tuted  the  peculiarity  of  his  phraseology.  ‘You  reckon  you’ll  get  an  in¬ 
come  from  the  government,  and  you  want  to  get  a  little  something  from 
your  company  too?’ 

‘No,  Pyotr  Nikolaitch,  I  only  want  to  show  that  in  the  cavalry  the 
advantages  are  few  as  compared  with  the  infantry.  Consider  my  position 
now,  for  instance,  Pyotr  Nikolaitch.’  Berg  talked  very  precisely,  se¬ 
renely,  and  politely.  All  he  said  was  always  concerning  himself.  He  always 
maintained  a  serene  silence  when  any  subject  was  discussed  that  had  no 
direct  bearing  on  himself.  And  he  could  be  silent  in  that  way  for  several 
hours  at  a  time,  neither  experiencing  nor  causing  in  others  the  slightest 
embarrassment.  But  as  soon  as  the  conversation  concerned  him  per¬ 
sonally,  he  began  to  talk  at  length  and  with  visible  satisfaction. 

‘Consider  my  position,  Pyotr  Nikolaitch:  if  I  were  in  the  cavalry,  I 
should  get  no  more  than  two  hundred  roubles  every  four  months,  even 
at  the  rank  of  lieutenant,  while  as  it  is  I  get  two  hundred  and  thirty,’  he 
explained  with  a  beaming,  friendly  smile,  looking  at  Shinshin  and  the 
:ount  as  though  he  had  no  doubt  that  his  success  would  always  be  the 
chief  goal  of  all  other  people’s  wishes.  ‘Besides  that,  Pyotr  Nikolaitch, 
exchanging  into  the  Guards,  I’m  so  much  nearer  the  front,’  pursued  Berg, 


WARANDPEACE  51 

‘and  vacancies  occur  so  much  more  frequently  in  the  infantry  guards. 
Then  you  can  fancy  how  well  I  can  manage  on  two  hundred  and  thirty 
roubles.  Why,  I’m  putting  by  and  sending  some  off  to  my  father  too,’  he 
pursued,  letting  off  a  ring  of  smoke. 

‘There  is  a  balance.  A  German  will  thrash  wheat  out  of  the  head  of 
an  axe,  as  the  Russian  proverb  has  it,’  said  Shinshin,  shifting  his  pipe 
to  the  other  side  of  his  mouth  and  winking  to  the  count. 

The  count  chuckled.  The  other  visitors  seeing  that  Shinshin  was  talk¬ 
ing  came  up  to  listen.  Berg,  without  perceiving  either  their  sneers  or 
their  lack  of  interest,  proceeded  to  explain  how  by  exchanging  into  the 
guards  he  had  already  gained  a  step  in  advance  of  his  old  comrades  in 
the  corps;  how  in  war-time  the  commander  of  a  company  may  so  easily 
be  killed,  and  he  as  next  in  command  might  very  easily  succeed  him,  and 
how  every  one  in  the  regiment  liked  him,  and  how  pleased  his  father  was 
with  him.  Berg  was  unmistakably  enjoying  himself  as  he  told  all  this, 
and  seemed  never  to  suspect  that  other  people  too  might  have  their  own 
interests.  But  all  he  said  was  so  nice,  so  sedate,  the  naivete  of  his  youthful 
egoism  was  so  undisguised,  that  he  disarmed  his  listeners. 

‘Well,  my  good  fellow,  whether  you’re  in  the  infantry  or  in  the 
cavalry,  you’ll  always  get  on  all  right,  that  I  venture  to  predict,’  said 
Shinshin,  patting  him  on  the  shoulder,  and  setting  his  feet  down  off  the 
ottoman.  Berg  smiled  gleefully.  The  count  and  the  guests  after  him  went 
into  the  drawing-room. 

It  was  that  interval  just  before  a  dinner  when  the  assembled  guests 
do  not  care  to  enter  on  a  lengthy  conversation,  expecting  to  be  sum¬ 
moned  to  the  dining-room;  while  they  feel  it  incumbent  on  them  to 
move  about  and  not  to  be  silent,  so  as  to  show  that  they  are  not  im¬ 
patient  to  sit  down  to  table.  The  host  and  hostess  look  towards  the  door, 
and  occasionally  at  one  another.  The  guests  try  from  these  glances  to 
divine  whom  or  what  they  are  waiting  for;  some  important  relation  late 
in  arriving,  or  some  dish  which  is  not  ready. 

Pierre  arrived  just  at  dinner-time,  and  awkwardly  sat  down  in  the 
middle  of  the  drawing-room  in  the  first  easy-chair  he  came  across,  block¬ 
ing  up  the  way  for  every  one.  The  countess  tried  to  make  him  talk,  but 
he  looked  naively  round  him  over  his  spectacles  as  though  he  were 
looking  for  some  one,  and  replied  in  monosyllables  to  all  the  countess's 
questions.  He  was  in  the  way,  and  was  the  only  person  unaware  of  it. 
The  greater  number  of  the  guests,  knowing  the  story  of  the  bear,  looked 
inquisitively  at  this  big,  stout,  inoffensive-looking  person,  puzzled  to 
think  how  such  a  spiritless  and  staid  young  man  could  have  played  such 
a  prank. 

‘You  have  only  lately  arrived?’  the  countess  asked  him. 

‘Oni,  madame! 

‘You  have  not  seen  my  husband?’ 

‘Non,  madame.’  He  smiled  very  inappropriately. 


42  WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘You  have  lately  been  in  Paris,  I  believe?  I  suppose  it’s  very  interest¬ 
ing.’ 

‘Very  interesting.’ 

The  countess  exchanged  glances  with  Anna  Mihalovna.  Anna  Mihal- 
ovna  saw  that  she  was  asked  to  undertake  the  young  man,  and  sitting 
down  by  him  she  began  talking  of  his  father.  But  to  her  as  to  the 
countess  he  replied  only  in  monosyllables.  The  other  guests  were  all 
busily  engaged  together.  ‘The  Razumovskys  ...  It  was  very  charming 
.  .  .  You  are  so  kind  .  .  .  Countess  Apraxin  .  .  .’  rose  in  murmurs  on 
all  sides.  The  countess  got  up  and  went  into  the  reception  hall. 

‘Marya  Dmitryevna?’  her  voice  was  heard  asking  from  there. 

‘Herself,’  a  rough  voice  was  heard  in  reply,  and  immediately  after, 
Marya  Dmitryevna  walked  into  the  room.  All  the  girls  and  even  the 
ladies,  except  the  very  old  ones,  got  up.  Marya  Dmitryevna,  a  stout 
woman  of  fifty,  stopped  in  the  doorway,  and  holding  her  head  with  its 
grey  curls  erect,  she  looked  down  at  the  guests  and  as  though  tucking 
up  her  cuffs,  she  deliberately  arranged  the  wide  sleeves  of  her  gown. 
Marya  Dmitryevna  always  spoke  Russian. 

‘Health  and  happiness  to  the  lady  whose  name-day  we  are  keeping  and 
to  her  children,’  she  said  in  her  loud,  rich  voice  that  dominated  all  other 
sounds.  ‘Well,  you  old  sinner,’  she  turned  to  the  count  who  was  kissing 
her  hand,  ‘I  suppose  you  are  tired  of  Moscow — nowhere  to  go  out  with 
the  dogs?  Well,  my  good  man, 'what’s  to  be  done?  these  nestlings  will 
grow  up.  .  .  .’  She  pointed  to  the  girls.  ‘Willy-nilly,  you  must  look  out 
for  young  men  for  them.’ 

‘Well,  my  Cossack?’  (Marya  Dmitryevna  used  to  call  Natasha  a 
Cossack)  she  said,  stroking  the  hand  of  Natasha,  who  came  up  to  kiss 
her  hand  gaily  without  shyness.  ‘I  know  you’re  a  wicked  girl,  but  I  like 
you.’ 

She  took  out  of  her  huge  reticule  some  amber  earrings  with  drops, 
and  giving  them  to  Natasha,  whose  beaming  birthday  face  flushed  rosy 
red,  she  turned  away  immediately  and  addressed  Pierre. 

‘Ay,  ay!  come  here,  sir!’  she  said  in  an  intentionally  quiet  and  gentle 
voice.  ‘Come  here,  sir  .  .  .’  And  she  tucked  her  sleeve  up  higher  in  an 
ominous  manner. 

Pierre  went  up,  looking  innocently  at  her  over  his  spectacles. 

‘Come  along,  come  along,  sir!  I  was  the  only  person  that  told  your 
father  the  truth  when  he  was  in  high  favour,  and  in  your  case  it  is  a 
sacred  duty.’  She  paused.  Every  one  was  mutely  expectant  of  what  was 
to  follow,  feeling  that  this  was  merely  a  prelude.  ‘A  pretty  fellow,  there’s 
no  denying!  a  pretty  fellow!  .  .  .  His  father  is  lying  on  his  deathbed, 
and  he’s  amusing  himself,  setting  a  police-constable  astride  on  a  bear! 
For  shame,  sir,  for  shame!  You  had  better  have  gone  to  the  war.’ 

She  turned  away  and  gave  her  hand  to  the  count,  who  could  hardly 
keep  from  laughing. 

‘Well,  I  suppose  dinner’s  ready,  eh?’  said  Marya  Dmitryevna.  The 
count  led  the  way  with  Marya  Dmitryevna,  then  followed  the  countess, 


WARANDPEACE  S3 

taken  in  by  a  colonel  of  hussars,  a  person  of  importance,  as  Nikolay  was 
to  travel  in  his  company  to  join  the  regiment;  then  Anna  Mihalovna  with 
Shinshin.  Berg  gave  him  arm  to  Vera,  Julie  Karagin  walked  in  smiling 
with  Nikolay.  They  were  followed  by  a  string  of  other  couples,  stretching 
right  across  the  hall,  and  behind  all,  the  children  with  their  tutors  and 
governesses  trooped  in,  walked  singly.  There  was  a  bustle  among  the 
waiters  and  a  creaking  of  chairs;  the  orchestra  began  playing,  as  the 
guests  took  their  places.  Then  the  strains  of  the  count’s  household  band 
were  succeeded  by  the  clatter  of  knives  and  forks,  the  conversation  of  the 
guests,  and  the  subdued  tread  of  the  waiters.  The  countess  presided  at 
one  end  of  the  table.  On  her  right  was  Marya  Dmitryevna;  on  her  left 
Anna  Mihalovna  and  the  other  ladies  of  the  party.  At  the  other  end  sat 
the  count,  with  the  colonel  of  hussars  on  his  left,  and  on  his  right  Shinshin 
and  the  other  guests  of  the  male  sex.  On  one  side  of  the  large  table  sat 
the  more  grown-up  of  the  young  people:  Vera  beside  Berg,  Pierre  beside 
Boris.  On  the  other  side  were  the  children  with  their  tutors  and  gov¬ 
ernesses.  The  count  peeped  from  behind  the  crystal  of  the  decanters  and 
fruit-dishes  at  his  wife  and  her  high  cap  with  blue  ribbons,  and  zealously 
poured  out  wine  for  his  neighbours,  not  overlooking  himself.  The  countess, 
too,  while  mindful  of  her  duties  as  hostess,  cast  significant  glances  from 
behind  the  pineapples  at  her  husband,  whose  face  and  bald  head  struck 
her  as  looking  particularly  red  against  his  grey  hair.  At  the  ladies’  end 
there  was  a  rhythmic  murmur  of  talk,  but  at  the  other  end  of  the 
table  the  men’s  voices  grew  lotkler  and  louder,  especially  the  voice 
of  the  colonel  of  hussars,  who,  getting  more  and  more  flushed,  ate  and 
drank  so  much  that  the  count  held  him  up  as  a  pattern  to  the  rest.  Berg 
with  a  tender  smile  was  telling  Vera  that  love  was  an  emotion  not  of 
earth  but  of  heaven.  Boris  was  telling  his  new  friend  Pierre  the  names  of 
the  guests,  while  he  exchanged  glances  with  Natasha  sitting  opposite  him. 
Pierre  said  little,  looked  about  at  the  new  faces,  and  ate  a  great  deal. 
Of  the  two  soups  he  chose  a  la  tortue,  and  from  that  course  to  the  fish- 
pasties  and  the  grouse,  he  did  not  let  a  single  dish  pass,  and  took  every 
sort  of  wine  that  the  butler  offered  him,  as  he  mysteriously  poked  a 
bottle  wrapped  in  a  napkin  over  his  neighbour’s  shoulder,  murmuring, 
‘Dry  Madeira,’  or  ‘Hungarian,’  or  ‘Rhine  wine.’  Pierre  took  a  wine-glass 
at  random  out  of  the  four  crystal  glasses  engraved  with  the  count’s  crest 
that  were  set  at  each  place,  and  drank  with  relish,  staring  at  the  guests 
with  a  countenance  that  became  more  and  more  amiable  as  the  dinner 
went  on.  Natasha,  who  sat  opposite  him,  gazed  at  Boris  as  girls  of  thirteen 
gaze  at  the  boy  whom  they  have  just  kissed  for  the  first  time,  and  with 
whom  they  are  in  love.  This  gaze  sometimes  strayed  to  Pierre,  and  at 
the  look  on  the  funny,  excited  little  girl’s  face,  he  felt  an  impulse  to 
laugh  himself  without  knowing  why. 

Nikolay  was  sitting  a  long  way  from  Sonya,  beside  Julie  Karagin,  and 
again  smiling  the  same  unconscious  smile,  he  was  talking  to  her.  Sonya 
wore  a  company  smile,  but  she  was  visibly  in  agonies  of  jealousy;  at  one 
moment  she  turned  pale,  then  she  crimsoned,  and  all  her  energies  were 


54  WAR  AND  PEACE 

concentrated  on  listening  to  what  Nikolay  and  Julie  were  saying.  The 
governess  looked  nervously  about  her,  as  though  preparing  to  resent  any 
slight  that  might  be  offered  to  the  children.  The  German  tutor  was  trying 
to  learn  by  heart  a  list  of  all  the  kinds  of  dishes,  desserts,  and  wines,  in 
order  to  write  a  detailed  description  of  them  to  the  folks  at  home  in 
Germany,  and  was  greatly  mortified  that  the  butler  with  the  bottle  in 
the  napkin  had  passed  him  over.  The  German  knitted  his  brows,  and 
tried  to  look  as  though  he  would  not  have  cared  to  take  that  wine,  but 
he  was  mortified  because  no  one  would  understand  that  he  had  not 
wanted  the  wine  to  quench  his  thirst,  or  through  greed,  but  from  a  con¬ 
scientious  desire  for  knowledge. 


XVI 

At  the  men’s  end  of  the  table  the  conversation  was  becoming  more  and 
more  lively.  The  colonel  was  asserting  that  the  proclamation  of  the 
declaration  of  war  had  already  been  issued  in  Petersburg,  and  that  a 
copy,  which  he  had  seen  himself,  had  that  day  been  brought  by  a  courier 
to  the  commander-in-chief. 

‘And  what  evil  spirit  must  make  us  go  to  war  with  Bonaparte?’  said 
Shinshin.  ‘He  has  already  made  Austria  take  a  back  seat.  I  am  afraid  it 
may  be  our  turn  this  time.’ 

The  colonel  was  a  stout,  tall,  and  plethoric  German,  evidently  a  zealous 
officer  and  good  patriot.  He  resented  Shinshin’s  words. 

‘The  reason  why,  my  good  sir,’  he  said,  speaking  with  a  German  ac¬ 
cent,  ‘is  just  that  the  emperor  knows  that.  In  his  proclamation  he  says 
that  he  cannot  behold  with  equanimity  the  danger  threatening  Russia, 
and  that  the  security  of  the  empire,  its  dignity,  and  the  sacredness  of  its 
alliances.’  He  laid  a  special  emphasis  on  the  word  alliances,  as  though  the 
gist  of  the  matter  lay  in  that  word.  And  with  the  unfailing  memory  for 
official  matters  that  was  peculiar  to  him,  he  repeated  the  introductory 
words  of  the  proclamation  .  .  .  ‘and  the  desire,  which  constitutes  the 
Sovereign’s  sole  and  immutable  aim,  to  establish  peace  on  a  secure 
foundation,  have  determined  him  to  despatch  now  a  part  of  the  troops 
abroad,  and  to  make  dispositions  for  carrying  out  this  new  project.  That  j 
is  the  reason  why,  my  dear  sir,’  he  concluded,  tossing  off  a  glass  of  wine 
in  edifying  fashion,  and  looking  towards  the  count  for  encouragement. 

‘Do  you  know  the  proverb,  “Erema,  Erema,  you’d  better  stay  at 
home  and  mind  your  spindle”?’  said  Shinshin,  frowning  and  smiling. 
‘That  suits  us  to  a  hair.  Why,  Suvorov  even  was  defeated  hollow,  and 
where  are  our  Suvorovs  nowadays?  I  just  ask  you  that,’  he  said,  continu¬ 
ally  shifting  from  Russian  to  French  and  back  again. 

‘We  ought  to  fight  to  the  last  drop  of  our  blood,’  said  the  colonel, 
thumping  the  table,  ‘and  to  die  for  our  emperor,  and  then  all  will  be 
well.  And  to  discuss  it  as  little  as  possible,’  he  concluded,  turning  again 
to  the  count,  and  drawling  out  the  word  ‘possible.’  ‘That’s  how  we  old 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


55 

hussars  look  at  it;  that’s  all  we  have  to  say.  And  how  do  you  look  at  it, 
young  man  and  young  hussar?’  he  added,  addressing  Nikolay,  who,  catch¬ 
ing  that  it  was  the  war  they  were  discussing,  had  dropped  his  conversa¬ 
tion  with  Julie,  and  was  all  eyes  and  all  ears,  intent  on  the  colonel. 

‘I  perfectly  agree  with  you,’  answered  Nikolay,  growing  hot  all  over, 
twisting  his  plate  round,  and  changing  the  places  of  the  glasses  with  a 
face  as  desperate  and  determined  as  though  he  were  exposed  to  great 
danger  at  that  actual  moment.  ‘I  am  convinced  that  the  Russians  must 
die  or  conquer,’  he  said.  He  was  himself,  like  the  rest  of  the  party,  con¬ 
scious  after  the  words  were  uttered  that  he  had  spoken  with  an  enthusiasm 
and  fervour  out  of  keeping  with  the  occasion,  and  so  he  was  embarrassed. 

‘That  was  very  fine,  what  you  just  said,’  Julie  sitting  beside  him  said 
breathlessly.  Sonya  trembled  all  over  and  crimsoned  to  her  ears,  and 
behind  her  ears,  and  down  her  neck  and  shoulders,  while  Nikolay  was 
speaking.  Pierre  listened  to  the  colonel’s  remarks,  and  nodded  his  head 
approvingly. 

‘That’s  capital,’  said  he. 

‘You’re  a  true  hussar,  young  man,’  the  colonel  shouted,  thumping  on 
the  table  again. 

‘What  are  you  making  such  a  noise  about  over  there?’  Marya  Dmitry- 
evna’s  bass  voice  was  suddenly  heard  asking  across  the  table.  ‘What  are 
you  thumping  the  table  for?’  she  addressed  the  colonel.  ‘Whom  are  you 
so  hot  against?  You  imagine,  I  suppose,  that  the  French  are  before  you?’ 

‘I  speak  the  truth,’  said  the  hussar,  smiling. 

‘It’s  all  about  the  war,’  the  count  shouted  across  the  table.  ‘My  son’s 
going,  you  see,  Marya  Dmitryevna,  my  son’s  going.’ 

‘And  I’ve  four  sons  in  the  army,  but  I  don’t  grieve.  All’s  in  God’s 
hands;  one  may  die  in  one’s  bed,  and  in  battle  God  may  spare,’  Marya 
Dmitryevna ’s  deep  voice  boomed  back,  speaking  without  the  slightest 
effort  from  the  further  end  of  the  table. 

‘That’s  true.’ 

And  the  conversation  concentrated  into  two  groups  again,  one  at  the 
ladies’  end,  and  one  at  the  men’s. 

‘You  don’t  dare  to  ask!’  said  her  little  brother  to  Natasha,  ‘and  you 
won’t  ask!  ’ 

‘I  will  ask,’  answered  Natasha.  Her  face  suddenly  glowed,  expressing 
a  desperate  and  mirthful  resolution.  She  rose  in  her  seat,  her  eyes  inviting 
Pierre  to  listen,  and  addressed  her  mother. 

‘Mamma!  ’  her  childish  contralto  rang  out  over  the  table. 

‘What  is  it?’  the  countess  asked  in  dismay;  but  seeing  from  her  daugh¬ 
ter’s  face  that  it  was  mischief.,  she  shook  her  hand  at  her  sternly,  with  a 
threatening  and  forbidding  movement  of  her  head. 

All  conversation  was  hushed. 

‘Mamma!  what  pudding  will  there  be?’  Natasha’s  little  voice  rang 
out  still  more  resolutely  and  deliberately. 

The  countess  tried  to  frown,  but  could  not.  Marya  Dmitryevna  shook 
her  fat  finger. 


56  WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Cossack!  ’  she  said  menacingly. 

Most  of  the  guests  looked  at  the  parents,  not  knowing  how  they  were 
to  take  this  sally. 

‘I’ll  give  it  to  you,’  said  the  countess. 

‘Mamma!  what  pudding  will  it  be?’  Natasha  cried,  with  bold  and 
saucy  gaiety,  feeling  sure  that  her  prank  would  be  taken  in  the  right 
spirit.  Sonya  and  fat  little  Petya  were  hiding  their  giggles.  ‘You  see  I 
did  ask,’  Natasha  whispered  to  her  little  brother  and  Pierre,  at  whom 
she  glanced  again. 

‘Ice-pudding,  only  you  are  not  to  have  any,’  said  Marya  Dmitryevna. 
Natasha  saw  there  was  nothing  to  be  afraid  of,  and  so  she  was  not 
frightened  at  Marya  Dmitryevna  even. 

‘Marya  Dmitryevna!  what  sort  of  ice-pudding?  I  don’t  like  ice-cream.’ 

‘Carrot-ices.’ 

‘No,  what  sort,  Marya  Dmitryevna,  what  sort?’  she  almost  shrieked. 
‘I  want  to  know.’  Marya  Dmitryevna  and  the  countess  burst  out  laugh¬ 
ing,  and  all  the  party  followed  their  example.  They  all  laughed,  not  at 
Marya  Dmitryevna ’s  answer,  but  at  the  irrepressible  boldness  and  smart¬ 
ness  of  the  little  girl,  who  had  the  pluck  and  the  wit  to  tackle  Marya 
Dmitryevna  in  this  fashion. 

Natasha  only  desisted  when  she  had  been  told  it  was  to  be  pineapple 
ice.  Before  the  ices,  champagne  was  passed  round.  Again  the  band 
struck  up,  the  count  kissed  the  countess,  and  the  guests  getting  up  from 
the  table  congratulated  the  countess,  and  clinked  glasses  across  the 
table  with  the  count,  the  children,  and  one  another.  Again  the  waiters 
darted  about,  chairs  grated  on  the  floor,  and  in  the  same  order,  but  with 
flushed  faces,  the  guests  returned  to  the  drawing-room  and  the  count’s 
study. 


XVII 

The  card-tables  were  opened,  parties  were  made  up  for  boston,  and  the 
count’s  guests  settled  themselves  in  the  two  drawing-rooms,  the  divan 
room,  and  the  library. 

The  count,  holding  his  cards  in  a  fan,  with  some  difficulty  kept  him¬ 
self  from  dropping  into  his  customary  after-dinner  nap,  and  laughed  at 
everything.  The  young  people,  at  the  countess’s  suggestion,  gathered 
about  the  clavichord  and  the  harp.  Julie  was  first  pressed  by  every  one 
to  perform,  and  played  a  piece  with  variations  on  the  harp.  Then  she 
joined  the  other  young  ladies  in  begging  Natasha  and  Nikolay,  who  were  i 
noted  for  their  musical  talents,  to  sing  something.  Natasha,  who  was 
treated  by  every  one  as  though  she  were  grown-up,  was  visibly  very  i . 
proud  of  it,  and  at  the  same  time  made  shy  by  it.  j  j 

‘What  are  we  to  sing?’  she  asked. 

‘The  “Spring,”  ’  answered  Nikolay.  $ 

‘Well,  then,  let’s  make  haste.  Boris,  come  here,’  said  Natasha.  ‘But  t 


WARANDPEACE  59 

be  of  interest  to  any  one  who  had  just  come  home  from  abroad,  though 
it  did  not  in  fact  interest  Pierre.  Several  other  persons  joined  in  the 
conversation.  When  the  orchestra  struck  up,  Natasha  walked  into  the 
drawing-room,  and  going  straight  up  to  Pierre,  laughing  and  blushing, 
she  said,  ‘Mamma  told  me  to  ask  you  to  dance.’ 

‘I’m  afraid  of  muddling  the  figures,’  said  Pierre,  ‘but  if  you  will  be 
my  teacher  .  .  .’  and  he  gave  his  fat  hand  to  the  slim  little  girl,  putting 
his  arm  low  down  to  reach  her  level. 

While  the  couples  were  placing  themselves  and  the  musicians  were 
tuning  up,  Pierre  sat  down  with  his  little  partner.  Natasha  was  perfectly 
happy;  she  was  dancing  with  a  grown-up  person,  with  a  man  who  had 
just  come  from  abroad.  She  was  sitting  in  view  of  every  one  and  talking 
to  him  like  a  grown-up  person.  She  had  in  her  hand  a  fan,  which  some 
lady  had  given  her  to  hold,  and  taking  the  most  modish  pose  (God 
knows  where  and  when  she  had  learnt  it),  fanning  herself  and  smiling  all 
over  her  face,  she  talked  to  her  partner. 

‘What  a  girl!  Just  look  at  her,  look  at  her!  ’  said  the  old  countess,  cross¬ 
ing  the  big  hall  and  pointing  to  Natasha.  Natasha  coloured  and  laughed. 

‘Why,  what  do  you  mean,  mamma?  Why  should  you  laugh?  Is  there 
anything  strange  about  it?’ 

In  the  middle  of  the  third  ecossaise  there  was  a  clatter  of  chairs  in 
the  drawing-room,  where  the  count  and  Marya  Dmitryevna  were  playing, 
and  the  greater  number  of  the  more  honoured  guests  and  elderly  people 
stretching  themselves  after  sitting  so  long,  put  their  pocket-books  and 
purses  in  their  pockets  and  came  out  to  the  door  of  the  big  hall.  In  front 
of  all  came  Marya  Dmitryevna  and  the  count,  both  with  radiant  faces. 
The  count  gave  his  arm,  curved  into  a  hoop,  to  Marya  Dmitryevna  with 
playfully  exaggerated  ceremony,  like  a  ballet-dancer.  He  drew  himself 
up,  and  his  face  beamed  with  a  peculiar,  jauntily-knowing  smile,  and  as 
soon  as  they  had  finished  dancing  the  last  figure  of  the  ecossaise,  he 
clapped  his  hands  to  the  orchestra,  and  shouted  to  the  first  violin: 
‘Semyon!  do  you  know  “Daniel  Cooper”?’ 

That  was  the  count’s  favourite  dance  that  he  had  danced  in  his  youth. 
(Daniel  Cooper  was  the  name  of  a  figure  of  the  anglaise.) 

‘Look  at  papa!’  Natasha  shouted  to  all  the  room  (entirely  forgetting 
that  she  was  dancing  with  a  grown-up  partner),  and  ducking  down  till 
her  curly  head  almost  touched  her  knees,  she  went  off  into  her  ringing 
laugh  that  filled  the  hall.  Every  one  in  the  hall  was,  in  fact,  looking  with 
a  smile  of  delight  at  the  gleeful  old  gentleman.  Standing  beside  his 
majestic  partner,  Marya  Dmitryevna,  who  was  taller  than  he  was,  he 
curved  his  arms,  swaying  them  in  time  to  the  music,  moved  his  shoulders, 
twirled  with  his  legs,  lightly  tapping  with  his  heels,  and  with  a  broaden¬ 
ing  grin  on  his  round  face,  prepared  the  spectators  for  what  was  to  come. 
As  soon  as  the  orchestra  played  the  gay,  irresistible  air  of  Daniel  Cooper, 
somewhat  like  a  livelier  Russian  trepak,  all  the  doorways  of  the  big  hall 
we*5**  suddenly  filled  with  the  smiling  faces  of  the  house-serfs— men  on  one 


6o 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

side,  and  women  on  the  other — come  to  look  at  their  master  making 
merry. 

‘Our  little  father!  An  eagle  he  is!’  the  old  nurse  said  out  loud  at  one 
door. 

The  count  danced  well  and  knew  that  he  did,  but  his  partner  could 
not  dance  at  all,  and  did  not  care  about  dancing  well.  Her  portly  figure 
stood  erect,  with  her  mighty  arms  hanging  by  her  side  (she  had  handed 
her  reticule  to  the  countess).  It  was  only  her  stern,  but  comely  face  that 
danced.  What  was  expressed  by  the  whole  round  person  of  the  count, 
was  expressed  by  Marya  Dmitryevna  in  her  more  and  more  beaming 
countenance  and  puckered  nose.  While  the  count,  with  greater  and 
greater  expenditure  of  energy,  enchanted  the  spectators  by  the  unex¬ 
pectedness  of  the  nimble  pirouettes  and  capers  of  his  supple  legs,  Marya 
Dmitryevna  with  the  slightest  effort  in  the  movement  of  her  shoulders 
or  curving  of  her  arms,  when  they  turned  or  marked  the  time  with 
their  feet,  produced  no  less  impression  from  the  contrast,  which  every 
one  appreciated,  with  her  portliness  and  her  habitual  severity  of  de¬ 
meanour.  The  dance  grew  more  and  more  animated.  The  vis-a-vis  could 
not  obtain  one  moment’s  attention,  and  did  not  attempt  to  do  so.  All 
attention  was  absorbed  by  the  count  and  Marya  Dmitryevna.  Natasha 
pulled  at  the  sleeve  or  gown  of  every  one  present,  urging  them  to  look 
at  papa,  though  they  never  took  their  eyes  off  the  dancers.  In  the  pauses 
in  the  dance  the  count  drew  a  deep  breath,  waved  his  hands  and  shouted 
to  the  musician  to  play  faster.  More  and  more  quickly,  more  and  more 
nimbly  the  count  pirouetted,  turning  now  on  his  toes  and  now  on  his 
heels,  round  Marya  Dmitryevna.  At  last,  twisting  his  lady  round  to  her 
place,  he  executed  the  last  steps,  kicking  his  supple  legs  up  behind  him, 
and  bowing  his  perspiring  head  and  smiling  face,  with  a  round  sweep  of 
his  right  arm,  amidst  a  thunder  of  applause  and  laughter,  in  which 
Natasha’s  laugh  was  loudest.  Both  partners  stood  still,  breathing  heavily, 
and  mopping  their  faces  with  their  batiste  handkerchiefs. 

‘That’s  how  they  used  to  dance  in  our  day,  ma  chere,’  said  the  count. 

‘Bravo,  Daniel  Cooper!’  said  Marya  Dmitryevna,  tucking  up  her 
sleeves  and  drawing  a  deep,  prolonged  breath. 


XVIII 

While  in  the  Rostovs’  hall  they  were  dancing  the  sixth  anglaise,  while 
the  weary  orchestra  played  wrong  notes,  and  the  tired  footmen  and  : 
cooks  were  getting  the  supper,  Count  Bezuhov  had  just  had  his  sixth 
stroke.  The  doctors  declared  that  there  was  no  hope  of  recovery;  the  , 
sick  man  received  absolution  and  the  sacrament  while  unconscious,  j 
Preparations  were  being  made  for  administering  extreme  unction,  and  J 
the  house  was  full  of  the  bustle  and  thrill  of  suspense  usual  at  such  |t 
moments.  Outside  the  house  undertakers  were  crowding  beyond  the  | 

/  gates,  trying  to  escape  the  notice  of  the  carriages  that  drove  up,  but 


6i 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

eagerly  anticipating  a  good  order  for  the  count’s  funeral.  The  governor 
of  Moscow,  who  had  been  constantly  sending  his  adjutants  to  inquire 
after  the  count’s  condition,  came  himself  that  evening  to  say  good-bye 
to  the  renowned  grandee  of  Catherine’s  court,  Count  Bezuhov. 

The  magnificent  reception-room  was  full.  Every  one  stood  up  respect¬ 
fully  when  the  governor,  after  being  half  an  hour  alone  with  the  sick 
man,  came  out  of  the  sick-room.  Bestowing  scanty  recognition  on  the 
bows  with  which  he  was  received,  he  tried  to  escape  as  quickly  as  pos¬ 
sible  from  the  gaze  of  the  doctors,  ecclesiastical  personages,  and  relations. 
Prince  Vassily,  who  had  grown  paler  and  thinner  during  the  last  few 
days,  escorted  the  governor  out,  and  softly  repeated  something  to  him 
several  times  over. 

After  seeing  the  governor,  Prince  Vassily  sat  down  on  a  chair  in  the 
hall  alone,  crossing  one  leg  high  over  the  other,  leaning  his  elbow  on  his 
knee,  and  covering  his  eyes  with  his  hand.  After  sitting  so  for  some  time 
he  got  up,  and  with  steps  more  hurried  than  his  wont,  he  crossed  the  long 
corridor,  looking  round  him  with  frightened  eyes,  and  went  to  the  back 
part  of  the  house  to  the  apartments  of  the  eldest  princess. 

The  persons  he  had  left  in  the  dimly  lighted  reception-room,  next  to 
the  sick-room,  talked  in  broken  whispers  among  themselves,  pausing, 
and  looking  round  with  eyes  full  of  suspense  and  inquiry  whenever  the 
door  that  led  into  the  dying  man’s  room  creaked  as  some  one  went  in 
or  came  out. 

‘Man’s  limitation,’  said  a  little  man,  an  ecclesiastic  of  some  sort,  to  a 
lady,  who  was  sitting  near  him  listening  naively  to  his  words — ‘his 
limitation  is  fixed,  there  is  no  overstepping  it.’ 

‘I  wonder  if  it  won’t  be  late  for  extreme  unction?’  inquired  the  lady, 
using  his  clerical  title,  and  apparently  having  no  opinion  of  her  own 
on  the  matter. 

‘It  is  a  great  mystery,  ma’am,’  answered  the  clerk,  passing  his  hands 
over  his  bald  head,  on  which  lay  a  few  tresses  of  carefully  combed,  half 
grey  hair. 

‘Who  was  that?  was  it  the  governor  himself?’  they  were  asking  at  the 
other  end  of  the  room.  ‘What  a  young-looking  man!’ 

‘And  he’s  over  sixty!  .  .  .  What,  do  they  say,  the  count  does  not 
know'  any  one?  Do  they  mean  to  give  extreme  unction?’ 

‘I  knew  a  man  who  received  extreme  unction  seven  times.’ 

The  second  princess  came  out  of  the  sick-room  with  tearful  eyes,  and 
sat  down  beside  Doctor  Lorrain,  who  was  sitting  in  a  graceful  pose  under 
the  portrait  of  Catherine,  with  his  elbow  on  the  table. 

‘Very  fine,’  said  the  doctor  in  reply  to  a  question  about  the  weather: 
‘very  fine,  princess,  and  besides,  at  Moscow,  one  might  suppose  oneself 
in  the  country.’ 

‘Might  one  not?’  said  the  princess,  sighing.  ‘So  may  he  have  something 
to  drink?’  Lorrain  thought  a  moment. 

‘He  has  taken  his  medicine?’ 

‘Yes.’ 


62 


WAR  AND  PEACE 
The  doctor  looked  at  his  memoranda. 

‘Take  a  glass  of  boiled  water  and  put  in  a  pinch’  (he  showed  with  his 
delicate  fingers  what  was  meant  by  a  pinch)  ‘of  cream  of  tartar.’ 

‘There  has  never  been  a  case,’  said  the  German  doctor  to  the  adjutant, 
speaking  broken  Russian,  ‘of  recovery  after  having  a  third  stroke.’ 

‘And  what  a  vigorous  man  he  was!’  said  the  adjutant.  ‘And  to  whom 
will  this  great  wealth  go?’  he  added  in  a  whisper. 

‘Candidates  will  be  found,’  the  German  replied,  smiling.  Every  one 
looked  round  again  at  the  door;  it  creaked,  and  the  second  princess  hav¬ 
ing  made  the  drink  according  to  Lorrain’s  direction,  carried  it  into  the 
sick-room.  The  German  doctor  went  up  to  Lorrain. 

‘Can  it  drag  on  till  to-morrow  morning?’  asked  the  German,  with  a 
vile  French  accent. 

Lorrain,  with  compressed  lips  and  a  stern  face,  moved  his  finger  before 
his  nose  to  express  a  negative. 

‘To-night,  not  later,’  he  said  softly,  and  with  a  decorous  smile  of  satis¬ 
faction  at  being  able  to  understand  and  to  express  the  exact  position  of 
the  sick  man,  he  walked  away. 

Meanwhile  Prince  Vassily  had  opened  the  door  of  the  princess’s  room. 

It  was  half  dark  in  the  room;  there  were  only  two  lamps  burning 
before  the  holy  pictures,  and  there  was  a  sweet  perfume  of  incense  and 
flowers.  The  whole  room  was  furnished  with  miniature  furniture,  little 
sideboards,  small  bookcases,  and  small  tables.  Behind  a  screen  could  be 
seen  the  white  coverings  of  a  high  feather-bed.  A  little  dog  barked. 

‘Ah,  is  that  you,  mon  cousin?’ 

She  got  up  and  smoothed  her  hair,  which  was  always,  even  now,  so 
extraordinarily  smooth  that  it  seemed  as  though  made  out  of  one  piece 
with  her  head  and  covered  with  varnish. 

‘Has  anything  happened?’  she  asked.  ‘I  am  in  continual  dread.’ 

‘Nothing,  everything  is  unchanged.  I  have  only  come  to  have  a  little 
talk  with  you,  Katish,  about  business,’  said  the  prince,  sitting  down 
wearily  in  the  low  chair  from  which  she  had  just  risen.  ‘How  warm  it  is 
here.,  though,’  he  said.  ‘Come,  sit  here;  let  us  talk.’ 

‘I  wondered  whether  anything  had  happened,’  said  the  princess,  and 
with  her  stonily  severe  expression  unchanged,  she  sat  down  opposite  the 
prince,  preparing  herself  to  listen.  ‘I  have  been  trying  to  get  some  sleep, 
mon  cousin,  but  I  can’t.” 

‘Well,  my  dear?’  said  Prince  Vassily,  taking  the  princess’s  hand,  and 
bending  it  downwards  as  his  habit  was. 

It  was  plain  that  this  ‘well?’  referred  to  much  that  they  both  com¬ 
prehended  without  mentioning  it  in  words. 

The  princess,  with  her  spare,  upright  figure,  so  disproportionately  long 
in  the  body,  looked  straight  at  the  prince  with  no  sign  of  emotion  in  her 
prominent  grey  eyes.  She  shook  her  head,  and  sighing  looked  towards  the 
holy  pictures.  Her  gesture  might  have  been  interpreted  as  an  expression 


WAR  AND  PEACE  63 

of  grief  and  devotion,  or  as  an  expression  of  weariness  and  the  hope  of  a 
speedy  release.  Prince  Vassily  took  it  as  an  expression  of  weariness. 

‘And  do  you  suppose  it’s  any  easier  for  me?’  he  said.  ‘I  am  as  worn 
out  as  a  post  horse.  I  must  have  a  little  talk  with  you,  Katish,  and  a  very 
serious  one.’ 

Prince  Vassily  paused,  and  his  cheeks  began  twitching  nervously,  first 
on  one  side,  then  on  the  other,  giving  his  face  an  unpleasant  expression 
such  as  was  never  seen  on  his  countenance  when  he  was  in  drawing¬ 
rooms.  His  eyes,  too,  were  different  from  usual:  at  one  moment  they 
stared  with  a  sort  of  insolent  jocoseness,  at  the  next  they  looked  round 
furtively. 

The  princess,  pulling  her  dog  on  her  lap  with  her  thin,  dry  hands, 
gazed  intently  at  the  eyes  of  Prince  Vassily,  but  it  was  evident  that  she 
would  not  break  the  silence,  if  she  had  to  sit  silent  till  morning. 

‘You  see,  my  dear  princess  and  cousin,  Katerina  Semyonovna/  pur¬ 
sued  Prince  Vassily,  obviously  with  some  inner  conflict  bracing  himself 
to  go  on  with  what  he  wanted  to  say,  ‘at  such  moments  as  the  present, 
one  has  to  think  of  everything.  One  must  think  of  the  future,  of  you  .  .  . 
I  care  for  all  of  you  as  if  you  were  my  own  children;  you  know  that.’ 

The  princess  looked  at  him  with  the  same  dull  immovable  gaze. 

‘Finally,  we  have  to  think  of  my  family  too/  continued  Prince  Vassily, 
angrily  pushing  away  a  little  table  and  not  looking  at  her:  ‘you  know, 
Katish,  that  you  three  Mamontov  sisters  and  my  wife, — we  are  the  only 
direct  heirs  of  the  count.  I  know,  I  know  how  painful  it  is  for  you  to 
speak  and  think  of  such  things.  And  it’s  as  hard  for  me;  but,  my  dear, 
I  am  a  man  over  fifty,  I  must  be  ready  for  anything.  Do  you  know  that 
I  have  sent  for  Pierre,  and  that  the  count,  pointing  straight  at  his  por¬ 
trait,  has  asked  for  him?’ 

Prince  Vassily  looked  inquiringly  at  the  princess,  but  he  could  not 
make  out  whether  she  was  considering  what  he  had  said,  or  was  simply 
staring  at  him. 

‘I  pray  to  God  for  one  thing  only  continually,  mon  cousin,’  she  replied, 
‘that  He  may  have  mercy  upon  him,  and  allow  his  noble  soul  to  leave 
:  this  .  .  .’ 

‘Yes,  quite  so/  Prince  Vassily  continued  impatiently,  rubbing  his  bald 
head  and  again  wrathfully  moving  the  table  towards  him  that  he  had 
just  moved  away,  ‘but  in  fact  ...  in  fact  the  point  is,  as  you  are 
yourself  aware,  that  last  winter  the  count  made  a  will  by  which,  passing 
over  his  direct  heirs  and  us/he  bequeathed  all  his  property  to  Pierre.’ 

‘He  may  have  made  ever  so  many  wills!’  the  princess  said  placidly; 
‘but  he  can't  leave  it  to  Pierre.  Pierre  is  illegitimate.’ 

‘Ma  chere,’  said  Prince  Vassily  suddenly,  pushing  the  table  against 
him,  growing  more  earnest  and  beginning  to  speak  more  rapidly:  ‘but 
what  if  a  letter  has  been  written  to  the  Emperor,  and  the  count  has 
petitioned  him  to  legitimise  Pierre?  You  understand,  that  the  count’s 
services  would  make  his  petition  carry  weight  .  .  / 


64 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

The  princess  smiled,  as  people  smile  who  believe  that  they  know  much 
more  about  the  subject  than  those  with  whom  they  are  talking. 

‘I  can  say  more,’  Prince  Vassily  went  on,  clasping  her  hand;  ‘that  letter 
has  been  written,  though  it  has  not  been  sent  off,  and  the  Emperor  has 
heard  about  it.  The  question  only  is  whether  it  has  been  destroyed  or  not. 

If  not,  as  soon  as  all  is  over,’  Prince  Vassily  sighed,  giving  her  thereby 
to  understand  what  he  meant  precisely  by  the  words  ‘all  is  over,’  ‘and 
they  open  the  count’s  papers,  the  will  with  the  letter  will  be  given  to 
the  Emperor,  and  his  petition  will  certainly  be  granted.  Pierre,  as  the 
legitimate  son,  will  receive  everything.’ 

‘What  about  our  share?’  the  princess  inquired,  smiling  ironically  as  ! 
though  anything  but  that  might  happen. 

‘Why,  my  poor  Katish,  it  is  as  clear  as  daylight.  He  will  then  be  the 
only  legal  heir  of  all,  and  you  won't  receive  as  much  as  this,  see.  You 
ought  to  know,  my  dear,  whether  the  will  and  the  petition  were  written, 
and  whether  they  have  been  destroyed,  and  if  they  have  somehow  been 
overlooked,  then  you  ought  to  know  where  they  are  and  to  find  them, 
because  .  .  .’ 

‘That  would  be  rather  too  much!  ’  the  princess  interrupted  him,  smiling 
sardonically,  with  no  change  in  the  expression  of  her  eyes.  ‘I  am  a  j 
woman,  and  you  think  we  are  all  silly;  but  I  do  know  so  much,  that  an 
illegitimate  son  can’t  inherit  .  .  .  JJn  batard,’  she  added,  supposing  that 
by  this  translation  of  the  word  she  was  conclusively  proving  to  the  prince 
the  groundlessness  of  his  contention.  . 

‘How  can  you  not  understand,  Katish,  really!  You  are  so  intelligent;  i 
how  is  it  you  don’t  understand  that  if  the  count  has  written  a  letter  to 
the  Emperor,  begging  him  to  recognise  his  son  as  legitimate,  then  Pierre 
will  not  be  Pierre  but  Count  Bezuhov,  and  then  he  will  inherit  everything 
under  the  will?  And  if  the  will  and  the  letter  have  not  been  destroyed, 
then  except  the  consolation  of  having  been  dutiful  and  of  all  that 
results  from  having  done  your  duty,  nothing  is  left  for  you.  That’s  the 
fact.’ 

‘I  know  that  the  will  was  made,  but  I  know,  too,  that  it  is  invalid,  and 
you  seem  to  take  me  for  a  perfect  fool,  mon  cousin’  said  the  princess, 
with  the  air  with  which  women  speak  when  they  imagine  they  are  saying 
something  witty  and  biting. 

‘My  dear  princess,  Katerina  Semyonovna!’  Prince  Vassily  began  im¬ 
patiently,  ‘I  have  come  to  you  not  to  provoke  you,  but  to  talk  to  you 
as  a  kinswoman,  a  good,  kind-hearted,  true  kinswoman,  of  your  own  in¬ 
terests.  I  tell  you  for  the  tenth  time  that  if  the  letter  to  the  Emperor  . 
and  the  will  in  Pierre’s  favour  are  among  the  count’s  papers,  you,  my  dear  , 
girl,  and  your  sisters  are  not  heiresses.  If  you  don’t  believe  me,  believe  T 
people  who  know;  I  have  just  been  talking  to  Dmitry  Onufritch’  (this  .. 
was  the  family  solicitor);  ‘he  said  the  same.’ 

There  was  obviously  some  sudden  change  in  the  princess’s  ideas;  her 
thin  lips  turned  white  (her  eyes  did  not  change),  and  when  she  began 


WARANDPEACE  65 

to  speak,  her  voice  passed  through  transitions,  which  she  clearly  did  not 
herself  anticipate. 

‘That  would  be  a  pretty  thing/  she  said.  ‘I  wanted  nothing,  and  I  want 
nothing.’  She  flung  her  dog  off  her  lap  and  smoothed  out  the  folds  of 
her  skirt. 

‘That’s  the  gratitude,  that’s  the  recognition  people  get  who  have  sacri¬ 
ficed  everything  for  him,’  she  said.  ‘Very  nice!  Excellent!  I  don’t  want 
anything,  prince.’ 

‘Yes,  but  you  are  not  alone,  you  have  sisters,’  answered  Prince  Vassily. 
But  the  princess  did  not  heed  him. 

‘Yes,  I  knew  it  long  ago,  but  I’d  forgotten  that  I  could  expect  nothing 
in  this  house  but  baseness,  deceit,  envy,  scheming,  nothing  but  ingrati¬ 
tude,  the  blackest  ingratitude  .  .  .’ 

‘Do  you  or  do  you  not  know  where  that  will  is?’  asked  Prince  Vassily, 
the  twitching  of  his  cheeks  more  marked  than  ever. 

‘Yes,  I  have  been  foolish;  I  still  kept  faith  in  people,  and  cared  for 
them  and  sacrificed  myself.  But  no  one  succeeds  except  those  who  are 
base  and  vile.  I  know  whose  plotting  this  is.’ 

The  princess  would  have  risen,  but  the  prince  held  her  by  the  arm. 
The  princess  had  the  air  of  a  person  who  has  suddenly  lost  faith  in  the 
whole  human  race.  She  looked  viciously  at  her  companion. 

‘There  is  still  time,  my  dear.  Remember,  Katish,  that  all  this  was 
done  heedlessly,  in  a  moment  of  anger,  of  illness,  and  then  forgotten.  Our 
duty,  my  dear  girl,  is  to  correct  his  mistake,  to  soften  his  last  moments 
by  not  letting  him  commit  this  injustice,  not  letting  him  die  with  the 
thought  that  he  has  made  miserable  those  .  . 

‘Those  who  have  sacrificed  everything  for  him,’  the  princess  caught 
him  up;  and  she  made  an  impulsive  effort  again  to  stand  up,  but  the 
prince  would  not  let  her,  ‘a  sacrifice  he  has  never  known  how  to  appre¬ 
ciate.  No,  mon  cousin,’  she  added,  with  a  sigh,  ‘I  will  remember  that 
one  can  expect  no  reward  in  this  world,  that  in  this  world  there  is  no 
honour,  no  justice.  Cunning  and  wickedness  is  what  one  wants  in  this 
world.’ 

I  ‘Come,  voyons,  calm  yourself ;  I  know  your  noble  heart.’ 

‘No,  I  have  a  wicked  heart.’ 

‘I  know  your  heart,’  repeated  the  prince.  ‘I  value  your  affection,  and 
l  could  wish  you  had  the  same  opinion  of  me.  Calm  yourself  and  let  us 
talk  sensibly  while  there  is  time- — perhaps  twenty-four  hours,  perhaps 
one.  Tell  me  all  you  know  about  the  will,  and  what’s  of  most  consequence, 
where  it  is;  you  must  know.  We  will  take  it  now  at  once  and  show  it  to 
the  count.  He  has  no  doubt  forgotten  about  it  and  would  wish  to  destroy 
it.  You  understand  that  my  desire  is  to  carry  out  his  wishes  religiously. 
That  is  what  I  came  here  for.  I  am  only  here  to  be  of  use  to  him  and 
to  you.’ 

‘Now  I  see  it  all.  I  know  whose  plotting  this  is.  I  know,’  the  princess 
was  saying. 

‘That’s  not  the  point,  my  dear.’ 


66 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘It’s  all  your  precious  Anna  Mihalovna,  your  protegee  whom  I 
wouldn’t  take  as  a  housemaid,  tne  nasty  creature.’ 

‘Do  not  let  us  waste  time.’ 

‘Oh,  don’t  talk  to  me!  Last  winter  she  forced  her  way  in  here  and  told 
such  a  pack  of  vile,  mean  tales  to  the  count  about  all  of  us,  especially 
Sophie — I  can’t  repeat  them — that  it  made  the  count  ill,  and  he  wouldn’t 
see  us  for  a  fortnight.  It  was  at  that  time,  I  know,  he  wrote  that  hateful, 
infamous  document,  but  I  thought  it  was  of  no  consequence.’ 

‘There  we  are.  Why  didn’t  you  tell  us  about  it  before?’ 

‘It’s  in  the  inlaid  portfolio  that  he  keeps  under  his  pillow.  Now  I  know,’ 
said  the  princess,  making  no  reply.  ‘Yes,  if  I  have  a  sin  to  my  account, 
a  great  sin,  it’s  my  hatred  of  that  infamous  woman,’  almost  shrieked  the 
princess,  utterly  transformed.  ‘And  why  does  she  force  herself  in  here? 
But  I’ll  have  it  out.  with  her.  The  time  will  come!  ’ 


XIX 

At  the  time  that  these  conversations  were  taking  place  in  the  reception- 
room  and  the  princess’s  room,  a  carriage  with  Pierre  (who  had  been  sent 
for)  and  Anna  Mihalovna  (who  had  thought  fit  to  come  with  him)  in  it 
was  driving  into  the  court  of  Count  Bezuhov’s  mansion.  When  the  sound 
of  the  carriage  wheels  was  muffled  by  the  straw  in  the  street,  Anna 
Mihalovna  turned  with  words  of  consolation  to  her  companion,  discovered  ! 
that  he  was  asleep  in  his  corner  of  the  carriage,  and  waked  him  up.  i 
Rousing  himself,  Pierre  followed  Anna  Mihalovna  out  of  the  carriage,  j 
and  only  then  began  to  think  of  the  interview  with  his  dying  father  that  i 
awaited  him.  He  noticed  that  they  had  driven  not  up  to  the  visitors’ 
approach,  but  to  the  back  entrance.  As  he  got  down  from  the  carriage 
step,  two  men  in  the  dress  of  tradesmen  hastily  scurried  away  from  the 
entrance  into  the  shadow  of  the  wall.  Pierre,  as  he  stood  waiting,  noticed 
several  other  similar  persons  standing  in  the  shadow  of  the  house  on  1 
both  sides.  But  neither  Anna  Mihalovna  nor  the  footman  and  coachman,  i  ( 
who  must  have  seen  these  people,  took  any  notice  of  them.  So  it  must 
be  all  right,  Pierre  decided,  and  he  followed  Anna  Mihalovna.  With  ' 
hurrying  footsteps  Anna  Mihalovna  walked  up  the  dimly  lighted,  narrow'  ! 
stone  staircase,  urging  on  Pierre,  who  lagged  behind.  Though  Pierre  had  ' 
no  notion  why  he  had  to  go  to  the  count  at  all,  and  still  less  why  he  had' 
to  go  by  the  back  stairs,  yet,  impressed  by  Anna  Mihalovna’s  assurance  t: 
and  haste,  he  made  up  his  mind  that  it  was  undoubtedly  necessary  tor  ( 
him  to  do  so.  Half-way  up  the  stairs  they  were  almost  knocked  over  by 
some  men  with  pails,  who  ran  down  towards  them,  tramping  loudly  with  ’ 
their  big  boots.  These  men  huddled  up  against  the  wall  to  let  Pierre  and  |l] 
Anna  Mihalovna  pass,  and  showed  not  the  slightest  surprise  at  seeing'  1 
them. 

‘Is  this  the  princess’s  side  of  the  house?’  Anna  Mihalovna  asked  of  1 
one  of  them  ...  1  811 


WARANDPEACE  67 

‘Yes,  it  is,’  answered  the  footman  in  a  bold,  loud  voice,  as  though  any¬ 
thing  were  permissible  at  such  a  time;  ‘the  door  on  the  left,  ma’am.’ 

‘Perhaps  the  count  has  not  asked  for  me,’  said  Pierre,  as  he  reached 
the  landing.  ‘I  had  better  go  to  my  own  room.’  Anna  Mihalovna  stopped 
for  Pierre  to  catch  her  up. 

‘Ah,  mon  ami,’  she  said,  touching  his  hand  with  just  the  same  gesture 
as  she  had  used  in  the  morning  with  her  son.  ‘Believe  me,  I  am  suffering 
as  much  as  you;  but  be  a  man.’ 

‘Really,  had  I  not  better  go?’  Pierre  asked  affectionately,  looking  at 
her  over  his  spectacles. 

‘Ah,  mon  ami,  forget  the  wrong  that  may  have  been  done  you,  think 
that  it  is  your  father  .  .  .  and  perhaps  in  his  death  agony,’  she  sighed. 
‘I  have  loved  you  like  a  son  from  the  first.  Trust  in  me,  Pierre.  I  shall 
not  forget  your  interests.’ 

Pierre  did  not  understand  a  word.  Again  he  felt  more  strongly  than 
before  that  all  this  had  to  be  so,  and  he  obediently  followed  Anna  Mihal¬ 
ovna,  who  was  already  opening  the  door.  The  door  led  into  the  vestibule 
of  the  back  stairs.  In  the  corner  sat  the  princess’s  old  man-servant  knit¬ 
ting  stockings.  Pierre  had  never  been  in  this  part  of  the  house,  and  had 
not  even  suspected  the  existence  of  these  apartments.  A  maid-servant 
carrying  a  tray  with  a  decanter  overtook  them,  and  Anna  Mihalovna 
(calling  her  ‘my  dear’  and  ‘my  good  girl’)  asked  her  after  the  princesses’ 
health,  and  drew  Pierre  further  along  the  stone  corridor.  The  first  door 
to  the  left  led  out  of  the  corridor  into  the  princesses’  living  rooms.  The 
maid  with  the  decanter  was  in  a  hurry  (everything  seemed  to  be  done 
in  a  hurry  at  that  moment  in  the  house),  and  she  did  not  close  the  door 
after  her.  Pierre  and  Anna  Mihalovna,  as  they  passed  by,  glanced  uncon¬ 
sciously  into  the  room  where  the  eldest  princess  and  Prince  Vassily  were 
sitting  close  together  talking.  On  catching  sight  of  their  passing  figures, 
Prince  Vassily  made  an  impatient  movement  and  drew  back,  the  princess 
jumped  up,  and  with  a  despairing  gesture  she  closed  the  door,  slamming 
it  with  all  her  might.  This  action  was  so  unlike  the  princess’s  habitual 
composure,  the  dismay  depicted  on  the  countenance  of  Prince  Vassily 
was  so  out  of  keeping  with  his  dignity,  that  Pierre  stopped  short  and 
looked  inquiringly  over  his  spectacles  at  his  guide.  Anna  Mihalovna  mani¬ 
fested  no  surprise;  she  simply  smiled  a  little  and  sighed,  as  though  to 
show  that  she  had  anticipated  all  that. 

‘Be  a  man,  mon  ami,  I  am  looking  after  your  interests,’  she  said  in 
response  to  his  look  of  inquiry,  and  she  walked  more  quickly  along  the 
corridor. 

Pierre  had  no  notion  what  was  going  on,  and  no  inkling  of  what  was 
meant  by  watching  over  his  interests.  But  he  felt  that  all  this  had  had 
to  be  so.  From  the  corridor  they  went  into  the  half-lighted  hall  adjoining 
the  count’s  reception-room.  This  was  one  of  the  cold,  sumptuously  fur¬ 
nished  rooms  which  Pierre  knew,  leading  from  the  visitors’  staircase.  But 
even  in  this  apartment  there  was  an  empty  bath  standing  in  the  middle 
of  the  floor,  and  water  had  been  spilt  on  the  carpet.  They  were  met  here 


68 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

by  a  servant  and  a  church  attendant  with  a  censer,  who  walked  on  tiptoe 
and  took  no  notice  of  them.  They  went  into  the  reception-room  opening 
into  the  winter  garden,  a  room  Pierre  knew  well,  with  its  two  Italian 
windows,  its  big  bust  and  full-length  portrait  of  Catherine.  The  same 
persons  were  all  sitting  almost  in  the  same  positions  exchanging  whispers 
in  the  reception-room.  All  ceased  speaking  and  looked  round  at  Anna 
Mihalovna,  as  she  came  in  with  her  pale,  tear-stained  face,  and  at  the 
big,  stout  figure  of  Pierre,  as  with  downcast  head  he  followed  her  sub¬ 
missively. 

The  countenance  of  Anna  Mihalovna  showed  a  consciousness  that  the 
crucial  moment  had  arrived.  With  the  air  of  a  Petersburg  lady  of  ex¬ 
perience,  she  walked  into  the  room  even  more  boldly  than  in  the  morn¬ 
ing,  keeping  Pierre  at  her  side.  She  felt  that  as  she  was  bringing  the 
person  the  dying  man  wanted  to  see,  she  might  feel  secure  as  Ip  her  recep¬ 
tion.  With  a  rapid  glance,  scanning  all  the  persons  in  the  room,  and 
observing  the  count’s  spiritual  adviser,  she  did  not  precisely  bow  down, 
but  seemed  somehow  suddenly  to  shrink  in  stature,  and  with  a  tripping 
amble  swam  up  to  the  priest  and  reverentially  received  a  blessing  first 
from  one  and  then  from  another  ecclesiastic. 

‘Thank  God  that  we  are  in  time,’  she  said  to  the  priest;  ‘all  of  us,  his 
kinsfolk,  have  been  in  such  alarm.  This  young  man  is  the  count’s  son,’ 
she  added  more  softly,  ‘It  is  a  terrible  moment.’ 

Having  uttered  these  words  she  approached  the  doctor. 

‘Dear  doctor,’  she  said  to  him,  ‘this  young  man  is  the  count’s  son.  Is 
there  any  hope?’ 

The  doctor  did  not  speak  but  rapidly  shrugged  his  shoulders  and 
turned  up  his  eyes.  With  precisely  the  same  gesture  Anna  Mihalovna 
moved  her  shoulders  and  eyes,  almost  closing  her  eyelids,  sighed  and 
went  away  from  the  doctor  to  Pierre.  She  addressed  Pierre  with  peculiar 
deference  and  tender  melancholy. 

‘Have  faith  in  His  mercy,’  she  said  to  him,  and  indicating  a  sofa  for 
him  to  sit  down  and  wait  for  her,  she  went  herself  with  inaudible  steps 
towards  the  door,  at  which  every  one  was  looking,  and  after  almost  noise-  i 
lessly  opening  it,  she  vanished  behind  it.  ; 

Pierre,  having  decided  to  obey  his  monitress  in  everything,  moved  j 
towards  the  sofa  she  had  pointed  out  to  him.  As  soon  as  Anna  Mihalovna  t 
had  disappeared,  he  noticed  that  the  eyes  of  all  the  persons  in  the  room 
were  fixed  upon  him  with  something  more  than  curiosity  and  sympathy  a 
in  their  gaze.  He  noticed  that  they  were  all  whispering  together,  looking  j 
towards  him  with  something  like  awe  and  even  obsequious  deference. 
They  showed  him  a  respect  such  as  had  never  been  shown  him  before. 

A  lady,  a  stranger  to  him,  the  one  who  had  been  talking  to  the  priest, 
got  up  and  offered  him  her  place.  An  adjutant  picked  up  the  glove  Pierre 
had  dropped  and  handed  it  to  him.  The  doctors  respectfully  paused  in  ft 
their  talk  when  he  passed  by  them  and  moved  aside  to  make  way  for  Q 
him.  Pierre  wanted  at  first  to  sit  somewhere  else,  so  as  not  to  trouble  i) 
the  lady;  he  would  have  liked  to  pick  up  the  glove  himself  and  to  walk  k 


WAR  AND  PEACE  69 

round  the  doctors,  who  were  really  not  at  all  in  the  way.  But  he  felt  all 
at  once  that  to  do  so  would  be  improper ;  he  felt  that  he  was  that  night 
a  person  who  had  to  go  through  a  terrible  ceremony  which  every  one 
expected  of  him,  and  that  for  that  reason  he  was  bound  to  accept  service 
from  every  one.  He  took  the  glove  from  the  adjutant  in  silence,  sat  down 
in  the  lady’s  place,  laying  his  big  hands  on  his  knees,  sitting  in  the 
naively  symmetrical  pose  of  an  Egyptian  statue,  and  decided  mentally 
that  it  must  all  inevitably  be  like  this,  and  that  to  avoid  losing  his  head 
and  doing  something  stupid,  he  must  for  that  evening  not  act  on  his  own 
ideas,  but  abandon  himself  wholly  to  the  will  of  those  who  were  guiding 
him. 

Two  minutes  had  not  elapsed  before  Prince  Vassily  came  majestically 
into  the  room,  wearing  his  coat  with  three  stars  on  it,  and  carrying  his 
head  high.  He  looked  as  though  he  had  grown  thinner  since  the  morning. 
His  eyes  seemed  larger  than  usual  as  he  glanced  round  the  room,  and 
caught  sight  of  Pierre.  He  went  up  to  him,  took  his  hand  (a  thing  he 
had  never  done  before),  and  drew  it  downwards,  as  though  he  wanted 
to  try  its  strength. 

‘Courage,  courage,  vion  ami.  He  has  asked  to  see  you,  that  is  well  .  .  .’ 
and  he  would  have  gone  on,  but  Pierre  thought  it  fitting  to  ask:  ‘How 
is  .  .  .  ?’  He  hesitated,  not  knowing  whether  it  was  proper  for  him  to 
call  the  dying  man  ‘the  count’;  he  felt  ashamed  to  call  him  ‘father.’ 

‘He  has  had  another  stroke  half-an-hour  ago.  Courage,  mon  ami .’ 

Pierre  was  in  a  condition  of  such  mental  confusion  that  the  word 
stroke  aroused  in  his  mind  the  idea  of  a  blow  from  some  heavy  body. 
He  looked  in  perplexity  at  Prince  Vassily,  and  only  later  grasped  that 
an  attack  of  illness  was  called  a  stroke.  Prince  Vassily  said  a  few  words 
to  Lorrain  as  he  passed  and  went  to  the  door  on  tiptoe.  He  could  not 
walk  easily  on  tiptoe,  and  jerked  his  whole  person  up  and  down  in  an 
ungainly  fashion.  He  was  followed  by  the  eldest  princess,  then  by  the 
clergy  and  church  attendants;  some  servants  too  went  in  at  the  door. 
Through  that  door  a  stir  could  be  heard,  and  at  last  Anna  Mihalovna, 
with  a  face  still  pale  but  resolute  in  the  performance  of  duty,  ran  out 
and,  touching  Pierre  on  the  arm,  said: 

‘The  goodness  of  heaven  is  inexhaustible;  it  is  the  ceremony  of  extreme 
unction  which  they  are  beginning.  Come.’ 

Pierre  went  in,  stepping  on  to  the  soft  carpet,  and  noticed  that  the 
adjutant  and  the  unknown  lady  and  some  servants  too,  all  followed  him 
in,  as  though  there  were  no  need  now  to  ask  permission  to  enter  that  room. 


XX 

Pierre  knew  well  that  great  room,  divided  by  columns  and  an  arch,  and 
carpeted  with  Persian  rugs.  The  part  of  the  room  behind  the  columns, 
where  on  one  side  there  stood  a  high  mahogany  bedstead  with  silken 
hangings,  and  on  the  other  a  huge  case  of  holy  pictures,  was  brightly 


70  WAR  AND  PEACE 

and  decoratively  lighted  up,  as  churches  are  lighted  for  evening  service. 
Under  the  gleaming  ornamentation  of  the  case  stood  a  long  invalid 
chair,  and  in  the  chair,  on  snow-white,  uncrumpled,  freshly  changed  pil¬ 
lows,  covered  to  the  waist  with  a  bright  green  quilt,  Pierre  recognised  the 
majestic  figure  of  his  father,  Count  Bezuhov,  with  the  grey  shock  of 
hair  like  a  lion’s  mane  over  his  broad  forehead,  and  the  characteristically 
aristocratic,  deep  lines  on  his  handsome,  reddish-yellow  face.  He  was 
lying  directly  under  the  holy  pictures:  both  his  great  stout  arms  were 
lying  on  the  quilt.  In  his  right  hand,  which  lay  with  the  palm  downwards, 
a  wax  candle  had  been  thrust  between  the  thumb  and  forefinger,  and 
an  old  servant  bending  down  over  the  chair  held  it  in  it.  About  the 
chair  stood  the  clergy  in  their  shining  ceremonial  vestments,  with  their 
long  hair  pulled  out  over  them.  They  held  lighted  candles  in  their 
hands,  and  were  performing  the  service  with  deliberate  solemnity.  A 
little  behind  them  stood  the  two  younger  princesses  holding  handkerchiefs 
to  their  eyes,  and  in  front  of  them  the  eldest,  Katish,  stood  with  a  vin¬ 
dictive  and  determined  air,  never  for  an  instant  taking  her  eyes  off  the 
holy  image,  as  though  she  were  declaring  to  all  that  she  would  not 
answer  for  herself,  if  she  were  to  look  round.  Anna  Mihalovna  with  a 
countenance  of  meek  sorrow  and  forgiveness  stood  at  the  door  with  the 
unknown  lady.  Prince  Vassily  was  standing  close  to  the  invalid  chair  on 
the  other  side  of  the  door.  He  had  drawn  a  carved,  velvet  chair  up  to 
him,  and  was  leaning  on  the  back  of  it  with  his  left  hand,  in  which  he 
held  a  candle,  while  with  his  right  he  crossed  himself,  turning  his  eyes 
upwards  every  time  as  he  put  his  finger  to  his  forehead.  His  face  ex¬ 
pressed  quiet  piety  and  submission  to  the  will  of  God.  ‘If  you  don’t 
understand  such  feelings,  so  much  the  worse  for  you,’  his  face  seemed 
to  say. 

Behind  him  stood  the  adjutant,  the  doctors,  and  the  men-servants; 
the  men  and  the  women  had  separated  as  though  they  were  in  church. 
All  were  silently  crossing  themselves,  nothing  was  audible  but  the  read¬ 
ing  of  the  service,  the  subdued,  deep  bass  singing,  and  in  the  intervals 
of  silence  sighs  could  be  heard  and  the  shuffling  of  feet.  With  a  sig¬ 
nificant  air,  which  showed  she  knew  what  she  was  about,  Anna  Mihalovna 
walked  right  across  the  room  to  Pierre  and  gave  him  a  candle.  He  lighted 
it,  and  absorbed  in  watching  the  people  around  him,  he  absent-mindedly 
crossed  himself  with  the  hand  in  which  he  held  the  candle.  The  youngest 
princess,  Sophie,  the  rosy,  laughing  one  with  the  mole,  was  looking  at 
him.  She  smiled,  hid  her  face  in  her  handkerchief,  and  for  a  long  while 
did  not  uncover  it.  But  looking  at  Pierre  again,  again  she  laughed.  She 
was  apparently  unable  to  look  at  him  without  laughing,  but  could  not 
resist  looking  at  him,  and  to  be  out  of  temptation,  she  softly  moved 
behind  a  column.  In  the  middle  of  the  service  the  voices  of  the  priests 
suddenly  ceased,  and  they  whispered  something  to  one  another.  The 
old  servant,  who  was  holding  the  count’s  hand,  got  up  and  turned  to  the 
ladies.  Anna  Mihalovna  stepped  forward  and,  stooping  over  the  sick 
man,  she  beckoned  behind  her  back  to  Lorrain.  The  French  doctor  had 


WARANDPEACE  71 

been  leaning  against  the  column  without  a  candle,  in  the  respectful 
attitude  of  the  foreigner,  who  would  show  that  in  spite  of  the  difference 
of  religion  he  comprehends  all  the  solemnity  of  the  ceremony  and  even 
approves  of  it.  With  the  noiseless  steps  of  a  man  in  full  vigour  of  his 
age,  he  went  up  to  the  sick  man.  His  delicate,  white  fingers  lifted  his 
disengaged  hand  from  the  quilt,  and  turning  away,  the  doctor  began  feel¬ 
ing  the  pulse  in  absorbed  attention.  They  gave  the  sick  man  some  drink; 
there  was  a  slight  bustle  around  him,  then  all  went  back  to  their  places 
and  the  service  was  continued.  During  this  break  in  the  proceedings 
Pierre  noticed  that  Prince  Vassily  moved  away  from  his  chair-back,  and 
with  that  same  air  of  being  quite  sure  of  what  he  was  about,  and  of  its 
being  so  much  the  worse  for  others,  if  they  failed  to  understand  it,  he 
did  not  go  up  to  the  sick  man,  but  passed  by  him  and  joined  the  eldest 
princess.  Then  together  they  went  away  to  the  further  end  of  the  room 
to  the  high  bedstead  under  the  silk  canopy.  When  they  moved  away 
from  the  bed  the  prince  and  princess  disappeared  together  by  the  further 
door,  but  before  the  end  of  the  service  they  returned  one  after  the  other 
to  their  places.  Pierre  paid  no  more  attention  to  this  circumstance  than 
to  all  the  rest,  having  once  for  all  made  up  his  mind  that  all  that  he  saw 
taking  place  that  evening  must  inevitably  be  as  it  was. 

The  sounds  of  the  church  singing  ceased  and  the  voice  of  the  chief 
ecclesiastic  was  heard,  respectfully  congratulating  the  sick  man  on  his 
reception  of  the  mystery.  The  dying  man  lay  as  lifeless  and  immovable 
as  before.  Every  one  was  moving  about  him,  there  was  the  sound  of 
footsteps  and  of  whispers,  Anna  Mihalovna’s  whisper  rising  above  the 
rest. 

Pierre  heard  her  say:  ‘Undoubtedly  he  must  be  moved  on  to  the  bed; 
it’s  impossible  .  . 

The  sick  man  was  so  surrounded  by  the  doctors,  the  princesses  and  the 
servants,  that  Pierre  could  no  longer  see  the  reddish-yellow  face  with 
the  grey  mane,  which  he  had  never  lost  sight  of  for  one  instant  during 
the  ceremony,  even  though  he  had  been  watching  other  people  too.  Pierre 
guessed  from  the  cautious  movements  of  the  people  about  the  chair  that 
they  were  lifting  the  dying  man  up  and  moving  him. 

‘Hold  on  to  my  arm;  you’ll  drop  him  so,’  he  heard  the  frightened 
whisper  of  one  of  the  servants.  ‘Lower  down  .  .  .  another  one  here,’  said 
voices.  And  their  heavy  breathing  and  hurried  tread  seemed  to  show  that 
the  weight  they  carried  was  too  heavy  for  them. 

As  they  passed  him — Anna  Mihalovna  among  them — the  young  man 
caught  a  glimpse  over  people’s  backs  and  necks  of  the  great  muscular 
open  chest,  the  grey,  curly,  leonine  head,  and  the  massive  shoulders  of 
the  sick  man,  which  were  pushed  up,  as  he  was  supported  under  the  arm- 
pits.  His  head,  with  its  extraordinarily  broad  brow  and  cheek-bones,  its 
beautiful  sensual  mouth,  and  haughty,  cold  eyes,  was  not  disfigured  by 
the  proximity  of  death.  It  was  just  the  same  as  Pierre  had  seen  it  three 
months  before,  when  his  father  had  been  sending  him  off  to  Petersburg. 


72  WARANDPEACE 

But  the  head  swayed  helplessly  with  the  jerky  steps  of  the  bearers,  and 
the  cold,  apathetic  eyes  did  not  know  on  what  to  rest. 

They  were  busy  for  several  minutes  round  the  high  bed;  then  the 
people,  who  had  moved  the  count,  dispersed.  Anna  Mihalovna  touched 
Pierre’s  arm  and  said,  ‘Come  along.’  With  her  Pierre  approached  the 
bed,  on  which  the  sick  man  had  been  laid  in  a  ceremonial  position  in 
keeping  with  the  sacred  rite  that  had  just  been  performed.  He  was 
lying  with  his  head  propped  high  on  the  pillows.  His  hands  were  laid 
symmetrically  on  the  green  silk  quilt  with  the  palms  turned  downwards. 
When  Pierre  came  up,  the  count  looked  straight  at  him,  but  he  looked 
at  him  with  a  gaze  the  intent  and  significance  of  which  no  man  could 
fathom.  Either  these  eyes  said  nothing,  but  simply  looked  because  as 
eyes  they  must  look  at  something,  or  they  said  too  much.  Pierre  stopped, 
not  knowing  what  he  was  to  do,  and  looked  inquiringly  at  his  monitress. 
Anna  Mihalovna  gave  him  a  hurried  glance,  with  a  gesture  indicating 
the  sick  man’s  hand  and  with  her  lips  wafting  towards  it  a  phantom 
kiss.  Pierre  did  as  he  was  bid,  and  carefully  craning  his  neck  to  avoid 
entanglement  with  the  quilt,  kissed  the  broad-boned,  muscular  hand. 
There  was  not  the  faintest  stir  in  the  hand,  nor  in  any  muscle  of  the 
count’s  face.  Pierre  again  looked  inquiringly  at  Anna  Mihalovna  to 
learn  what  he  was  to  do  now.  Anna  Mihalovna  glanced  towards  the  arm¬ 
chair  that  stood  beside  the  bed.  Pierre  proceeded  obediently  to  sit  down 
there,  his  eyes  still  inquiring  whether  he  had  done  the  right,  thing.  Anna 
Mihalovna  nodded  approvingly.  Again  Pierre  fell  into  the  naively  sym¬ 
metrical  pose  of  an  Egyptian  statue,  obviously  distressed  that  his  un¬ 
gainly  person  took  up  so  much  room,  and  doing  his  utmost  to  look  as 
small  as  possible.  He  looked  at  the  count.  The  count  still  gazed  at  the 
spot  where  Pierre’s  face  had  been,  when  he  was  standing  up.  Anna 
Mihalovna’s  attitude  evinced  her  consciousness  of  the  touching  gravity 
of  this  last  meeting  between  father  and  son.  It  lasted  for  two  minutes, 
which  seemed  to  Pierre  an  hour.  Suddenly  a  shudder  passed  over  the 
thick  muscles  and  furrows  of  the  count’s  face.  The  shudder  grew  more 
intense;  the  beautiful  mouth  was  contorted  (it  was  only  then  that 
Pierre  grasped  how  near  death  his  father  was)  and  from  the  contorted 
mouth  there  came  a  husky,  muffled  sound.  Anna  Mihalovna  looked  in¬ 
tently  at  the  sick  man’s  mouth,  and  trying  to  guess  what  he  wanted, 
pointed  first  to  Pierre,  then  to  some  drink,  then  in  an  inquiring  whisper 
she  mentioned  the  name  of  Prince  Vassily,  then  pointed  to  the  quilt. 
The  eyes  and  face  of  the  sick  man  showed  impatience.  He  made  an  effort 
to  glance  at  the  servant,  who  never  moved  away  from  the  head  of  his  bed. 

‘His  excellency  wants  to  be  turned  over  on  the  other  side,’  whispered 
the  servant,  and  he  got  up  to  turn  the  heavy  body  of  the  count  facing 
the  wall. 

Pierre  stood  up  to  help  the  servant. 

While  the  count  was  being  turned  over,  one  of  his  arms  dragged  help¬ 
lessly  behind,  and  he  made  a  vain  effort  to  pull  it  after  him.  Whether 
the  count  noticed  the  face  of  horror  with  which  Pierre  looked  at  that 


WAR  A  A  D  PEACE  73 

lifeless  arm,  or  whether  some  other  idea  passed  through  his  dying  brain, 
he  looked  at  the  refractory  arm,  at  the  expression  of  horror  on  Pierre’s 
face,  again  at  his  arm,  and  a  smile  came  on  to  his  face,  strangely  out  of 
keeping  with  its  features;  a  weak,  suffering  smile,  which  seemed  mocking 
at  his  own  helplessness.  Suddenly,  at  the  sight  of  that  smile,  Pierre  felt 
a  lump  in  his  throat  and  a  tickling  in  his  nose,  and  tears  dimmed  his 
eyes.  The  sick  man  was  turned  towards  the  wall.  He  sighed. 

‘He  has  fallen  into  a  doze,’  said  Anna  Mihalovna,  noticing  the  princess 
coming  to  take  her  turn  by  the  bedside.  ‘Let  us  go.’ 

Pierre  went  out. 


XXI 

There  was  by  now  no  one  in  the  reception-room  except  Prince  Vassily 
and  the  eldest  princess,  who  were  in  eager  conversation  together,  sitting 
under  the  portrait  of  Catherine.  They  were  mute  at  once  on  seeing  Pierre 
and  his  companion,  and  the  princess  concealed  something  as  Pierre 
fancied  and  murmured:  ‘I  can’t  stand  the  sight  of  that  woman.’ 

‘Katish  has  had  tea  served  in  the  little  drawing-room,’  Prince  Vassily 
said  to  Anna  Mihalovna.  ‘Go,  my  poor  Anna  Mihalovna,  take  something 
or  you  will  not  hold  out.’ 

To  Pierre  he  said  nothing;  he  simply  pressed  his  arm  sympathetically. 
Pierre  and  Anna  Mihalovna  went  on  into  the  little  drawing-room. 

‘There  is  nothing  so  reviving  as  a  cup  of  this  excellent  Russian  tea, 
after  a  sleepless  night,’  said  Lorrain  with  an  air  of  restrained  briskness, 
sipping  it  out  of  a  delicate  china  cup  without  a  handle,  as  he  stood  in 
the  little  circular  drawing-room  close  to  a  table  laid  with  tea-things  and 
cold  supper-dishes.  All  who  were  in  Count  Bezuhov’s  house  on  that 
night  had,  with  a  view  to  fortifying  themselves,  gathered  around  the 
table.  Pierre  remembered  well  that  little  circular  drawing-room  with  its 
mirrors  and  little  tables.  When  there  had  been  balls  in  the  count’s  house, 
Pierre,  who  could  not  dance,  had  liked  sitting  in  that  little  room  full  of 
mirrors,  watching  the  ladies  in  ball-dresses  with  pearls  and  diamonds  on 
their  bare  shoulders,  as  they  crossed  that  room  and  looked  at  themselves 
in  the  brightly  lighted  mirrors  that  repeated  their  reflections  several 
times.  Now  the  same  room  was  dimly  lighted  with  two  candles,  and  in 
the  middle  of  the  night  the  tea-set  and  supper-dishes  stood  in  disorder 
on  one  of  the  little  tables,  and  heterogeneous,  plainly  dressed  persons 
were  sitting  at  it,  whispering  together,  and  showing  in  every  word  that 
no  one  could  forget  what  was  passing  at  that  moment  and  what  was  still 
to  come  in  the  bedroom.  Pierre  did  not  eat  anything,  though  he  felt 
very  much  inclined  to.  He  looked  round  inquiringly  towards  his  monitress, 
and  perceived  that  she  had  gone  out  again  on  tiptoe  into  the  reception- 
room  where  Prince  Vassily  had  remained  with  the  eldest  princess.  Pierre 
supposed  that  this  too  was  an  inevitable  part  of  the  proceedings,  and, 
after  a  little  delay,  he  followed  her.  Anna  Mihalovna  was  standing  beside 
the  princess,  and  they  were  both  talking  at  once  in  excited  tones. 


74 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Allow  me,  madam,  to  know  what  is  and  what  is  not  to  be  done,’  said 
the  princess,  who  was  apparently  in  the  same  exasperated  temper  as  she 
had  been  when  she  slammed  the  door  of  her  room. 

‘But,  dear  princess,’  Anna  Mihalovna  was  saying  mildly  and  per¬ 
suasively,  blocking  up  the  way  towards  the  bedroom  and  not  letting  the 
princess  pass.  ‘Would  that  not  be  too  great  a  tax  on  poor  uncle  at  such 
a  moment,  when  he  needs  repose?  At  such  moments  to  talk  of  worldly 
matters  when  his  soul  is  already  prepared  .  .  .’ 

Prince  Vassily  was  sitting  in  a  low  chair  in  his  habitual  attitude,  with 
one  leg  crossed  high  above  the  other.  His  cheeks  were  twitching  violently, 
and  when  they  relaxed,  they  looked  heavier  below;  but  he  wore  the  air 
of  a  man  little  interested  in  the  two  ladies’  discussion. 

‘No,  my  dear  Anna  Mihalovna,  let  Katish  act  on  her  own  discretion. 
You  know  how  the  count  loves  her.’ 

‘I  don’t  even  know  what  is  in  this  document,’  said  the  princess,  ad¬ 
dressing  Prince  Vassily,  and  pointing  to  the  inlaid  portfolio  which  she 
held  in  her  hand.  ‘All  I  know  is  that  the  real  will  is  in  the  bureau,  and 
this  is  a  paper  that  has  been  forgotten.  .  .  .’ 

She  tried  to  get  round  Anna  Mihalovna,  but  the  latter,  with  another 
little  skip,  barred  her  way  again. 

‘I  know,  dear,  sweet  princess,’  said  Anna  Mihalovna,  taking  hold  of 
the  portfolio,  and  so  firmly  that  it  was  clear  she  would  not  readily  let 
go  of  it  again.  ‘Dear  princess,  I  beg  you,  I  beseech  you,  spare  him.  I 
entreat  you.’ 

The  princess  did  not  speak.  All  that  was  heard  was  the  sound  of  a 
scuffle  over  the  portfolio.  There  could  be  no  doubt  that  if  she  were  to 
speak,  she  would  say  nothing  complimentary  to  Anna  Mihalovna.  The 
latter  kept  a  tight  grip,  but  in  spite  of  that  her  voice  retained  all  its 
sweet  gravity  and  softness. 

‘Pierre,  come  here,  my  dear  boy.  He  will  not  be  one  too  many,  I  should 
imagine,  in  a  family  council;  eh,  prince?’ 

‘Why  don’t  you  speak,  mon  cousin?’  the  princess  shrieked  all  of  a 
sudden,  so  loudly  that  they  heard  her  voice,  and  were  alarmed  by  it  in 
the  drawing-room.  ‘Why  don’t  you  speak  when  here  a  meddling  outsider 
takes  upon  herself  to  interfere,  and  make  a  scene  on  the  very  threshold 
of  a  dying  man’s  room?  Scheming  creature,’  she  muttered  viciously,  and 
tugged  at  the  portfolio  with  all  her  might,  but  Anna  Mihalovna  took  a 
few  steps  forward  so  as  not  to  lose  her  grasp  of  it  and  changed  hands. 

‘Ah,’  said  Prince  Vassily,  in  reproachful  wonder.  He  got  up.  ‘It  is 
ridiculous.  Come,  let  go.  I  tell  you.’  The  princess  let  go. 

‘And  you.’ 

Anna  Mihalovna  did  not  heed  him. 

‘Let  go,  I  tell  you.  I  will  take  it  all  upon  myself.  I  will  go  and  ask  him. 
I  .  .  .  you  let  it  alone.’ 

‘But,  prince,’  said  Anna  Mihalovna,  ‘after  this  solemn  sacrament,  let 
him  have  a  moment’s  peace.  Here,  Pierre,  tell  me  your  opinion,’  she 
turned  to  the  young  man,  who  going  up  to  them  was  staring  in  surprise 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


75 

at  the  exasperated  face  of  the  princess,  which  had  thrown  off  all  appear¬ 
ance  of  decorum,  and  the  twitching  cheeks  of  Prince  Vassily. 

‘Remember  that  you  will  have  to  answer  for  all  the  consequences,’ 
said  Prince  Vassily  sternly;  ‘you  don’t  know  what  you  are  doing.’ 

‘Infamous  woman,’  shrieked  the  princess,  suddenly  pouncing  on  Anna 
Mihalovna  and  tearing  the  portfolio  from  her.  Prince  Vassily  bowed  his 
head  and  flung  up  his  hands. 

At  that  instant  the  door,  the  dreadful  door  at  which  Pierre  had  gazed 
so  long,  and  which  had  opened  so  softly,  was  flung  rapidly,  noisily  open, 
banging  against  the  wall,  and  the  second  princess  ran  out  wringing  her 
hands.  i 

‘What  are  you  about?’  she  said,  in  despair.  ‘He  is  passing  away,  and 
you  leave  me  alone.’ 

The  eldest  princess  dropped  the  portfolio.  Swiftly  Anna  Mihalovna 
stooped  and,  snatching  up  the  object  of  dispute,  ran  into  the  bedroom. 
The  eldest  princess  and  Prince  Vassily  recovering  themselves  followed 
her.  A  few  minutes  later  the  eldest  princess  came  out  again  with  a  pale, 
dry  face,  biting  her  underlip.  At  the  sight  of  Pierre  her  face  expressed 
irrepressible  hatred. 

‘Yes,  now  you  can  give  yourself  airs,’  she  said,  ‘you  have  got  what 
you  wanted.’  And  breaking  into  sobs,  she  hid  her  face  in  her  hand¬ 
kerchief  and  ran  out  of  the  room. 

The  next  to  emerge  was  Prince  Vassily.  He  staggered  to  the  sofa,  on 
which  Pierre  was  sitting,  and  sank  on  to  it,  covering  his  eyes  with  his 
hand.  Pierre  noticed  that  he  was  pale,  and  that  his  lower  jaw  was  quiver¬ 
ing  and  working  as  though  in  ague. 

‘Ah,  my  dear  boy,’  he  said,  taking  Pierre  by  the  elbow — and  there  was 
a  sincerity  and  a  weakness  in  his  voice  that  Pierre  had  never  observed 
in  him  before — ‘what  sins,  what  frauds  we  commit,  and  all  for  what? 
I’m  over  fifty,  my  dear  boy.  ...  I  too.  ...  It  all  ends  in  death,  all. 
Death  is  awful.’  He  burst  into  tears. 

Anna  Mihalovna  was  the  last  to  come  out.  She  approached  Pierre  with 
soft,  deliberate  steps.  ‘Pierre,’  she  said.  Pierre  looked  inquiringly  at  her. 
She  kissed  the  young  man  on  the  forehead,  wetting  him  with  her  tears. 
She  did  not  speak  for  a  while. 

‘He  is  no  more.  .  .  .’ 

Pierre  gazed  at  her  over  his  spectacles. 

‘Come.  I  will  take  you  back.  Try  to  cry.  Nothing  relieves  like  tears.’ 

She  led  him  into  the  dark  drawing-room,  and  Pierre  was  glad  that  no 
one  could  see  his  face.  Anna  Mihalovna  left  him,  and  when  she  came 
back  he  was  fast  asleep  with  his  arm  under  his  head. 

The  next  morning  Anna  Mihalovna  said  to  Pierre:  ‘Yes,  my  dear  boy, 
it  is  a  great  loss  for  us  all.  I  do  not  speak  of  you.  But  God  will  uphold 
you;  you  are  young,  and  now  you  are  at  the  head  of  an  immense  fortune, 
I  hope.  The  will  has  not  been  opened  yet.  I  know  you  well  enough  to 
know  that  this  will  not  turn  your  head,  but  it  will  impose  duties  upon 
you  and  you  must  be  a  man.’ 


76 


WAR  AND  PEACE 
Pierre  did  not  speak. 

‘Perhaps,  later,  I  may  tell  you,  my  dear  boy,  that  if  I  had  not  been 
there  God  knows  what  would  have  happened.  You  know,  my  uncle 
promised  me,  only  the  day  before  yesterday,  not  to  forget  Boris.  But 
he  had  no  time.  I  hope,  dear  friend,  that  you  will  fulfill  your  father’s 
desire.’ 

Pierre  did  not  understand  a  word,  and  colouring  shyly,  looked  dumbly 
at  Anna  Mihalovna.  After  talking  to  him,  Anna  Mihalovna  drove  to  the 
Rostovs’,  and  went  to  bed.  On  waking  in  the  morning,  she  told  the  RostoVs 
and  all  her  acquaintances  the  details  of  Count  Bezuhov’s  death.  She  said 
that  the  count  had  died,  as  she  would  wish  to  die  herself,  that  his  end 
had  been  not  simply  touching,  but  edifying;  that  the  last  interview  of 
the  father  and  son  had  been  so  touching  that  she  could  not  recall  it 
without  tears;  and  that  she  did  not  know  which  had  behaved  more 
nobly  in  those  terrible  moments:  the  father,  who  had  remembered  every¬ 
thing  and  every  one  so  well  at  the  last,  and  had  said  such  moving  words 
to  his  son;  or  Pierre,  whom  it  was  heartbreaking  to  see,  so  utterly  crushed 
was  he,  though  he  yet  tried  to  conceal  his  grief,  so  as  not  to  distress  his 
dying  father.  ‘It  is  painful,  but  it  does  one  good;  it  uplifts  the  soul  to 
see  such  men  as  the  old  count  and  his  worthy  son,’  she  said.  She  told  them 
about  the  action  of  the  princess  and  Prince  Vassily  too,  but  in  great 
secrecy,  in  whispers,  and  with  disapproval. 


XXII 

At  Bleak  Hills,  the  estate  of  Prince  Nikolay  Andreivitch  Bolkonsky, 
the  arrival  of  young  Prince  Andrey  and  his  wife  was  daily  expected. 
But  this  expectation  did  not  disturb  the  regular  routine  in  which  life 
moved  in  the  old  prince’s  household.  Prince  Nikolay  Andreivitch,  once 
a  commander-in-chief,  known  in  the  fashionable  world  by  the  nickname 
of  ‘the  Prussian  king,’  had  been  exiled  to  his  estate  in  the  reign  of  Paul, 
and  had  remained  at  Bleak  Hills  ever  since  with  his  daughter,  Princess 
Marya,  and  her  companion,  Mademoiselle  Bourienne.  Even  in  the  new 
reign,  though  he  had  received  permission  to  return  to  the  capital,  he 
had  never  left  his  home  in  the  country,  saying  that  if  any  one  wanted 
to  see  him,  he  could  travel  the  hundred  and  fifty  versts  from  Moscow 
to  Bleak  Hills,  and,  for  his  part,  he  wanted  nobody  and  nothing.  He 
used  to  maintain  that  human  vices  all  sprang  from  only  two  sources — 
idleness  and  superstition,  and  that  there  were  but  two  virtues— energy 
and  intelligence.  He  had  himself  undertaken  the  education  of  his  daugh¬ 
ter;  and  to  develop  in  her  these  important  qualities,  he  continued  giving 
her  lessons  in  algebra  and  geometry  up  to  her  twentieth  year,  and 
mapped  out  her  whole  life  in  uninterrupted  occupation.  He  was  himself 
always  occupied  in  writing  his  memoirs,  working  out  problems  in  higher 
mathafcnatics,  turning  snuff-boxes  on  his  lathe,  working  in  his  garden, 
or  looking  after  the  erection  of  farm  buildings  which  were  always  being 


WARANDPEACE  77 

built  on  his  estate.  Since  the  great  thing  for  enabling  one  to  get  through 
work  is  regularity,  he  had  carried  regularity  in  his  manner  of  life  to 
the  highest  point  of  exactitude.  His  meals  were  served  in  a  fixed  and  in¬ 
variable  manner,  and  not  only  at  a  certain  hour,  but  at  a  certain  minute. 
With  those  about  him,  from  his  daughter  to  his  servants,  the  count  was 
sharp  and  invariably  exacting,  and  so,  without  being  cruel,  he  inspired 
a  degree  of  respect  and  awe  that  the  most  cruel  man  could  not  readily 
have  commanded.  In  spite  of  the  fact  that  he  was  now  on  the  retired 
list,  and  had  no  influence  whatever  in  political  circles,  every  high 
official  in  the  province  in  which  was  the  prince’s  estate  felt  obliged  to 
call  upon  him,  and  had,  just  like  the  architect,  the  gardener,  or  Princess 
Marya,  to  wait  till  the  regular  hour  at  which  the  prince  always  made  his 
appearance  in  the  lofty  waiting-room.  And  every  one  in  the  waiting- 
room  felt  the  same  veneration,  and  even  awe,  when  the  immensely  high 
door  of  the  study  opened  and  showed  the  small  figure  of  the  old  man 
in  a  powdered  wig,  with  his  little  withered  hands  and  grey,  overhanging 
eyebrows,  that,  at  times  when  he  scowled,  hid  the  gleam  in  his  shrewd, 
youthful-looking  eyes. 

On  the  day  that  the  young  people  were  expected  to  arrive,  Princess 
Marya  went  as  usual  at  the  fixed  hour  in  the  morning  into  the  waiting- 
room  to  say  good-morning  to  her  father,  and  with  dread  in  her  heart 
crossed  herself  and  mentally  repeated  a  prayer.  Every  day  she  went  in 
to  her  father  in  the  same  way,  and  every  day  she  prayed  that  her  inter¬ 
view  with  her  father  might  pass  off  well  that  day.  The  old  man-servant, 
wearing  powder,  softly  got  up  from  his  seat  in  the  waiting-room  and 
whispered:  ‘Walk  in.’ 

Through  the  door  came  the  regular  sounds  of  the  lathe.  The  princess 
kept  timidly  hold  of  the  door,  which  opened  smoothly  and  easily,  and 
stood  still  in  the  doorway.  The  prince  was  working  at  his  lathe,  and 
glancing  round,  he  went  on  with  what  he  was  doing. 

The  immense  room  was  filled  with  things  obviously  in  constant  use. 
The  large  table,  on  which  lay  books  and  plans,  the  high  bookcases  with 
keys  in  the  glass-covered  doors,  the  high  table  for  the  prince  to  write  at, 
standing  up,  with  an  open  manuscript-book  upon  it,  the  carpenter’s  lathe, 
with  tools  ranged  about  it  and  shavings  scattered  around,  all  suggested 
continual,  varied,  and  orderly  activity.  The  movements  of  the  prince’s 
small  foot  in  its  Tatar,  silver-embroidered  boot,  the  firm  pressure  of  his 
sinewy,  lean  hand,  showed  the  strength  of  vigorous  old  age  still  strong- 
willed  and  wiry.  After  making  a  few  more  turns,  he  took  his  foot  from 
the  pedal  of  the  lathe,  wiped  the  plane,  dropped  it  into  a  leather  pouch 
attached  to  the  lathe,  and  going  up  to  the  table  called  his  daughter.  He 
never  gave  the  usual  blessing  to  his  children;  he  simply  offered  her  his 
scrubby,  not  yet  shaved  cheek,  and  said  sternly  and  yet  at  the  same 
time  with  intense  tenderness,  as  he  looked  her  over:  ‘Quite  well?  .  .  . 
All  right,  then,  sit  down!’  He  took  a  geometry  exercise-book  written  by 
his  own  hand,  and  drew  his  chair  up  with  his  leg. 

‘For  to-morrow,’  he  said  quickly,  turning  to  the  page  and  marking  it 


78  WARANDPEACE 

from  one  paragraph  to  the  next  with  his  rough  nail.  The  princess  bent 
over  the  exercise-book.  ‘Stop,  there’s  a  letter  for  you,’  the  old  man  said 
suddenly,  pulling  out  of  a  pocket  hanging  over  the  table  an  envelope 
addressed  in  a  feminine  hand,  and  putting  it  on  the  table. 

The  princess’s  face  coloured  red  in  patches  at  the  sight  of  the  letter. 
She  took  it  hurriedly  and  bent  over  it. 

‘From  Heloise?’  asked  the  prince,  showing  his  still  strong,  yellow 
teeth  in  a  cold  smile. 

‘Yes,  from  Julie,’  said  the  princess,  glancing  timidly  at  him,  and 
timidly  smiling. 

‘Two  more  letters  I’ll  let  pass,  but  the  third  I  shall  read,’  said  the 
prince  severely;  ‘I’m  afraid  you  write  a  lot  of  nonsense.  The  third  I 
shall  read.’ 

‘Read  this  one,  father,’  answered  the  princess,  colouring  still  more 
and  handing  him  the  letter. 

‘The  third,  I  said  the  third,’  the  prince  cried  shortly;  pushing  away 
the  letter  and  leaning  his  elbow  on  the  table,  he  drew  up  to  him  the 
book  with  the  figures  of  geometry  in  it. 

‘Now,  madam,’  began  the  old  man,  bending  over  the  book  close  to  his 
daughter,  and  laying  one  arm  on  the  back  of  the  chair  she  was  sitting 
on,  so  that  the  princess  felt  herself  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  the  peculiar 
acrid  smell  of  old  age  and  tobacco,  which  she  had  so  long  associated 
with  her  father.  ‘Come,  madam,  these  triangles  are  equal:  kindly  look; 
the  angle  ABC....’ 

The  princess  glanced  in  a  scared  way  at  her  father’s  eyes  gleaming 
close  beside  her.  The  red  patches  overspread  her  whole  face,  and  it  was 
evident  that  she  did  not  understand  a  word,  and  was  so  frightened  that 
terror  prevented  her  from  understanding  all  the  subsequent  explanations 
her  father  offered  her,  however  clear  they  might  be.  Whether  it  was  the 
teacher’s  fault  or  the  pupil’s,  every  day  the  same  scene  was  repeated. 
The  princess’s  eyes  grew  dim;  she  could  see  and  hear  nothing;  she 
could  feel  nothing  but  the  dry  face  of  her  stern  father  near  her,  his 
breath  and  the  smell  of  him,  and  could  think  of  nothing  but  how  to 
escape  as  soon  as  possible  from  the  study  and  to  make  out  the  problem 
in  freedom  in  her  room.  The  old  man  lost  his  temper;  with  a  loud, 
grating  noise  he  pushed  back  and  drew  up  again  the  chair  he  was  sitting 
on,  made  an  effort  to  control  himself,  not  to  fly  into  a  rage,  and  almost 
every  time  did  fly  into  a  rage,  and  scold,  and  sometimes  flung  the  book 
away. 

The  princess  answered  a  question  wrong. 

‘Well,  you  are  too  stupid!’  cried  the  prince,  pushing  away  the  book, 
and  turning  sharply  away.  But  he  got  up  immediately,  walked  up  and 
down,  laid  his  hand  on  the  princess’s  hair,  and  sat  down  again.  He  drew 
himself  up  to  the  table  and  continued  his  explanations.  ‘This  won’t  do; 
it  won’t  do,’  he  said,  when  Princess  Marya,  taking  the  exercise-book 
with  the  lesson  set  her,  and  shutting  it,  was  about  to  leave  the  room: 
‘mathematics  is  a  grand  subject,  madam.  And  to  have  you  like  the 


WAR  AND  PEACE  79 

common  run  of  our  silly  misses  is  what  I  don’t  want  at  all.  Patience,  and 
you’ll  get  to  like  it.’  He  patted  her  on  the  cheek.  ‘It  will  drive  all  the 
nonsense  out  of  your  head.’  She  would  have  gone;  he  stopped  her  with 
a  gesture,  and  took  a  new,  uncut  book  from  the  high  table. 

‘Here’s  a  book,  too,  your  Pleloise  sends  you  some  sort  of  Key  to  the 
Mystery.  Religious.  But  I  don’t  interfere  with  any  one’s  belief.  .  .  . 
I  have  looked  at  it.  Take  it.  Come,  run  along,  run  along.’ 

He  patted  her  on  the  shoulder,  and  himself  closed  the  door  after  her. 

Princess  Marya  went  back  to  her  own  room  with  that  dejected,  scared 
expression  that  rarely  left  her,  and  made  her  plain,  sickly  face  even 
plainer.  She  sat  down  at  her  writing-table,  which  was  dotted  with  minia¬ 
ture  portraits,  and  strewn  with  books  and  manuscripts.  The  princess  was 
as  untidy  as  her  father  was  tidy.  She  put  down  the  geometry  exercise- 
book  and  impatiently  opened  the  letter.  The  letter  was  from  the  princess's 
dearest  friend  from  childhood;  this  friend  was  none  other  than  Julie 
Karagin,  who  had  been  at  the  Rostovs’  name-day  party. 

Julie  wrote  in  French: 

‘Dear  and  excellent  Friend, — What  a  terrible  and  frightful  thing 
is  absence!  I  say  to  myself  that  half  of  my  existence  and  of  my  happi¬ 
ness  is  in  you,  that  notwithstanding  the  distance  that  separates  us,  our 
hearts  are  united  by  invisible  bonds;  yet  mine  rebels  against  destiny, 
and  in  spite  of  the  pleasures  and  distractions  around  me,  I  cannot  over¬ 
come  a  certain  hidden  sadness  which  I  feel  in  the  bottom  of  my  heart 
since  our  separation.  Why  are  we  not  together  as  we  were  this  summer 
in  your  great  study,  on  the  blue  sofa,  the  confidential  sofa?  Why  can  I 
not,  as  I  did  three  months  ago,  draw  new  moral  strength  from  that  gentle, 
calm,  penetrating  look  of  yours,  a  look  that  I  loved  so  well  and  that  I 
seem  to  see  before  me  as  I  write  to  you.’ 

When  she  reached  this  passage,  Princess  Marya  sighed  and  looked 
round  into  the  pier-glass  that  stood  on  her  right.  The  glass  reflected  a 
feeble,  ungraceful  figure  and  a  thin  face.  The  eyes,  always  melancholy, 
were  looking  just  now  with  a  particularly  hopeless  expression  at  herself 
in  the  looking-glass.  She  flatters  me,  thought  the  princess,  and  she  turned 
away  and  went  on  reading.  But  Julie  did  not  flatter  her  friend:  the 
princess’s  eyes — large,  deep,  and  luminous  (rays  of  warm  light  seemed 
at  times  to  radiate  in  streams  from  them),  were  really  so  fine,  that  very 
often  in  spite  of  the  plainness  of  the  whole  face  her  eyes  were  more 
attractive  than  beauty.  But  the  princess  had  never  seen  the  beautiful 
expression  of  her  eyes;  the  expression  that  came  into  them  when  she  was 
not  thinking  of  herself.  As  is  the  case  with  every  one,  her  face  assumed 
an  affected,  unnatural,  ugly  expression  as  soon  as  she  looked  in  the 
looking-glass. 

She  went  on  reading: 

‘All  Moscow  talks  of  nothing  but  war.  One  of  my  two  brothers  is 
already  abroad,  the  other  is  with  the  Guards,  who  are  starting  on  the 


So 


WAR  AND  PEACE 
march  to  the  frontier.  Our  dear  Emperor  has  left  Petersburg,  and,  people 
declare,  intends  to  expose  his  precious  existence  to  the  risks  of  war. 
God  grant  that  the  Corsican  monster  who  is  destroying  the  peace  of 
Europe  may  be  brought  low  by  the  angel  whom  the  Almighty  in  His 
mercy  has  given  us  as  sovereign.  Without  speaking  of  my  brothers,  this 
war  has  deprived  me  of  one  of  my  heart’s  dearest  alliances.  I  mean  the 
young  Nicholas  Rostov,  whose  enthusiasm  could  not  endure  inaction, 
and  who  has  left  the  university  to  go  and  join  the  army.  Well,  dear  Marie, 
I  will  own  to  you  that,  in  spite  of  his  extreme  youth,  his  departure  for 
the  army  has  been  a  great  grief  to  me.  This  young  man,  of  whom  I  spoke 
to  you  in  the  summer,  has  so  much  nobility,  so  much  real  youthfulness, 
rarely  to  be  met  with  in  our  age,  among  our  old  men  of  twenty.  Above 
all,  he  has  so  much  openness  and  so  much  heart.  He  is  so  pure  and 
poetic  that  my  acquaintance  with  him,  though  so  transient,  has  been  one 
of  the  dearest  joys  known  by  my  poor  heart,  which  has  already  had  so 
much  suffering.  Some  day  I  will  tell  you  about  our  farewells  and  all 
that  we  said  to  each  other  as  we  parted.  As  yet,  all  that  is  too  fresh.  Ah, 
dear  friend,  you  are  fortunate  in  not  knowing  these  joys  and  these 
pains  which  are  so  poignant.  You  are  fortunate,  because  the  latter  are 
generally  stronger!  I  know  very  well  that  Count  Nicholas  is  too  young 
ever  to  become  more  to  me  than  a  friend,  but  this  sweet  friendship,  this 
poetic  and  pure  intimacy  have  fulfilled  a  need  of  my  heart.  No  more  of 
this.  The  great  news  of  the  day,  with  which  all  Moscow  is  taken  up,  is 
the  death  of  old  Count  Bezuhov,  and  his  inheritance.  Fancy,  the  three 
princesses  have  hardly  got  anything,  Prince  Vassily  nothing,  and  every¬ 
thing  has  been  left  to  M.  Pierre,  who  has  been  acknowledged  as  a  legiti¬ 
mate  son  into  the  bargain,  so  that  he  is  Count  Bezuhov  and  has  the  finest 
fortune  in  Russia.  People  say  that  Prince  Vassily  behaved  very  badly  in 
all  these  matters  and  that  he  has  gone  back  to  Petersburg  quite  cast  down. 

‘I  own  that  I  understand  very  little  about  all  these  details  of  legacies 
and  wills;  what  I  know  is  that  since  the  young  man  whom  we  all  used 
to  know  as  plain  M.  Pierre  has  become  Count  Bezuhov  and  owner  of  one 
of  the  largest  fortunes  in  Russia,  I  am  much  amused  to  observe  the 
change  in  the  tone  and  the  manners  of  mammas  burdened  with  mar¬ 
riageable  daughters  and  of  those  young  ladies  themselves,  towards  that 
individual — who  I  may  say  in  passing  has  always  seemed  to  me  a  poor 
creature.  As  people  have  amused  themselves  for  the  last  two  years  in 
giving  me  husbands  whom  I  don’t  know,  the  matrimonial  gossip  of 
Moscow  generally  makes  me  Countess  Bezuhov.  But  you,  I  am  sure, 
feel  that  I  have  no  desire  to  become  so.  About  marriage,  by  the  by,  do 
you  know  that  the  universal  aunt,  Anna  Mihalovna,  has  confided  to  me, 
under  the  seal  of  the  deepest  secrecy,  a  marriage  scheme  for  you.  It  is 
no  one  more  or  less  than  Prince  Vassily’s  son,  Anatole,  whom  they  want  to 
settle  by  marrying  him  to  some  one  rich  and  distinguished,  and  the 
choice  of  his  relations  has  fallen  on  you.  I  don’t  know  what  view  you 
will  take  of  the  matter,  but  I  thought  it  my  duty  to  let  you  know  before- 


8i 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

hand.  He  is  said  to  be  very  handsome  and  very  wild;  that  is  all  I  have 
been  able  to  find  out  about  him. 

‘But  enough  of  gossip.  I  am  finishing  my  second  sheet  and  mamma 
is  sending  for  me  to  go  and  dine  with  the  Apraxins.  Read  the  mystical 
book  which  I  send  you,  and  which  is  the  rage  here.  Though  there  are 
things  in  this  book,  difficult  for  our  human  conceptions  to  attain  to, 
it  is  an  admirable  book,  and  reading  it  calms  and  elevates  the  soul. 
Farewell.  My  respects  to  your  father  and  my  compliments  to  Mile. 
Bourienne.  I  embrace  you  as  I  love  you.  Julie. 

‘P.S. — Let  me  hear  news  of  your  brother  and  his  charming  little  wife.’ 

Princess  Marya  thought  a  minute,  smiling  dreamily  (her  face,  lighted 
up  by  her  luminous  eyes,  was  completely  transformed).  Suddenly  getting 
up,  she  crossed  over  to  the  table,  treading  heavily.  She  got  out  a  sheet 
of  paper  and  her  hand  began  rapidly  moving  over  it.  She  wrote  the  fol¬ 
lowing  answer: 

‘Dear  and  excellent  Friend, — Your  letter  of  the  13th  gave  me 
great  delight.  So  you  still  love  me,  my  poetic  Julie.  So,  absence,  which 
you  so  bitterly  denounce,  has  not  had  its  usual  effect  upon  you.  You 
complain  of  absence — what  might  I  say,  if  I  ventured  to  complain,  I, 
deprived  of  all  who  are  dear  to  me?  Ah,  if  we  had  not  religion  to  console 
us,  life  would  be  very  sad.  Why  do  you  suppose  that  I  should  look  severe 
when  you  tell  me  of  your  affection  for  that  young  man?  In  such  matters 
I  am  hard  upon  no  one  but  myself.  I  understand  such  feelings  in  other 
people,  and  if,  never  having  felt  them,  I  cannot  express  approval,  I  do 
not  condemn  them.  Only  it  seems  to  me  that  Christian  love,  the  love  of 
our  neighbour,  the  love  of  our  enemies,  is  more  meritorious,  sweeter  and 
more  beautiful  than  those  feelings  that  may  be  inspired  in  a  poetic  and 
loving  young  girl  like  you,  by  the  fine  eyes  of  a  young  man. 

‘The  news  of  Count  Bezuhov’s  death  reached  us  before  your  letter, 
and  affected  my  father  very  much.  He  says  that  the  count  was  the  last 
representative  but  one  of  the  great  century  and  that  it  is  his  turn  now; 
but  that  he  will  do  his  best  to  have  his  turn  come  as  late  as  possible. 
May  God  save  us  from  that  terrible  misfortune.  I  cannot  agree  with 
you  about  Pierre,  whom  I  knew  as  a  child.  He  always  appeared  to  me 
to  have  an  excellent  heart,  and  that  is  the  quality  that  I  most  esteem 
in  people.  As  to  his  inheritance  and  Prince  Vassily’s  behaviour  about  it, 
it  is  very  sad  for  both.  Ah,  my  dear  friend,  our  divine  Saviour’s  word, 
that  it  is  easier  for  a  camel  to  pass  through  the  eye  of  a  needle  than 
for  a  rich  man  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  Heaven  is  a  terribly  true 
saying;  I  pity  Prince  Vassily,  and  I  am  yet  more  sorry  for  Pierre.  So 
young  and  burdened  with  this  wealth,  to  what  temptations  he  will  be  ex¬ 
posed!  If  I  were  asked  what  I  wished  most  in  the  world,  it  would  be  to  be 
poorer  than  the  poorest  beggar.  A  thousand  thanks,  dear  friend,  for  the 
work  you  send  me,  and  which  is  all  the  rage  where  you  are.  As,  however, 
you  tell  me  that  amid  many  good  things  there  are  others  to  which  our 
weak  human  understanding  cannot  attain,  it  seems  to  me  rather  useless 


82 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

to  busy  oneself  in  reading  an  unintelligible  book,  since  for  that  very 
reason  it  cannot  yield  any  profit.  I  have  never  been  able  to  comprehend 
the  passion  which  some  people  have  for  confusing  their  minds  by  giving 
themselves  to  the  study  of  mystical  books  which  only  awaken  their 
doubts,  inflaming  their  imagination,  and  giving  them  a  disposition  to 
exaggeration  altogether  contrary  to  Christian  simplicity.  Let  us  read  the 
Apostles  and  the  Gospel.  Do  not  let  us  seek  to  penetrate  what  is  mysteri¬ 
ous  in  these,  for  how  can  we  dare  presume,  miserable  sinners  as  we  are, 
to  enter  into  the  terrible  and  sacred  secrets  of  Providence,  while  we  wear 
this  carnal  husk  that  raises  an  impenetrable  veil  between  us  and  the 
Eternal?  Let  us  rather  confine  ourselves  to  studying  those  sublime  prin¬ 
ciples  which  our  divine  Saviour  has  left  us  as  guides  for  our  conduct 
here  below;  let  us  seek  to  conform  ourselves  to  those  and  follow  them; 
let  us  persuade  ourselves  that  the  less  range  we  give  to  our  weak  human 
understanding,  the  more  agreeable  it  will  be  to  God,  who  rejects  all 
knowledge  that  does  not  come  from  Him;  that  the  less  we  seek  to  dive 
into  that  which  He  has  pleased  to  hide  from  our  knowledge  the  sooner 
will  He  discover  it  to  us  by  means  of  His  divine  Spirit. 

‘My  father  has  not  spoken  to  me  of  the  suitor,  but  has  only  told  me 
that  he  has  received  a  letter,  and  was  expecting  a  visit  from  Prince 
Vassily.  In  regard  to  a  marriage-scheme  concerning  myself,  I  will  tell 
you,  my  dear  and  excellent  friend,  that  to  my  mind  marriage  is  a  divine 
institution  to  which  we  must  conform.  However  painful  it  may  be  to  me, 
if  the  Almighty  should  ever  impose  upon  me  the  duties  of  a  wife  and 
mother,  I  shall  try  to  fulfil  them  as  faithfully  as  I  can,  without  dis¬ 
quieting  myself  by  examining  my  feelings  in  regard  to  him  whom  He 
may  give  me  for  a  husband. 

‘I  have  received  a  letter  from  my  brother,  who  announces  his  coming 
to  Bleak  Hills  with  his  wife.  It  will  be  a  pleasure  of  brief  duration,  since 
he  is  leaving  us  to  take  part  in  this  unhappy  war  into  which  we  have 
been  drawn,  God  knows  how  and  why.  It  is  not  only  with  you,  in  the 
centre  of  business  and  society,  that  people  talk  of  nothing  except  war, 
for  here  also,  amid  those  rustic  labours  and  that  calm  of  nature,  which 
townspeople  generally  imagine  in  the  country,  rumours  of  war  are  heard 
and  are  felt  painfully.  My  father  talks  of  nothing  but  marches  and 
counter-marches,  things  of  which  I  understand  nothing;  and  the  day 
before  yesterday,  taking  my  usual  walk  in  the  village  street,  I  witnessed 
a  heartrending  scene.  ...  It  was  a  convoy  of  recruits  that  had  been 
enrolled  in  our  district,  and  were  being  sent  away  to  the  army.  You 
should  have  seen  the  state  of  the  mothers,  wives  and  children  of  the 
men  who  were  going,  and  have  heard  the  sobs  on  both  sides.  It  seems 
as  though  humanity  had  forgotten  the  laws  of  its  divine  Saviour,  Who 
preached  love  and  the  forgiveness  of  offences,  and  were  making  the 
greatest  merit  to  consist  in  the  art  of  killing  one  another. 

‘Adieu,  dear  and  good  friend:  may  our  divine  Saviour  and  His  most 
Holy  Mother  keep  you  in  their  holy  and  powerful  care.  Marie.’ 


WAR  AND  PEACE  83 

‘Ah,  you  are  sending  off  your  letters,  princess.  I  have  already  finished 
mine.  I  have  written  to  my  poor  mother,’  said  Mademoiselle  Bourienne 
quickly  in  her  agreeable,  juicy  voice,  with  a  roll  of  the  r’s.  She  came  in, 
all  smiles,  bringing  into  the  intense,  melancholy,  gloomy  atmosphere  of 
the  Princess  Marya  an  alien  world  of  gay  frivolity  and  self-satisfaction. 
‘Princess,  I  must  warn  you,’  she  added,  dropping  her  voice,  ‘the  prince 
has  had  an  altercation,’  she  said,  with  a  peculiar  roll  of  the  r,  seeming  to 
listen  to  herself  with  pleasure.  ‘An  altercation  with  Mihail  Ivanov.  He 
is  in  a  very  ill  humour,  very  morose.  Be  prepared,  you  know.’ 

‘Ah,  chere  amie,’  answered  Princess  Marya,  ‘I  have  begged  you  never 
to  tell  me  beforehand  in  what  humour  I  shall  find  my  father.  I  do  not 
permit  myself  to  judge  him  and  I  would  not  have  others  do  so.’ 

The  princess  glanced  at  her  watch,  and  seeing  that  it  was  already 
five  minutes  later  than  the  hour  fixed  for  her  practice  on  the  clavichord, 
she  went  with  a  face  of  alarm  into  the  divan-room.  In  accordance  with 
the  rules  by  which  the  day  was  mapped  out,  the  prince  rested  from 
twelve  to  two,  while  the  young  princess  practised  on  the  clavichord. 


XXIII 

The  grey-haired  valet  was  sitting  in  the  waiting-room  dozing  and  listen¬ 
ing  to  the  prince’s  snoring  in  his  immense  study.  From  a  far-off  part  of 
the  house  there  came  through  closed  doors  the  sound  of  difficult  passages 
of  a  sonata  of  Dusseck’s  repeated  twenty  times  over. 

At  that  moment  a  carriage  and  a  little  cart  drove  up  to  the  steps, 
and  Prince  Andrey  got  out  of  the  carriage,  helped  his  little  wife  out 
and  let  her  pass  into  the  house  before  him.  Grey  Tihon  in  his  wig,  popping 
out  at  the  door  of  the  waiting-room,  informed  him  in  a  whisper  that  the 
prince  was  taking  a  nap  and  made  haste  to  close  the  door.  Tihon  knew 
that  no  extraordinary  event,  not  even  the  arrival  of  his  son,  would  be 
permitted  to  break  through  the  routine  of  the  day.  Prince  Andrey  was 
apparently  as  well  aware  of  the  fact  as  Tihon.  He  looked  at  his  watch 
as  though  to  ascertain  whether  his  father’s  habits  had  changed  during 
the  time  he  had  not  seen  him,  and  satisfying  himself  that  they  were 
unchanged,  he  turned  to  his  wife. 

‘He  will  get  up  in  twenty  minutes.  Let’s  go  to  Marie,’  he  said. 

The  little  princess  had  grown  stouter  during  this  time,  but  her  short 
upper  lip,  with  a  smile  and  the  faint  moustache  on  it,  rose  as  gaily  and 
charmingly  as  ever  when  she  spoke. 

‘Why,  it  is  a  palace,’  she  said  to  her  husband,  looking  round  her  with 
exactly  the  expression  with  which  people  pay  compliments  to  the  host 
at  a  ball.  ‘Come,  quick,  quick!’  As  she  looked  about  her,  she  smiled  at 
Tihon  and  at  her  husband,  and  at  the  footman  who  was  showing  them  in. 

‘It  is  Marie  practising?  Let  us  go  quietly,  we  must  surprise  her.’ 
Prince  Andrey  followed  her  with  a  courteous  and  depressed  expression. 


84 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

■You’re  looking  older,  Tihon,’  he  said  as  he  passed  to  the  old  man, 
who  was  kissing  his  hand. 

Before  they  had  reached  the  room,  from  which  the  sounds  of  the 
clavichord  were  coming,  the  pretty,  fair-haired  Frenchwoman  emerged 
from  a  side-door.  Mademoiselle  Bourienne  seemed  overwhelmed  with 
delight. 

‘Ah,  what  a  pleasure  for  the  princess!’  she  exclaimed.  ‘At  last!  I  must 
tell  her.’ 

‘No,  no,  please  not’  .  .  .  said  the  little  princess,  kissing  her.  ‘You 
are  Mademoiselle  Bourienne;  I  know  you  already  through  my  sister-in- 
law’s  friendship  for  you.  She  does  not  expect  us!’ 

"They  went  up  to  the  door  of  the  divan-room,  from  which  came  the 
sound  of  the  same  passage  repeated  over  and  over  again.  Prince  Andrey 
stood  still  frowning  as  though  in  expectation  of  something  unpleasant. 

The  little  princess  went  in.  The  passage  broke  off  in  the  middle;  he 
heard  an  exclamation,  the  heavy  tread  of  Princess  Marya,  and  the 
sound  of  kissing.  When  Prince  Andrey  went  in,  the  two  ladies,  who  had 
only  seen  each  other  once  for  a  short  time  at  Prince  Andrey’s  wedding, 
were  clasped  in  each  other’s  arms,  warmly  pressing  their  lips  to  the 
first  place  each  had  chanced  upon.  Mademoiselle  Bourienne  was  standing 
near  them,  her  hands  pressed  to  her  heart;  she  was  smiling  devoutly, 
apparently  equally  ready  to  weep  and  to  laugh.  Prince  Andrey  shrugged 
his  shoulders,  and  scowled  as  lovers  of  music  scowl  when  they  hear  a 
false  note.  The  two  ladies  let  each  other  go;  then  hastened  again,  as 
though  each  afraid  of  being  remiss,  to  hug  each  other,  began  kissing  each 
other’s  hands  and  pulling  them  away,  and  then  fell  to  kissing  each  other 
on  the  face  again.  Then  they  quite  astonished  Prince  Andrey  by  both 
suddenly  bursting  into  tears  and  beginning  the  kissing  over  again. 
Mademoiselle  Bourienne  cried  too.  Prince  Andrey  was  unmistakably  ill 
at  ease.  But  to  the  two  women  it  seemed  such  a  natural  thing  that  they 
should  weep;  it  seemed  never  to  have  occurred  to  them  that  their  meeting 
could  have  taken  place  without  tears. 

‘Ah,  ma  chere!  .  .  .  Ah,  Marie!’  .  .  .  both  the  ladies  began  talking 
at  once,  and  they  laughed.  ‘I  had  a  dream  last  night.  Then  you  did  not 
expect  us?  O  Marie,  you  have  got  thinner.’ 

‘And  you  are  looking  better  .  .  .’ 

‘I  recognized  the  princess  at  once,’  put  in  Mademoiselle  Bourienne. 

‘And  I  had  no  idea!’  .  .  .  cried  Princess  Marya.  ‘Ah,  Andrey,  I  did 
not  see  you.’ 

Prince  Andrey  and  his  sister  kissed  each  other’s  hands,  and  he  told 
her  she  was  just  as  great  a  cry-baby  as  she  always  had  been.  Princess 
Marya  turned  to  her  brother,  and  through  her  tears,  her  great,  luminous 
eyes,  that  were  beautiful  at  that  instant,  rested  with  a  loving,  warm  and 
gentle  gaze  on  Prince  Andrey’s  face.  The  little  princess  talked  inces¬ 
santly.  The  short,  downy  upper  lip  was  continually  flying  down  to  meet 
the  rosy,  lower  lip  when  necessary,  and  parting  again  in  a  smile  of 
gleaming  teeth  and  eyes.  The  little  princess  described  an  incident  that 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


85 

had  occurred  to  them  on  Spasskoe  hill,  and  might  have  been  serious  for 
her  in  her  condition.  And  immediately  after  that  she  communicated  the 
intelligence  that  she  had  left  all  her  clothes  in  Petersburg,  and  God  knew 
what  she  would  have  to  go  about  in  here,  and  that  Andrey  was  quite 
changed,  and  that  Kitty  Odintsov  had  married  an  old  man,  and  that  a 
suitor  had  turned  up  for  Princess  Marya,  ‘who  was  a  suitor  worth 
having,’  but  that  they  would  talk  about  that  later.  Princess  Marya  was 
still  gazing  mutely  at  her  brother,  and  her  beautiful  eyes  were  full  of 
love  and  melancholy.  It  was  clear  that  her  thoughts  were  following  a 
train  of  their  own,  apart  from  the  chatter  of  her  sister-in-law.  In  the 
middle  of  the  latter’s  description  of  the  last  fete-day  at  Petersburg,  she 
addressed  her  brother. 

‘And  is  it  quite  settled  that  you  are  going  to  the  war,  Andrey?’  she 
said,  sighing.  Liza  sighed  too. 

‘Yes,  and  to-morrow  too,’  answered  her  brother. 

‘He  is  deserting  me  here,  and  Heaven  knows  why,  when  he  might  have 
had  promotion  .  .  .’  Princess  Marya  did  not  listen  to  the  end,  but 
following  her  own  train  of  thought,  she  turned  to  her  sister-in-law,  letting 
her  affectionate  eyes  rest  on  her  waist. 

‘Is  it  really  true?’  she  said. 

The  face  of  her  sister-in-law  changed.  She  sighed. 

‘Yes,  it’s  true,’ she  said. ‘Oh!  It’s  very  dreadful  .  .  .’ 

Liza’s  lip  drooped.  She  put  her  face  close  to  her  sister-in-law’s  face, 
and  again  she  unexpectedly  began  to  cry. 

‘She  needs  rest,’  said  Prince  Andrey,  frowning.  ‘Don’t  you,  Liza? 
Take  her  to  your  room,  while  I  go  to  father.  How  is  he — just  the  same?’ 

‘The  same,  just  the  same;  I  don’t  know  what  you  will  think,’  Princess 
Marya  answered  joyfully. 

‘And  the  same  hours,  and  the  walks  about  the  avenues,  and  the  lathe?’ 
asked  Prince  Andrey  with  a  scarcely  perceptible  smile,  showing  that, 
in  spite  of  all  his  love  and  respect  for  his  father,  he  recognised  his 
weaknesses. 

‘The  same  hours  and  the  lathe,  mathematics  too,  and  my  geometry 
lessons,’  Princess  Marya  answered  gaily,  as  though  those  lessons  were 
one  of  the  most  delightful  events  of  her  life. 

When  the  twenty  minutes  had  elapsed,  and  the  time  for  the  old  prince 
to  get  up  had  come,  Tihon  came  to  call  the  young  man  to  his  father.  The 
old  man  made  a  departure  from  his  ordinary  routine  in  honour  of  his 
son’s  arrival.  He  directed  that  he  should  be  admitted  into  his  apart¬ 
ments  during  his  time  for  dressing,  before  dinner.  The  old  prince  used 
to  wear  the  old-fashioned  dress,  the  kaftan  and  powder.  And  when  Prince 
Andrey — not  with  the  disdainful  face  and  manners  with  which  he  walked 
into  drawing-rooms,  but  with  the  eager  face  with  which  he  had  talked  to 
Pierre — went  in  to  his  father’s  room,  the  old  gentleman  was  in  his 
dressing-room  sitting  in  a  roomy  morocco  chair  in  a  peignoir,  with  his 
head  in  the  hands  of  Tihon. 

‘Ah!  the  warrior!  So  you  want  to  fight  Bonaparte?’  said  the  old 


86 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

man,  shaking  his  powdered  head  as  far  as  his  plaited  tail,  which  was 
in  Tihon’s  hands,  would  permit  him. 

‘Mind  you  look  sharp  after  him,  at  any  rate,  or  he’ll  soon  be  putting 
us  on  the  list  of  his  subjects.  How  are  you?’ 

And  he  held  out  his  cheek  to  him. 

The  old  gentleman  was  in  excellent  humour  after  his  nap  before 
dinner.  (He  used  to  say  that  sleep  after  dinner  was  silver,  but  before 
dinner  it  was  golden.)  He  took  delighted,  sidelong  glances  at  his  son 
from  under  his  thick,  overhanging  brows.  Prince  Andrey  went  up  and 
kissed  his  father  on  the  spot  indicated  for  him.  He  made  no  reply  on 
his  father’s  favourite  topic— jesting  banter  at  the  military  men  of  the 
period,  and  particularly  at  Bonaparte. 

‘Yes,  I  have  come  to  you,  father,  bringing  a  wife  with  child,’  said 
Prince  Andrey,  with  eager  and  reverential  eyes  watching  every  move¬ 
ment  of  his  father’s  face.  ‘How  is  your  health?’ 

‘None  but  fools,  my  lad,  and  profligates  are  unwell,  and  you  know  me; 
busy  from  morning  till  night  and  temperate,  so  of  course  I’m  well.’ 

‘Thank  God,’  said  his  son,  smiling. 

‘God’s  not  much  to  do  with  the  matter.  Come,  tell  me/  the  old  man 
went  on,  going  back  to  his  favourite  hobby,  ‘how  have  the  Germans 
trained  you  to  fight  with  Bonaparte  on  their  new  scientific  method- 
strategy  as  they  call  it?’ 

Prince  Andrey  smiled. 

‘Give  me  time  to  recover  myself,  father/  he  said,  with  a  smile  that 
showed  that  his  father’s  failings  did  not  prevent  his  respecting  and  loving 
him.  ‘Why,  I  have  only  just  got  here.’ 

‘Nonsense,  nonsense,’  cried  the  old  man,  shaking  his  tail  to  try 
whether  it  were  tightly  plaited,  and  taking  his  son  by  the  hand.  ‘The 
house  is  ready  for  your  wife.  Marie  will  look  after  her  and  show  her 
everything,  and  talk  nineteen  to  the  dozen  with  her  too.  That’s  their 
feminine  way.  I’m  glad  to  have  her.  Sit  down,  talk  to  me.  Mihelson’s 
army,  I  understand,  Tolstoy’s  too  ...  a  simultaneous  expedition  .  .  . 
but  what’s  the  army  of  the  South  going  to  do?  Prussia,  her  neutrality 
.  .  .  I  know  all  that.  What  of  Austria?’  he  said,  getting  up  from  his 
chair  and  walking  about  the  room,  with  Tihon  running  after  him,  giving 
him  various  articles  of  his  apparel.  ‘What  about  Sweden?  How  will  they 
cross  Pomerania?’ 

Prince  Andrey,  seeing  the  urgency  of  his  father’s  questions,  began 
explaining  the  plan  of  operations  of  the  proposed  campaign,  speaking 
at  first  reluctantly,  but  becoming  more  interested  as  he  went  on,  and 
unconsciously  from  habit  passing  from  Russian  into  French.  He  told 
him  how  an  army  of  ninety  thousand  troops  was  to  threaten  Prussia  so 
as  to  drive  her  out  of  her  neutrality  and  draw  her  into  the  war,  how 
part  of  these  troops  were  to  join  the  Swedish  troops  at  Strahlsund,  how 
two  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  Austrians  were  to  combine  with  a 
hundred  thousand  Russians  in  Italy  and  on  the  Rhine,  and  how  fifty 
thousand  Russians  and  fifty  thousand  English  troops  were  to  meet  at 


WAR  AND  PEACE  87 

Naples,  and  how  the  army,  forming  a  total  of  five  hundred  thousand, 
was  to  attack  the  French  on  different  sides  at  once.  The  old  prince  did 
not  manifest  the  slightest  interest  in  what  he  told  him.  He  went  on 
dressing,  as  he  walked  about,  apparently  not  listening,  and  three  times 
he  unexpectedly  interrupted  him.  Once  he  stopped  him  and  shouted: 
The  white  one!  the  white  one!’ 

This  meant  that  Tihon  had  not  given  him  the  waistcoat  he  wanted. 
Another  time,  he  stood  still,  asked:  ‘And  will  she  be  confined  soon?’  and 
shook  his  head  reproachfully:  ‘That’s  bad!  Go  on,  go  on.’ 

The  third  time  was  when  Prince  Andrey  was  just  finishing  his  de¬ 
scription.  The  old  man  hummed  in  French,  in  his  falsetto  old  voice: 
‘Malbrook  goes  off  to  battle,  God  knows  when  he’ll  come  back.’ 

His  son  only  smiled. 

‘I  don’t  say  that  this  is  a  plan  I  approve  of,’  he  said;  ‘I’m  only  telling 
you  what  it  is.  Napoleon  has  made  a  plan  by  now  as  good  as  this  one.’ 

‘Well,  you  have  told  me  nothing  new.’  And  thoughtfully  the  old  man 
repeated,  speaking  quickly  to  himself:  ‘God  knows  when  he’ll  come 
•back.  Go  into  the  dining-room.’ 


XXIV 

At  the  exact  hour,  the  prince,  powdered  and  shaven,  walked  into  the 
dining-room,  where  there  were  waiting  for  him  his  daughter-in-law, 
Princess  Marya,  Mademoiselle  Bourienne,  and  the  prince’s  architect, 
who,  by  a  strange  whim  of  the  old  gentleman’s,  dined  at  his  table, 
though  being  an  insignificant  person  of  no  social  standing,  he  would 
not  naturally  have  expected  to  be  treated  with  such  honour.  The  prince, 
who  was  in  practice  a  firm  stickler  for  distinctions  of  rank,  and  rarely 
admitted  to  his  table  even  important  provincial  functionaries,  had  sud¬ 
denly  pitched  on  the  architect  Mihail  Ivanovitch,  blowing  his  nose  in  a 
check  pocket-handkerchief  in  the  corner,  to  illustrate  the  theory  that 
all  men  are  equal,  and  had  more  than  once  impressed  upon  his  daughter 
that  Mihail  Ivanovitch  was  every  whit  as  good  as  himself  and  her.  At 
table  the  prince  addressed  his  conversation  to  the  taciturn  architect  more 
often  than  to  any  one. 

In  the  dining-room,  which,  like  all  the  other  rooms  in  the  house,  was 
immensely  lofty,  the  prince’s  entrance  was  awaited  by  all  the  members 
of  his  household  and  the  footmen,  standing  behind  each  chair.  The 
butler  with  a  table-napkin  on  his  arm  scanned  the  setting  of  the  table, 
making  signs  to  the  footmen,  and  continually  he  glanced  uneasily  from 
the  clock  on  the  wall  to  the  door,  by  which  the  prince  was  to  enter. 
Prince  Andrey  stared  at  an  immense  golden  frame  on  the  wall  that  was 
new  to  him.  It  contained  the  genealogical  tree  of  the  Bolkonskys,  and 
hanging  opposite  it  was  a  frame,  equally  immense,  with  a  badly  painted 
r  presentation  (evidently  the  work  of  some  household  artist)  of  a  reign¬ 
ing  prince  in  a  crown,  intended  for  the  descendant  of  Rurik  and  founder 


86 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

man,  shaking  his  powdered  head  as  far  as  his  plaited  tail,  which  was 
in  Tihon’s  hands,  would  permit  him. 

‘Mind  you  look  sharp  after  him,  at  any  rate,  or  he’ll  soon  be  putting 
us  on  the  list  of  his  subjects.  How  are  you?’ 

And  he  held  out  his  cheek  to  him. 

The  old  gentleman  was  in  excellent  humour  after  his  nap  before 
dinner.  (He  used  to  say  that  sleep  after  dinner  was  silver,  but  before 
dinner  it  was  golden.)  He  took  delighted,  sidelong  glances  at  his  son 
from  under  his  thick,  overhanging  brows.  Prince  Andrey  went  up  and 
kissed  his  father  on  the  spot  indicated  for  him.  He  made  no  reply  on 
his  father’s  favourite  topic — jesting  banter  at  the  military  men  of  the 
period,  and  particularly  at  Bonaparte. 

‘Yes,  I  have  come  to  you,  father,  bringing  a  wife  with  child,’  said 
Prince  Andrey,  with  eager  and  reverential  eyes  watching  every  move¬ 
ment  of  his  father’s  face.  ‘How  is  your  health?’ 

‘None  but  fools,  my  lad,  and  profligates  are  unwell,  and  you  know  me; 
busy  from  morning  till  night  and  temperate,  so  of  course  I’m  well.’ 

‘Thank  God,’  said  his  son,  smiling. 

‘God’s  not  much  to  do  with  the  matter.  Come,  tell  me,’  the  old  man 
went  on,  going  back  to  his  favourite  hobby,  ‘how  have  the  Germans 
trained  you  to  fight  with  Bonaparte  on  their  new  scientific  method — 
strategy  as  they  call  it?’ 

Prince  Andrey  smiled. 

‘Give  me  time  to  recover  myself,  father,’  he  said,  with  a  smile  that 
showed  that  his  father’s  failings  did  not  prevent  his  respecting  and  loving 
him.  ‘Why,  I  have  only  just  got  here.’ 

‘Nonsense,  nonsense,’  cried  the  old  man,  shaking  his  tail  to  try 
whether  it  were  tightly  plaited,  and  taking  his  son  by  the  hand.  ‘The 
house  is  ready  for  your  wife.  Marie  will  look  after  her  and  show  her 
everything,  and  talk  nineteen  to  the  dozen  with  her  too.  That’s  their 
feminine  way.  I’m  glad  to  have  her.  Sit  down,  talk  to  me.  Mihelson’s 
army,  I  understand,  Tolstoy’s  too  ...  a  simultaneous  expedition  .  .  . 
but  what’s  the  army  of  the  South  going  to  do?  Prussia,  her  neutrality 
...  I  know  all  that.  What  of  Austria?’  he  said,  getting  up  from  his 
chair  and  walking  about  the  room,  with  Tihon  running  after  him,  giving 
him  various  articles  of  his  apparel.  ‘What  about  Sweden?  Plow  will  they 
cross  Pomerania?’ 

Prince  Andrey,  seeing  the  urgency  of  his  father’s  questions,  began 
explaining  the  plan  of  operations  of  the  proposed  campaign,  speaking 
at  first  reluctantly,  but  becoming  more  interested  as  he  went  on,  and 
unconsciously  from  habit  passing  from  Russian  into  French.  He  told 
him  how  an  army  of  ninety  thousand  troops  was  to  threaten  Prussia  so 
as  to  drive  her  out  of  her  neutrality  and  draw  her  into  the  war,  how 
part  of  these  troops  were  to  join  the  Swedish  troops  at  Strahlsund,  how 
two  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  Austrians  were  to  combine  with  a 
hundred  thousand  Russians  in  Italy  and  on  the  Rhine,  and  how  fifty 
thousand  Russians  and  fifty  thousand  English  troops  were  to  meet  at 


WAR  AND  PEACE  87 

Naples,  and  how  the  army,  forming  a  total  of  five  hundred  thousand, 
was  to  attack  the  French  on  different  sides  at  once.  The  old  prince  did 
not  manifest  the  slightest  interest  in  what  he  told  him.  He  went  on 
dressing,  as  he  walked  about,  apparently  not  listening,  and  three  times 
he  unexpectedly  interrupted  him.  Once  he  stopped  him  and  shouted: 
The  white  one!  the  white  one!’ 

This  meant  that  Tihon  had  not  given  him  the  waistcoat  he  wanted. 
Another  time,  he  stood  still,  asked:  ‘And  will  she  be  confined  soon?’  and 
shook  his  head  reproachfully:  ‘That’s  bad!  Go  on,  go  on.’ 

The  third  time  was  when  Prince  Andrey  was  just  finishing  his  de¬ 
scription.  The  old  man  hummed  in  French,  in  his  falsetto  old  voice: 
‘Malbrook  goes  off  to  battle,  God  knows  when  he’ll  come  back.’ 

His  son  only  smiled. 

‘I  don’t  say  that  this  is  a  plan  I  approve  of,’  he  said;  ‘I’m  only  telling 
you  what  it  is.  Napoleon  has  made  a  plan  by  now  as  good  as  this  one.’ 

‘Well,  you  have  told  me  nothing  new.’  And  thoughtfully  the  old  man 
repeated,  speaking  quickly  to  himself:  ‘God  knows  when  he’ll  come 
•back.  Go  into  the  dining-room.’ 


XXIV 

At  the  exact  hour,  the  prince,  powdered  and  shaven,  walked  into  the 
dining-room,  where  there  were  waiting  for  him  his  daughter-in-law, 
Princess  Marya,  Mademoiselle  Bourienne,  and  the  prince’s  architect, 
who,  by  a  strange  whim  of  the  old  gentleman’s,  dined  at  his  table, 
though  being  an  insignificant  person  of  no  social  standing,  he  would 
not  naturally  have  expected  to  be  treated  with  such  honour.  The  prince, 
who  was  in  practice  a  firm  stickler  for  distinctions  of  rank,  and  rarely 
admitted  to  his  table  even  important  provincial  functionaries,  had  sud¬ 
denly  pitched  on  the  architect  Mihail  Ivanovitch,  blowing  his  nose  in  a 
check  pocket-handkerchief  in  the  corner,  to  illustrate  the  theory  that 
all  men  are  equal,  and  had  more  than  once  impressed  upon  his  daughter 
that  Mihail  Ivanovitch  was  every  whit  as  good  as  himself  and  her.  At 
table  the  prince  addressed  his  conversation  to  the  taciturn  architect  more 
often  than  to  any  one. 

In  the  dining-room,  which,  like  all  the  other  rooms  in  the  house,  was 
immensely  lofty,  the  prince’s  entrance  was  awaited  by  all  the  members 
of  his  household  and  the  footmen,  standing  behind  each  chair.  The 
butler  with  a  table-napkin  on  his  arm  scanned  the  setting  of  the  table, 
making  signs  to  the  footmen,  and  continually  he  glanced  uneasily  from 
the  clock  on  the  wall  to  the  door,  by  which  the  prince  was  to  enter. 
Prince  Andrey  stared  at  an  immense  golden  frame  on  the  wall  that  was 
new  to  him.  It  contained  the  genealogical  tree  of  the  Bolkonskys,  and 
hanging  opposite  it  was  a  frame,  equally  immense,  with  a  badly  painted 
r  yresentation  (evidently  the  work  of  some  household -artist)  of  a  reign¬ 
ing  prince  in  a  crown,  intended  for  the  descendant  of  Rurik  and  founder 


90 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Bonaparte  was  born  with  a  silver  spoon  in  his  mouth.  He  has  splendid 
soldiers.  And  he  attacked  the  Germans  first  too.  And  any  fool  can  beat 
the  Germans.  From  the  very  beginning  of  the  world  every  one  has  beaten 
the  Germans.  And  they’ve  never  beaten  any  one.  They  only  conquer  each 
other.  He  made  his  reputation  fighting  against  them.’ 

And  the  prince  began  analysing  all  the  blunders  that  in  his  opinion 
Bonaparte  had  committed  in  his  wars  and  even  in  politics.  His  son  did 
not  protest,  but  it  was  evident  that  whatever  arguments  were  advanced 
against  him,  he  was  as  little  disposed  to  give  up  his  opinion  as  the  old 
prince  himself.  Prince  Audrey  listened  and  refrained  from  replying.  He 
could  not  help  wondering  how  this  old  man,  living  so  many  years  alone 
and  never  leaving  the  country,  could  know  all  the  military  and  political 
events  in  Europe  of  the  last  few  years  in  such  detail  and  with  such 
accuracy,  and  form  his  own  judgment  on  them. 

‘You  think  I’m  an  old  man  and  don’t  understand  the  actual  position 
of  affairs?’  he  wound  up.  ‘But  I’ll  tell  you  I’m  taken  up  with  it!  I  don’t 
sleep  at  nights.  Come,  where  has  this  great  general  of  yours  proved 
himself  to  be  such?’ 

‘That  would  be  a  long  story,’  answered  his  son. 

‘You  go  along  to  your  Bonaparte.  Mademoiselle  Bourienne,  here  is 
another  admirer  of  your  blackguard  of  an  emperor!  ’  he  cried  in  excellent 
French. 

‘You  know  that  I  am  not  a  Bonapartist,  prince.’ 

‘God  knows  when  he’ll  come  back  .  .  .’  the  prince  hummed  in  falsetto, 
laughed  still  more  falsetto,  and  got  up  from  the  table. 

The  little  princess  had  sat  silent  during  the  whole  discussion  and  the 
rest  of  the  dinner,  looking  in  alarm  first  at  Princess  Marya  and  then  at 
ier  father-in-law.  When  they  left  the  dinner-table,  she  took  her  sister-in- 
aw’s  arm  and  drew  her  into  another  room. 

‘What  a  clever  man  your  father  is,’  she  said;  ‘perhaps  that  is  why 
I  am  afraid  of  him.’ 

Oh,  he  is  so  kind!’  said  Princess  Marya. 


XXV 

Prince  Andrey  was  leaving  the  following  evening.  The  old  prince,  not 
departing  from  his  regular  routine,  went  away  to  his  own  room  after 
dinner.  The  little  princess  was  with  her  sister-in-law.  Prince  Andrey, 
having  changed  his  dress  and  put  on  a  traveling-coat  without  epaulettes, 
had  been  packing  with  his  valet  in  the  rooms  set  apart  for  him.  After 
himself  inspecting  the  coach  and  the  packing  of  his  trunks  on  it,  he 
gave  orders  for  the  horses  to  be  put  to.  Nothing  was  left  in  the  room 
but  the  things  that  Prince  Andrey  always  carried  with  him:  a  travelling- 
case,  a  big  silver  wine-case,  two  Turkish  pistols  and  a  sabre,  a  present 
from  his  father,  brought  back  from  his  campaign  under  Otchakov.  All 
Prince  Andrey’s  belongings  for  the  journey  were  in  good  order;  every- 


WAR  AND  PEACE  9x 

thing  was  new  and  clean,  in  cloth  covers,  carefully  fastened  with  tape. 

At  moments  of  starting  off  and  beginning  a  different  life,  persons  given 
to  deliberating  on  their  actions  are  usually  apt  to  be  in  a  serious  frame 
of  mind.  At  such  moments  one  reviews  the  past  and  forms  plans  for  the 
future.  The  face  of  Prince  Andrey  was  very  dreamy  and  tender.  Clasping 
his  hands  behind  him,  he  walked  rapidly  up  and  down  the  room  from 
corner  to  corner,  looking  straight  before  him  and  dreamily  shaking  his 
head.  Whether  he  felt  dread  at  going  to  the  war,  or  grief  at  forsaking  his 
wife — or  possibly  something  of  both — he  evidently  did  not  care  to  be 
seen  in  that  mood,  for,  catching  the  sound  of  footsteps  in  the  outer 
room,  he  hastily  unclasped  his  hands,  stood  at  the  table,  as  though  en¬ 
gaged  in  fastening  the  cover  of  the  case,  and  assumed  his  habitual  calm 
and  impenetrable  expression.  It  was  the  heavy  step  of  Princess  Marya. 

‘They  told  me  you  had  ordered  the  horses  to  be  put  in,’  she  said, 
panting  (she  had  evidently  been  running),  ‘and  I  did  so  want  to  have 
a  little  more  talk  with  you  alone.  God  knows  how  long  we  shall  be  parted 
again.  You’re  not  angry  with  me  for  coming?  You’re  very  much  changed, 
Andryusha,’  she  added,  as  though  to  explain  the  question. 

She  smiled  as  she  uttered  the  word  ‘Andryusha.’  It  was  obviously 
strange  to  her  to  think  that  this  stern,  handsome  man  was  the  same  as 
the  thin,  mischievous  boy,  the  Andryusha  who  had  been  the  companion 
c?f  her  childhood. 

‘And  where’s  Liza?’  he  asked,  only  answering  her  question  by  a  smile. 

‘She  was  so  tired  that  she  fell  asleep  on  the  sofa  in  my  room.  O  Andrey, 
what  a  treasure  of  a  wife  you  have,’  she  said,  sitting  down  on  the  sofa, 
facing  her  brother.  ‘She  is  a  perfect  child;  such  a  sweet,  merry  child.  I 
like  her  so  much.’  Prince  Andrey  did  not  speak,  but  the  princess  noticed 
the  ironical  and  contemptuous  expression  that  came  into  his  face. 

‘But  one  must  be  indulgent  to  little  weaknesses.  Who  is  free  from 
them,  Andrey?  You  mustn’t  forget  that  she  has  grown  up  and  been 
educated  in  society.  And  then  her  position  is  not  a  very  cheerful  one. 
One  must  put  oneself  in  every  one’s  position.  To  understand  everything 
is  to  forgive  everything.  Only  think  what  it  must  be  for  her,  poor  girl, 
after  the  life  she  has  been  used  to,  to  part  from  her  husband  and  be  left 
alone  in  the  country,  and  in  her  condition  too.  It’s  very  hard.’ 

Prince  Andrey  smiled,  looking  at  his  sister  as  we  smile  listening  to 
people  whom  we  fancy  we  see  through. 

‘You  live  in  the  country  and  think  the  life  so  awful?’  he  said. 

‘I — that’s  a  different  matter.  W’hy  bring  me  in?  I  don’t  wish  for  any 
other  life,  and  indeed  I  can’t  wish  for  anything  different,  for  I  know  no 
other  sort  of  life.  But  only  think,  Andrey,  what  it  is  for  a  young  woman 
used  to  fashionable  society  to  be  buried  for  the  best  years  of  her  life 
in  the  country,  alone,  because  papa  is  always  busy;  and  I  .  .  .  you 
snow  me  ...  I  am  not  a  cheerful  companion  for  women  used  to  the 
oest  society.  Mademoiselle  Bourienne  is  the  only  person  .  .  .’ 

‘I  don’t  like  her  at  all,  your  Bourienne,’  said  Prince  Andrey. 

‘Oh,  no!  she’s  a  very  good  and  sweet  girl,  and  what’s  more,  she’s  very 


92 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


much  to  be  pitied.  She  has  nobody,  nobody.  To  tell  the  truth,  she  is  of 
no  use  to  me,  but  only  in  my  way.  I  have  always,  you  know,  been  a 
solitary  creature,  and  now  I’m  getting  more  and  more  so.  I  like  to  be 
alone  .  .  .  Mon  pcre  likes  her  very  much.  She  and  Mihail  Ivanovitch 
are  the  two  people  he  is  always  friendly  and  good-tempered  with,  because 
he  has  been  a  benefactor  to  both  of  them;  as  Sterne  says:  “We  don’t  love 
people  so  much  for  the  good  they  have  done  us  as  for  the  good  we  have 
done  them.”  Mon  pere  picked  her  up  an  orphan  in  the  streets,  and  she’s 
very  good-natured.  And  mon  pere  likes  her  way  of  reading.  She  reads 
aloud  to  him  in  the  evenings.  She  reads  very  well.’ 

‘Come,  tell  me  the  truth,  Marie,  you  suffer  a  good  deal,  I  expect, 
sometimes  from  our  father’s  character?’  Prince  Andrey  asked  suddenly. 
Princess  Marya  was"  at  first  amazed,  then  aghast  at  the  question. 

‘Me?  .  .  .  me?  ...  me  suffer!’  she  said. 

‘He  was  always  harsh,  but  he’s  growing  very  tedious,  I  should  think,’ 
said  Prince  Andrey,  speaking  so  slightingly  of  his  father  with  an  un¬ 
mistakable  intention  either  of  puzzling  or  of  testing  his  sister. 

‘You  are  good  in  every  way,  Andrey,  but  you  have  a  sort  of  pride  of 
intellect,’  said  the  princess,  evidently  following  her  own  train  of  thought 
rather  than  the  thread  of  the  conversation,  ‘and  that’s  a  great  sin.  Do 
you  think  it  right  to  judge  our  father?  But  if  it  were  right,  what  feeling 
but  veneration  could  be  aroused  by  such  a  man  as  mon  pere?  And  I  am 
so  contented  and  happy  with  him.  I  could  only  wish  you  were  all  as 
happy  as  I  am.’ 

Her  brother  shook  his  head  incredulously. 

‘The  only  thing  that  troubles  me, — I’ll  tell  you  the  truth,  Andrey, — 
is  our  father’s  way  of  thinking  in  religious  matters.  I  can’t  understand,  b 
how  a  man  of  such  immense  intellect  can  fail  to  see  what  is  as  clear  aSi 
day,  and  can  fall  into  such  error.  That  is  the  one  thing  that  makes  me 


unhappy.  But  even  in  this  I  see  a  slight  change  for  the  better  of  late 


IV 


Lately  his  jeers  have  not  been  so  bitter,  and  there  is  a  monk  whom  he 
received  and  talked  to  a  long  time.’ 

‘Well,  my  dear,  I’m  afraid  you  and  your  monk  are  wasting  your  powder 
and  shot,’  Prince  Andrey  said  ironically  but  affectionately. 

‘Ah,  mon  ami  I  I  can  only  pray  to  God  and  trust  that  He  'will  hear 
me.  Andrey,’  she  said  timidly  after  a  minute’s  silence,  ‘I  have  a  greal 
favour  to  ask  of  you.’ 

‘What  is  it,  dear?’ 

‘No;  promise  me  you  won’t  refuse.  It  will  be  no  trouble  to  you,  ancift 
there  is  nothing  beneath  you  in  it.  Only  it  will  be  a  comfort  to  me; 


Promise,  Andryusha,’  she  said,  putting  her  hand  into  her  reticule  anc 


holding  something  in  it,  but  not  showing  it  yet,  as  though  what  she 
was  holding  was  the  object  of  her  entreaty,  and  before  she  received 
promise  to  grant  it,  she  could  not  take  that  something  out  of  her  reticule  ^ 
She  looked  timidly  with  imploring  eyes  at  her  brother. 

‘Even  if  it  were  a  great  trouble  .  .  .’  answered  Prince  Andrey,  seemj 
g  to  guess  what  the  favour  was. 


in 


.'in 


let 


WARANDPEACE  93 

'You  may  think  what  you  please  about  it.  I  know  you  are  like  vion 
pere.  Think  what  you  please,  but  do  this  for  my  sake.  Do,  please.  The 
father  of  my  father,  our  grandfather,  always  wore  it  in  all  his  wars  .  .  .’ 
She  still  did  not  take  out  what  she  was  holding  in  her  reticule.  'You 
promise  me,  then?’ 

‘Of  course,  what  is  it?’ 

‘Andrey,  I  am  blessing  you  with  the  holy  image,  and  you  must  promise 
me  you  will  never  take  it  off.  ...  You  promise?’ 

‘If  it  does  not  weigh  a  ton  and  won’t  drag  my  neck  off  .  .  .  To  please 
you,’  said  Prince  Andrey.  The  same  second  he  noticed  the  pained  ex¬ 
pression  that  came  over  his  sister’s  face  at  this  jest,  and  felt  remorseful. 
‘I  am  very  glad,  really  very  glad,  dear,’  he  added. 

‘Against  your  own  will  He  will  save  and  will  have  mercy  on  you  and 
turn  you  to  Plimself,  because  in  Him  alone  is  truth  and  peace,’  she  said 
in  a  voice  shaking  with  emotion,  and  with  a  solemn  gesture  holding  in 
both  hands  before  her  brother  an  old-fashioned,  little,  oval  holy  image 
of  the  Saviour  with  a  black  face  in  a  silver  setting,  on  a  little  silver  chain 
of  delicate  workmanship.  She  crossed  herself,  kissed  the  image,  and  gave 
:t  to  Andrey. 

‘Please,  Andrey,  for  my  sake.’ 

Rays  of  kindly,  timid  light  beamed  from  her  great  eyes.  Those  eyes 
lighted  up  all  the  thin,  sickly  face  and  made  it  beautiful.  Her  brother 
would  have  taken  the  image,  but  she  stopped  him.  Andrey  understood, 
crossed  himself,  and  kissed  the  image.  His  face  looked  at  once  tender 
(he  was  touched)  and  ironical. 

‘ Merer,  vion  ami!  She  kissed  him  on  the  forehead  and  sat  down  again 
an  the  sofa.  Both  were  silent. 

‘So  as  I  was  telling  you,  Andrey,  you  must  be  kind  and  generous  as 
you  always  used  to  be.  Don’t  judge  Liza  harshly,’  she  began;  ‘she  is  so 
iweet,  so  good-natured,  and  her  position  is  a  very  hard  one  just  now.’ 

‘I  fancy  I  have  said  nothing  to  you,  Masha,  of  my  blaming  my  wife 
‘or  anything  or  being  dissatisfied  with  her.  What  makes  you  say  all  this 
:o  me?’ 

Princess  Marya  coloured  in  patches,  and  was  mute,  as  though  she  felt 
guilty. 

‘I  have  said  nothing  to  you,  but  you  have  been  talked  to.  And  that 
nakes  me  sad.’ 

The  red  patches  grew  deeper  on  the  forehead  and  neck  and  cheeks 
if  Princess  Marya.  She  would  have  said  something,  but  could  not  utter 
he  words.  Her  brother  had  guessed  right:  his  wife  had  shed  tears  after 
[inner,  had  said  that  she  had  a  presentiment  of  a  bad  confinement,  that 
■he  was  afraid  of  it,  and  had  complained  of  her  hard  lot,  of  her  father- 
;n-law  and  her  husband.  After  crying  she  had  fallen  asleep.  Prince 
fndrey  felt  sorry  for  his  sister. 

‘Let  me  tell  you  one  thing,  Masha,  I  can’t  reproach  my  wife  for  any- 
hing,  I  never  have  and  I  never  shall,  nor  can  I  reproach  myself  for 
nything  in  regard  to  her,  and  that  shall  always  be  so  in  whatever  cir- 


34  WARANDPEACE 

cumstances  I  may  be  placed.  But  if  you  want  to  know  the  truth  ...  if 
you  want  to  know  if  I  am  happy.  No.  Is  she  happy?  No.  Why  is  it  so? 

I  don:t  know.’ 

As  he  said  this,  he  went  up  to  his  sister,  and  stooping  over  her  kissed 
her  on  the  forehead.  His  fine  eyes  shone  with  an  unaccustomed  light  of 
intelligence  and  goodness.  But  he  was  not  looking  at  his  sister,  but 
towards  the  darkness  of  the  open  door,  over  her  head. 

‘Let  us  go  to  her;  I  must  say  good-bye.  Or  you  go  alone  and  wake  her 
up,  and  I’ll  come  in  a  moment.  Petrushka!  ’  he  called  to  his  valet,  ‘come 
here  and  take  away  these  things.  This  is  to  go  in  the  seat  and  this  on 
the  right  side.’ 

Princess  Marya  got  up  and  moved  toward  the  door.  She  stopped. 
‘Andrey,  if  you  had  faith,  you  would  have  appealed  to  God,  to  give  you 
the  love  that  you  do  not  feel,  and  your  prayer  would  have  been  granted.’ 

‘Yes,  perhaps  so,’  said  Prince  Andrey.  ‘Go,  Masha,  I’ll  come  immedi¬ 
ately.’ 

On  the  way  to  his  sister’s  room,  in  the  gallery  that  united  one  house 
to  the  other,  Prince  Andrey  encountered  Mademoiselle  Bourienne  smil¬ 
ing  sweetly.  It  was  the  third  time  that  day  that  with  an  innocent  and 
enthusiastic  smile  she  had  thrown  herself  in  his  way  in  secluded  passages, 

‘Ah,  I  thought  you  were  in  your  own  room,’  she  said,  for  some  reason 
blushing  and  casting  down  her  eyes.  Prince  Andrey  looked  sternly  at  her. 
A  sudden  look  of  wrathful  exasperation  came  into  his  face.  He  said 
nothing  to  her,  but  stared  at  her  forehead  and  her  hair,  without  looking 
at  her  eyes,  with  such  contempt  that  the  Frenchwoman  crimsoned  and 
went  away  without  a  word.  When  he  reached  his  sister’s  room,  the  little 
princess  was  awake  and  her  gay  little  voice  could  be  heard  through  the 
open  door,  hurrying  one  word  after  another.  She  talked  as  though,  after 
being  long  restrained,  she  wanted  to  make  up  for  lost  time,  and,  as 
always,  she  spoke  French. 

‘No,  but  imagine  the  old  Countess  Zubov,  with  false  curls  and  her 
mouth  full  of  false  teeth  as  though  she  wanted  to  defy  the  years.  Ha, 
ha,  ha,  Marie  1’ 

Just  the  same  phrase  about  Countess  Zubov  and  just  the  same  laugh 
Prince  Andrey  had  heard  five  times  already  from  his  v/ife  before  out¬ 
siders.  He  walked  softly  into  the  room.  The  little  princess,  plump  and 
rosy,  was  sitting  in  a  low  chair  with  her  work  in  her  hands,  trotting  out 
her  Petersburg  reminiscences  and  phrases.  Prince  Andrey  went  up, 
stroked  her  on  the  head,  and  asked  if  she  had  got  over  the  fatigue  of 
the  journey.  She  answered  him  and  went  on  talking. 

The  coach  with  six  horses  stood  at  the  steps.  It  was  a  dark  autumn 
night.  The  coachman  could  not  see  the  shafts  of  the  carriage.  Servants 
with  lanterns  were  running  to  and  fro  on  the  steps.  The  immense  house 
glared  with  its  great  windows  lighted  up.  The  house-serfs  were  crowding 
in  the  outer  hall,  anxious  to  say  good-bye  to  their  young  prince.  In  the 
great  hall  within  stood  all  the  members  of  the  household:  Mihail  Ivano- 
vitch,  Mademoiselle  Bourienne,  Princess  Marya,  and  the  little  princess  , 


WAR  AND  PEACE  95 

Prince  Andrey  had  been  summoned  to  the  study  of  his  father,  who 
wanted  to  take  leave  of  him  alone.  All  were  waiting  for  him  to  come  out 
again.  When  Prince  Andrey  went  into  the  study,  the  old  prince  was  in 
his  old-age  spectacles  and  his  white  dressing-gown,  in  which  he  never 
saw  any  one  but  his  son.  He  was  sitting  at  the  table  writing.  He  looked 
round. 

'Going?’  And  he  went  on  writing  again. 

‘I  have  come  to  say  good-bye.’ 

‘Kiss  me  here,’  he  touched  his  cheek;  ‘thanks,  thanks!’ 

‘What  are  you  thanking  me  for?’ 

‘For  not  lingering  beyond  your  fixed  time,  for  not  hanging  about  a 
woman’s  petticoats.  Duty  before  everything.  Thanks,  thanks!’  And  he 
went  on  writing,  so  that  ink  spurted  from  the  scratching  pen. 

‘If  you  want  to  say  anything,  say  it.  I  can  do  these  two  things  at 
once,’  he  added. 

‘About  my  wife  .  .  .  I’m  ashamed  as  it  is  to  leave  her  on  your 
hands.  .  .  .’ 

‘Why  talk  nonsense?  Say  what  you  want.’ 

‘When  my  wife’s  confinement  is  due,  send  to  Moscow  for  an  accoucheur 
.  .  .  Let  him  be  here.’ 

The  old  man  stopped  and  stared  with  stern  eyes  at  his  son,  as  though 
not  understanding. 

‘I  know  that  no  one  can  be  of  use,  if  nature  does  not  assist,’  said 
Prince  Andrey,  evidently  confused.  ‘I  admit  that  out  of  a  million  cases 
only  one  goes  wrong,  but  it’s  her  fancy  and  mine.  They’ve  been  telling 
her  things;  she’s  had  a  dream  and  she’s  frightened.’ 

‘H’m  .  .  .  h’m  .  .  .’  the  old  prince  muttered  to  himself,  going  on 
with  his  writing.  ‘I  will  do  so.’  He  scribbled  his  signature,  and  suddenly 
turned  quickly  to  his  son  and  laughed. 

‘It’s  a  bad  business,  eh?’ 

‘What’s  a  bad  business,  father?’ 

‘Wife!’  the  old  prince  said  briefly  and  significantly. 

‘I  don’t  understand,’  said  Prince  Andrey. 

‘But  there’s  no  help  for  it,  my  dear  boy,’  said  the  old  prince;  ‘they’re 
all  like  that,  and  there’s  no  getting  unmarried  again.  Don’t  be  afraid, 
I  won’t  say  a  word  to  any  one,  but  you  know  it  yourself.’ 

He  grasped  his  hand  with  his  thin,  little,  bony  fingers,  shook  it, 
looked  straight  into  his  son’s  face  with  his  keen  eyes,  that  seemed  to  see 
right  through  any  one,  and  again  he  laughed  his  frigid  laugh. 

The  son  sighed,  acknowledging  in  that  sigh  that  his  father  understood 
him.  The  old  man,  still  busy  folding  and  sealing  the  letters  with  his 
habitual  rapidity,  snatched  up  and  flung  down  again  the  wax,  the  seal, 
and  the  paper. 

‘It  can’t  be  helped.  She’s  pretty.  I’ll  do  everything.  Set  your  mind  at 
rest,’  he  said  jerkily,  as  he  sealed  the  letter. 

Andrey  did  not  speak;  it  was  both  pleasant  and  painful  to  him  that  his 
father  understood  him.  The  old  man  got  up  and  gave  his  son  the  letter. 


96 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Listen,’  said  he.  ‘Don’t  worry  about  your  wife;  what  can  be  done 
shall  be  done.  Now,  listen;  give  this  letter  to  Mihail  Ilarionovitch.  I 
write  that  he  is  to  make  use  of  you  on  good  work,  and  not  to  keep  you 
long  an  adjutant;  a  vile  duty!  Tell  him  I  remember  him  and  like  him. 
And  write  to  me  how  he  receives  you.  If  he’s  all  right,  serve  him.  The 
son  of  Nikolay  Andreitch  Bolkonsky  has  no  need  to  serve  under  any  man 
as  a  favour.  Now,  come  here.’ 

He  spoke  so  rapidly  that  he  did  not  finish  half  of  his  words,  but  his 
son  was  used  to  understanding  him.  He  led  his  son  to  the  bureau,  opened 
it,  drew  out  a  drawer,  and  took  out  of  it  a  manuscript  book  filled  with  his 
bold,  big,  compressed  handwriting. 

‘I  am  sure  to  die  before  you.  See,  here  are  my  notes,  to  be  given  to 
the  Emperor  after  my  death.  Now  here,  see,  is  a  bank  note  and  a  letter: 
this  is  a  prize  for  any  one  who  writes  a  history  of  Suvorov’s  wars.  Send  it 
to  the  academy.  Here  are  my  remarks,  read  them  after  I  am  gone  for 
your  own  sake;  you  will  find  them  profitable.’ 

Andrey  did  not  tell  his  father  that  he  probably  had  many  years  before 
him.  He  knew  there  was  no  need  to  say  that. 

‘I  will  do  all  that,  father,’  he  said. 

‘Well,  now,  good-bye!  ’  He  gave  his  son  his  hand  to  kiss  and  embraced  | 
him.  ‘Remember  one  thing,  Prince  Andrey,  if  you  are  killed,  it  will  be  a 
grief  to  me  in  my  old  age  .  .  .’  He  paused  abruptly,  and  all  at  once  in 
a  shrill  voice  went  on:  ‘But  if  I  learn  that  you  have  not  behaved  like 
the  son  of  Nikolay  Bolkonsky,  I  shall  be  .  .  .  ashamed,’  he  shrilled. 

‘You  needn’t  have  said  that  to  me,  father,’  said  his  son,  smiling. 

The  old  man  did  not  speak. 

‘There’s  another  thing  I  wanted  to  ask  you,’  went  on  Prince  Andrey;  j 
‘if  I’m  killed,  and  if  I  have  a  son,  don’t  let  him  slip  out  of  your  hands,  as  ! 
I  said  to  you  yesterday;  let  him  grow  up  with  you  .  .  .  please.’ 

‘Not  give  him  up  to  your  wife?’  said  the  old  man,  and  he  laughed. 

They  stood  mutually  facing  each  other.  The  old  man’s  sharp  eyes 
were  fixed  on  his  son’s  eyes.  A  quiver  passed  over  the  lower  part  of  the 
old  prince’s  face. 

‘We  have  said  good-bye  ...  go  along!  ’  he  said  suddenly.  ‘Go  along!  ’ 
he  cried  in  a  loud  and  wrathful  voice,  opening  the  study  door. 

‘What  is  it,  what’s  the  matter?’  asked  the  two  princesses  on  seeing 
Prince  Andrey,  and  catching  a  momentary  glimpse  of  the  figure  of  the 
old  man  in  his  white  dressing-gown,  wearing  his  spectacles  and  no  wig, 
and  shouting  in  a  wrathful  voice. 

Prince  Andrey  sighed  and  made  no  reply. 

‘Now,  then,’  he  said,  turning  to  his  wife,  and  that  ‘now  then'  sounded 
like  a  cold  sneer,  as  though  he  had  said,  ‘Now,  go  through  your  little 
performance.’ 

‘Andrey?  Already!’  said  the  little  princess,  turning  pale  and  looking  j 
with  dismay  at  her  husband.  He  embraced  her.  She  shrieked  and  fell 
swooning  on  his  shoulder. 


WAR  AND  PEACE  97 

He  cautiously  withdrew  the  shoulder,  on  which  she  was  lying,  glanced 
into  her  face  and  carefully  laid  her  in  a  low  chair. 

‘Good-bye,  Masha,’  he  said  gently  to  his  sister,  and  they  kissed  one 
another’s  hands,  then  with  rapid  steps  he  walked  out  of  the  room. 

The  little  princess  lay  in  the  arm-chair;  Mademoiselle  Bourienne 
rubbed  her  temples.  Princess  Marya,  supporting  her  sister-in-law,  still 
gazed  with  her  fine  eyes  full  of  tears  at  the  door  by  which  Prince  Andrey 
had  gone,  and  she  made  the  sign  of  the  cross  at  it.  From  the  study  she 
heard  like  pistol  shots  the  repeated  and  angry  sounds  of  the  old  man 
blowing  his  nose.  Just  after  Prince  Andrey  had  gone,  the  door  of  the 
study  was  flung  open,  and  the  stern  figure  of  the  old  man  in  his  white 
dressing-gown  peeped  out. 

‘Gone?  Well,  and  a  good  thing  too!’  he  said,  looking  furiously  at  the 
fainting  princess.  He  shook  his  head  reproachfully  and  slammed  the  door. 


PART  II 


■  I 

In  the  October  of  1805  the  Russian  troops  were  occupying  the  towns 
and  villages  of  the  Austrian  archduchy,  and  fresh  regiments  kept  arriv¬ 
ing  from  Russia  and  encamping  about  the  fortress  of  Braunau,  burden¬ 
ing  the  inhabitants  on  whom  they  were  billeted.  Braunau  was  the  chief 
headquarters  of  the  commander-in-chief,  Kutuzov. 

On  the  nth  of  October  1805,  one  of  the  infantry  regiments  that  had 
just  reached  Braunau  had  halted  half  a  mile  from  the  town,  awaiting  the 
inspection  of  the  commander-in-chief.  In  spite  of  the  un-Russian  char¬ 
acter  of  the  country  and  the  environment  (the  fruit  gardens,  the  stone 
walls,  the  tiled  roofs,  the  mountains  in  the  distance,  the  foreign  peasants, 
who  looked  with  curiosity  at  the  Russian  soldiers),  the  regiment  looked 
exactly  as  every  Russian  regiment  always  looks  when  it  is  getting  ready 
for  inspection  anywhere  in  the  heart  of  Russia.  In  the  evening,  on  the 
last  stage  of  the  march,  the  order  had  been  received  that  the  commander- 
in-chief  would  inspect  the  regiment  on  the  march.  Though  the  wording 
of  the  order  did  not  seem  quite  clear  to  the  general  in  command  of  the 
regiment,  and  the  question  arose  whether  they  were  to  take  it  to  mean, 
in  marching  order  or  not,  it  was  decided  on  a  consultation  between  the 
majors  to  present  the  regiment  in  parade  order  on  the  ground,  since,  as 
the  saying  is,  it  is  better  to  bow  too  low  than  not  to  bow  low  enough. 
And  the  soldiers  after  a  twenty-five  mile  march  had  not  closed  their 
eyes,  but  had  spent  the  night  mending  and  cleaning,  while  the  adjutants 
and  officers  had  been  reckoning  up  and  calculating.  And  by  the  morning 
the  regiment,  instead  of  the  straggling,  disorderly  crowd  it  had  been  on 
the  last  march,  the  previous  evening,  presented  the  spectacle  of  an  or¬ 
ganised  mass  of  two  thousand  men,  of  whom  every  one  knew  his  part 
and  his  duty,  and  had  every  button  and  every  strap  in  its  proper  posi¬ 
tion,  and  shining  with  cleanliness.  It  was  not  only  the  outside  that  was  in 
goo'd  order;  if  the  commander-in-chief  should  think  fit  to  peep  below  the 
uniform,  he  would  see  on  every  man  alike  a  clean  shirt,  and  in  every  knap¬ 
sack  he  would  find  the  regulation  number  of  articles.  There  was  only  one 
circumstance  which  no  one  could  feel  comfortable  about.  That  was  their 
foot-gear.  More  than  half  the  soldiers  had  holes  in  their  boots.  But  this 
deficiency  was  not  due  to  any  shortcoming  on  the  part  of  their  com¬ 
manding  officer,  since  in  spite  of  his  repeated  demands  the  boots  had  not 
yet  been  granted  him  by  the  Austrian  authorities,  and  the  regiment  had 
marched  nearly  a  thousand  miles. 

The  commander  of  the  regiment  was  a  sanguine-looking  general  past 

98 


WARANDPEACE  99 

middle  age,  with  grey  whiskers  and  eyebrows,  oroad  and  thick-set,  and 
thicker  through  from  the  chest  to  the  back  than  across  the  shoulders.  He 
wore  a  brand-new  uniform  with  the  creases  still  in  it  where  it  had  been 
folded,  and  rich  gold  epaulettes,  which  seemed  to  stand  up  instead  of 
lying  down  on  his  thick  shoulders.  The  general  had  the  air  of  a  man 
who  has  successfully  performed  one  of  the  most  solemn  duties  of  his  life. 
He  walked  about  in  front  of  the  line,  and  quivered  as  he  walked, 
with  a  slight  jerk  of  his  back  at  each  step.  The  general  was  unmistakably 
admiring  his  regiment,  and  happy  in  it,  and  it  was  evident  that  his  whole 
brain  was  engrossed  by  the  regiment.  But  for  all  that,  his  quivering  strut 
seemed  to  say  that,  apart  from  his  military  interests,  he  had  plenty  of 
warmth  in  his  heart  for  the  attractions  of  social  life  and  the  fair  sex. 

‘Well,  Mihail  Mitritch,  sir,’  he  said,  addressing  a  major  (the  major 
came  forward  smiling;  they  were  evidently  in  excellent  spirits). 

‘We  have  had  our  hands  full  all  night  .  .  .  But  it’ll  do,  I  fancy;  the 
regiment’s  not  so  bad  as  some  .  .  .  eh?’ 

The  major  understood  this  good-humoured  irony  and  laughed. 

‘Even  on  the  Tsaritsyn  review  ground  they  wouldn’t  be  turned  off.’ 

‘Eh?’  said  the  commander. 

At  that  moment  two  figures  on  horseback  came  into  sight  on  the  road 
from  the  town,  where  sentinels  had  been  posted  to  give  the  signal.  They 
were  an  adjutant,  and  a  Cossack  riding  behind  him. 

The  adjutant  had  been  sent  by  the  commander-in-chief  to  confirm  to 
the  commander  what  had  not  been  clearly  stated  in  the  previous  order, 
namely,  that  the  commander-in-chief  wished  to  inspect  the  regiment 
exactly  in  the  order  in  which  it  had  arrived — wearing  their  overcoats,  and 
carrying  their  baggage,  and  without  any  sort  of  preparation. 

A  member  of  the  Hofkriegsrath  from  Vienna  had  been  with  Kutuzov 
the  previous  day,  proposing  and  demanding  that  he  should  move  on  as 
quickly  as  possible  to  effect  a  junction  with  the  army  of  Archduke 
Ferdinand  and  Mack;  and  Kutuzov,  not  considering  this  combination 
advisable,  had  intended,  among  other  arguments  in  support  of  his  view, 
to  point  out  to  the  Austrian  general  the  pitiable  condition  in  which  were 
the  troops  that  had  arrived  from  Russia.  It  was  with  this  object,  indeed, 
that  he  had  meant  to  meet  the  regiment,  so  that  the  worse  the  condition 
of  the  regiment,  the  better  pleased  the  commander-in-chief  would  be 
with  it.  Though  the  adjutant  did  not  know  these  details,  he  gave  the 
general  in  command  of  the  regiment  the  message  that  the  commander-in- 
chief  absolutely  insisted  on  the  men  being  in  their  overcoats  and  march¬ 
ing  order,  and  that,  if  the  contrary  were  the  case,  the  commander-in- 
chief  would  be  displeased. 

On  hearing  this  the  general’s  head  sank;  he  shrugged  his  shoulders, 
and  flung  up  his  hands  with  a  choleric  gesture. 

‘Here’s  a  mess  we’ve  made  of  it,’  he  said.  ‘Why,  didn’t  I  tell  you,  Mihail 
t  Mitritch,  that  on  the  march  meant  in  their  overcoats,’  he  said  reproach¬ 
fully  to  the  major.  ‘Ah,  my  God!’  he  added,  and  stepped  resolutely  for¬ 
ward.  ‘Captains  of  the  companies!’  he  shouted  in  a  voice  used  to  com- 


IOO 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

mand.  ‘Sergeants!  .  .  .  Will  his  excellency  be  coming  soon?’  he  said, 
turning  to  the  adjutant  with  an  expression  of  respectful  deference,  that 
related  obviously  only  to  the  person  he  was  speaking  of. 

‘In  an  hour’s  time,  I  believe.’ 

‘Have  we  time' to  change  clothes?’ 

‘I  can’t  say,  general.  .  .  .’ 

The  general,  going  himself  among  the  ranks,  gave  orders  for  the  men 
to  change  back  to  their  overcoats.  The  captains  ran  about  among  the 
companies,  the  sergeants  bustled  to  and  fro  (the  overcoats  were  not 
quite  up  to  the  mark),  and  instantaneously  the  squadrons,  that  had  been 
in  regular  order  and  silent,  were  heaving  to  and  fro,  straggling  apart  and 
humming  with  talk.  The  soldiers  ran  backwards  and  forwards  in  all 
directions,  stooping  with  their  shoulders  thrown  back,  drawing  their 
knapsacks  off  over  their  heads,  taking  out  their  overcoats  and  lifting  their 
arms  up  to  thrust  them  into  the  sleeves. 

Half  an  hour  later  everything  was  in  its  former  good  order  again,  only 
the  squadrons  were  now  grey  instead  of  black.  The  general  walked  in 
front  of  the  regiment  again  with  his  quivering  strut,  and  scanned  it  from 
some  distance. 

‘What  next?  what’s  this!’  he  shouted,  stopping  short.  ‘Captain  of  the 
third  company!’ 

‘The  captain  of  the  third  company  to  the  general!  The  captain  to  the 
general  of  the  third  company  to  the  captain !  ’  .  .  .  voices  were  heard 
along  the  ranks,  and  an  adjutant  ran  to  look  for  the  tardy  officer.  When 
the  sound  of  the  officious  voices,  varying  the  command,  and,  by  now, 
crying,  ‘the  general  to  the  third  company,’  reached  their  destination,  the 
officer  called  for  emerged  from  behind  his  company,  and,  though  he  was 
an  elderly  man  and  not  accustomed  to  running,  he  moved  at  a  quick 
trot  towards  the  general,  stumbling  awkwardly  over  the  toes  of  his  boots. 
The  captain’s  face  showed  the  uneasiness  of  a  schoolboy  who  is  called 
up  to  repeat  an  unlearnt  lesson.  Patches  came  out  on  his  red  nose  (urn 
mistakably  due  to  intemperance),  and  he  did  not  know  how  to  keep  his 
mouth  steady.  The  general  looked  the  captain  up  and  down  as  he  ran 
panting  up,  slackening  his  pace  as  he  drew  nearer. 

‘You’ll  soon  be  dressing  your  men  in  petticoats!  What’s  the  meaning 
of  it?’  shouted  the  general,  thrusting  out  his  lower  jaw  and  pointing  in 
the  ranks  of  the  third  division  to  a  soldier  in  an  overcoat  of  a  colour 
different  from  the  rest.  ‘Where  have  you  been  yourself?  The  commander- 
in-chief  is  expected,  and  you’re  not  in  your  place?  Eh?  .  .  .  I’ll  teach 
you  to  rig  your  men  out  in  dressing-gowns  for  inspection!  .  .  .  Eh?’ 

The  captain,  never  taking  his  eyes  off  his  superior  officer,  pressed  the 
peak  of  his  cap  more  and  more  tightly  with  his  two  fingers,  as  though 
he  saw  in  this  compression  his  only  hope  of  safety. 

‘Well,  why  don’t  you  speak?  Who’s  that  dressed  up  like  a  Hungarian?’ 
the  general  jested  bitterly. 

‘Your  excellency  .  .  .’ 


ICI 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Well,  what’s  your  excellency?  Your  excellency!  Your  excellency!  But 
what  that  means,  your  excellency,  nobody  knows.’ 

‘Your  excellency,  that’s  Dolohov,  the  degraded  officer,’  the  captain 
said  softly. 

‘Well,  is  he  degraded  to  be  a  field-marshal,  or  a  common  soldier?  If 
he’s  a  soldier,  then  he  must  be  dressed  like  all  the  rest,  according  to 
regulation.’ 

‘Your  excellency,  you  gave  him  leave  yourself  on  the  march.’ 

‘Gave  him  leave?  There,  you’re  always  like  that,  you  young  men,’  said 
the  general,  softening  a  little.  ‘Gave  him  leave?  If  one  says  a  word  to 
you,  you  go  and  .  .  .’  The  general  paused.  ‘One  says  a  word  to  you, 
and  you  go  and  .  .  .  Eh?’  he  said  with  renewed  irritation.  ‘Be  so  good 
as  to  clothe  your  men  decently.  .  .  .’ 

And  the  general,  looking  round  at  the  adjutant,  walked  with  his  quiver¬ 
ing  strut  towards  the  regiment.  It  was  obvious  that  he  was  pleased  with 
his  own  display  of  anger,  and  that,  walking  through  the  regiment,  he  was 
trying  to  find  a  pretext  for  wrath.  Falling  foul  of  one  officer  for  an  un¬ 
polished  ensign,  of  another  for  the  unevenness  of  the  rank,  he  approached 
the  third  company. 

‘How  are  you  standing?  Where  is  your  leg?  Where  is  your  leg?’  the 
general  shouted  with  a  note  of  anguish  in  his  voice,  stopping  five  men 
off  Dolohov,  who  was  wearing  his  blue  overcoat.  Dolohov  slowly  straight¬ 
ened  his  bent  leg,  and  looked  with  his  clear,  insolent  eyes  straight  in  the 
general’s  face. 

‘Why  are  you  in  a  blue  coat?  Off  with  it!  ...  Sergeant!  change  his 
coat  .  .  .  the  dir  .  .  .’  Before  he  had  time  to  finish  the  word — 

‘General,  I  am  bound  to  obey  orders,  but  I  am  not  bound  to  put  up 
with  .  .  .’  Dolohov  hastened  to  say. 

‘No  talking  in  the  ranks!  .  .  .  No  talking,  no  talking!’ 

‘Not  bound  to  put  up  with  insults,’  Dolohov  went  on,  loudly  and 
clearly.  The  eyes  of  the  general  and  the  soldier  met.  The  general  paused, 
angrily  pulling  down  his  stiff  scarf. 

‘Change  your  coat,  if  you  please,’  he  said  as  he  walked  away. 


II 

‘Coming!’  the  sentinel  shouted  at  that  moment.  The  general,  turning 
red,  ran  to  his  horse,  with  trembling  hands  caught  at  the  stirrup,  swung 
himself  up,  settled  himself  in  the  saddle,  drew  out  his  sword,  and  with 
a  pleased  and  resolute  face  opened  his  mouth  on  one  side,  in  readiness 
to  shout.  The  regiment  fluttered  all  over,  like  a  bird  preening  its  wings, 
and  subsided  into  stillness. 

‘Silence!’  roared  the  general,  in  a  soul-quaking  voice,  expressing  at 
once  gladness  on  his  own  account,  severity  as  regards  the  regiment,  and 
welcome  as  regards  the  approaching  commander-in-chief. 

A  high,  blue  Vienna  coach  with  several  horses  was  driving  at  a  smart 


102 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

trot,  rumbling  on  its  springs,  along  the  broad  unpaved  high-road,  with 
trees  planted  on  each  side  of  it.  The  general’s  suite  and  an  escort  of 
Croats  galloped  after  the  coach.  Beside  Kutuzov  sat  an  Austrian  general 
in  a  white  uniform,  that  looked  strange  among  the  black  Russian  ones. 
The  coach  drew  up  on  reaching  the  regiment.  Kutuzov  and  the  Austrian 
general  were  talking  of  something  in  low  voices,  and  Kutuzov  smiled 
slightly  as,  treading  heavily,  he  put  his  foot  on  the  carriage  step,  exactly 
as  though  those  two  thousand  men  gazing  breathlessly  at  him  and  at 
their  general,  did  not  exist  at  all. 

The  word  of  command  rang  out,  again  the  regiment  quivered  with  a 
clanking  sound-  as  it  presented  arms.  In  the  deathly  silence  the  weak 
voice  of  the  commander-in-chief  was  audible.  The  regiment  roared: 
'Good  health  to  your  Ex  .  .  lency  .  .  lency  .  .  lency!’  And  again  all 
was  still.  At  first  Kutuzov  stood  in  one  spot,  while  the  regiment  moved; 
then  Kutuzov  began  walking  on  foot  among  the  ranks,  the  white 
general  beside  him,  followed  by  his  suite. 

From  the  way  that  the  general  in  command  of  the  regiment  saluted 
the  commander-in-chief,  fixing  his  eyes  intently  on  him,  rigidly  respectful 
and  obsequious,  from  the  way  in  which,  craning  forward,  he  followed 
the  generals  through  the  ranks,  with  an  effort  restraining  his  quivering 
strut,  and  darted  up  at  every  word  and  every  gesture  of  the  commander- 
in-chief, — it  was  evident  that  he  performed  his  duties  as  a  subordinate 
with  even  greater  zest  than  his  duties  as  a  commanding  officer.  Thanks  to 
the  strictness  and  assiduity  of  its  commander,  the  regiment  was  in  ex¬ 
cellent  form  as  compared  with  the  others  that  had  arrived  at  Braunau  at 
the  same  time.  The  sick  and  the  stragglers  left  behind  only  numbered 
two  hundred  and  seventeen,  and  everything  was  in  good  order  except 
the  soldiers’  boots. 

Kutuzov  walked  through  the  ranks,  stopping  now  and  then,  and  say¬ 
ing  a  few  friendly  words  to  officers  he  had  known  in  the  Turkish  war, 
and  sometimes  to  the  soldiers.  Looking  at  their  boots,  he  several  times 
shook  his  head  dejectedly,  and  pointed  them  out  to  the  Austrian  general, 
with  an  expression  as  much  as  to  say  that  he  blamed  no  one  for  it,  but 
he  could  not  help  seeing  what  a  bad  state  of  things  it  was.  The  general 
in  command  of  the  regiment,  on  every  occasion  such  as  this,  ran  forward, 
afraid  of  missing  a  single  word  the  commander-in-chief  might  utter  re¬ 
garding  the  regiment.  Behind  Kutuzov,  at  such  a  distance  that  every 
word,  even  feebly  articulated,  could  be  heard,  followed  his  suite,  consist¬ 
ing  of  some  twenty  persons.  These  gentlemen  were  talking  among  them¬ 
selves,  and  sometimes  laughed.  Nearest  of  all  to  the  commander-in-chief 
walked  a  handsome  adjutant.  It  was  Prince  Bolkonsky.  Beside  him  was 
his  comrade  Nesvitsky,  a  tall  staff-officer,  excessively  stout,  with  a  good- 
natured,  smiling,  handsome  face,  and  moist  eyes.  Nesvitsky  could  hardly 
suppress  his  mirth,  which  was  excited  by  a  swarthy  officer  of  hussars 
walking  near  him.  This  officer,  without  a  smile  or  a  change  in  the  ex¬ 
pression  of. his  fixed  eyes,  was  staring  with  a  serious  face  at  the  com¬ 
manding  officer’s  back,  and  mimicking  every  movement  he  made.  Every 


WAR  AND  PEACE  103 

time  the  commanding  officer  quivered  and  darted  forward,  the  officer  of 
hussars  quivered  and  darted  forward  in  precisely  the  same  way.  Nesvitsky 
laughed,  and  poked  the  others  to  make  them  look  at  the  mimic. 

Kutuzov  walked  slowly  and  listlessly  by  the  thousands  of  eyes  which 
were  almost  rolling  out  of  their  sockets  in  the  effort  to  watch  him.  On 
reaching  the  third  company,  he  suddenly  stopped.  The  suite,  not  foresee¬ 
ing  this  halt,  could  not  help  pressing  up  closer  to  him. 

‘Ah,  Timohin!’  said  the  commander-in-chief,  recognising  the  captain 
with  the  red  nose  who  had  got  into  trouble  over  the  blue  overcoat. 

One  would  have  thought  it  impossible  to  stand  more  rigidly  erect  than 
Timohin  had  done  when  the  general  in  command  of  the  regiment  had 
made  his  remarks  to  him;  but  at  the  instant  when  the  commander-in¬ 
chief  addressed  him,  the  captain  stood  with  such  erect  rigidity  that  it 
seemed  that,  were  the  commander-in-chief  to  remain  for  some  time  look¬ 
ing  at  him,  the  captain  could  hardly  sustain  the  ordeal,  and  for  that 
reason  Kutuzov,  realising  his  position,  and  wishing  him  nothing  but 
good,  hurriedly  turned  away.  A  scarcely  perceptible  smile  passed  over 
Kutuzov’s  podgy  face,  disfigured  by  the  scar  of  a  wound. 

‘Another  old  comrade  at  Ismail!’  he  said.  ‘A  gallant  officer!  Are  you 
satisfied  with  him?’  Kutuzov  asked  of  the  general  in  command. 

And  the  general,  all  unconscious  that  he  was  being  reflected  as  in  a 
mirror  in  the  officer  of  hussars  behind  him,  quivered,  pressed  forward, 
and  answered:  ‘Fully,  your  most  high  excellency.’ 

‘We  all  have  our  weaknesses,’  said  Kutuzov,  smiling  and  walking  away 
from  him.  ‘He  had  a  predilection  for  Bacchus.’ 

The  general  in  command  was  afraid  that  he  might  be  to  blame  for 
this,  and  made  no  answer.  The  officer  of  hussars  at  that  instant  noticed 
the  face  of  the  captain  with  the  red  nose,  and  the  rigidly  drawn-in  stomach, 
and  mimicked  his  face  and  attitude  in  such  a  life-like  manner  that  Nes¬ 
vitsky  could  not  restrain  his  laughter.  Kutuzov  turned  round.  The  officer 
could  apparently  do  anything  he  liked  with  his  face;  at  the  instant 
Kutuzov  turned  round,  the  officer  had  time  to  get  in  a  grimace  before 
assuming  the  most  serious,  respectful,  and  innocent  expression. 

The  third  company  was  the  last,  and  Kutuzov  seemed  pondering,  as 
though  trying  to  recall  something.  Prince  Andrey  stepped  forward  and 
said  softly  in  French:  ‘You  told  me  to  remind  you  of  the  degraded  officer, 
Dolohov,  serving  in  the  ranks  in  this  regiment.’ 

‘Where  is  Dolohov?’  asked  Kutuzov. 

Dolohov,  attired  by  now  in  the  grey  overcoat  of  a  private  soldier,  did 
not  wait  to  be  called  up.  The  slender  figure  of  the  fair-haired  soldier, 
with  his  bright  blue  eyes,  stepped  out  of  the  line.  He  went  up  to  the 
commander-in-chief  and  presented  arms. 

‘A  complaint  to  make?’  Kutuzov  asked  with  a  slight  frown. 

‘This  is  Dolohov,’  said  Prince  Andrey. 

‘Ah!’  said  Kutuzov.  ‘I  hope  this  will  be  a  lesson  to  you,  do  your  duty 
thoroughly.  The  Emperor  is  gracious.  And  I  shall  not  forget  you,  if  you 
deserve  it.’ 


T04  WAR  AND  PEACE 

The  bright  blue  eyes  looked  at  the  commander-in-chief  just  as  im¬ 
pudently  as  at  the  general  of  his  regiment,  as  though  by  his  expression 
tearing  down  the  veil  of  convention  that  removed  the  commander-in- 
chief  so  far  from  the  soldier. 

‘The  only  favour  I  beg  of  your  most  high  excellency,’  he  said  in  his 
firm,  ringing,  deliberate  voice,  ‘is  to  give  me  a  chance  to  atone  for  my 
offence,  and  to  prove  my  devotion  to  his  majesty  the  Emperor,  and  to 
Russia.’ 

Kutuzov  turned  away.  There  was  a  gleam  in  his  eyes  of  the  same 
smile  with  which  he  had  turned  away  from  Captain  Timohin.  He  turned 
away  and  frowned,  as  though  to  express  that  all  Dolohov  had  said  to 
him  and  all  he  could  say,  he  had  known  long,  long  ago,  that  he  was  sick 
to  death  long  ago  of  it,  and  that  it  was  not  at  all  what  was  wanted.  He 
turned  away  and  went  towards  the  coach. 

The  regiment  broke  into  companies  and  went  towards  the  quarters 
assigned  them  at  no  great  distance  from  Braunau,  where  they  hoped  to 
find  boots  and  clothes,  and  to  rest  after  their  hard  marches. 

‘You  won’t  bear  me  a  grudge,  Proho  Ignatitch?’  said  the  commanding 
general,  overtaking  the  third  company  and  riding  up  to  Captain  Timohin, 
who  was  walking  in  front  of  it.  The  general’s  face  beamed  with  a  delight 
he  could  not  suppress  after  the  successful  inspection.  ‘It’s  in  the  Tsar’s 
service  .  .  .  can’t  be  helped  .  .  .  sometimes  one  has  to  be  a  little  sharp 
at  inspection.  I’m  the  first  to  apologise;  you  know  me.  .  .  .  He  was 
very  much  pleased.’  And  he  held  out  his  hand  to  the  captain. 

‘Upon  my  word,  general,  as  if  I’d  make  so  bold,’  answered  the  captain, 
his  nose  flushing  redder.  He  smiled,  and  his  smile  revealed  the  loss  of 
two  front  teeth,  knocked  out  by  the  butt-end  of  a  gun  at  Ismail. 

‘And  tell  Dolohov  that  I  won’t  forget  him;  he  can  be  easy  about  that. 
And  tell  me,  please,  what  about  him,  how’s  he  behaving  himself  .  .  . 
I’ve  been  meaning  to  inquire  .  .  .’ 

‘He’s  very  exact  in  the  discharge  of  his  duties,  your  excellency  .  .  . 
but  he’s  a  character  .  .  .’  said  Timohin. 

‘Why,  what  sort  of  a  character?’  asked  the  general. 

‘It’s  different  on  different  days,  your  excellency,’  said  the  captain;  ‘at 
one  time  he’s  sensible  and  well-educated  and  good-natured.  And  then 
he’ll  be  like  a  wild  beast.  In  Poland,  he  all  but  killed  a  Jew,  if  you 
please.  .  .  .’ 

‘Well,  well,’  said  the  general,  ‘still  one  must  feel  for  a  young  man  in 
trouble.  He  has  great  connections,  you  know.  ...  So  you  .  .  .’ 

‘Oh,  yes,  your  excellency,’  said  Timohin,  with  a  smile  that  showed  he 
understood  his  superior  officer’s  wish  in  the  matter. 

‘Very  well,  then,  very  well.’ 

The  general  sought  out  Dolohov  in  the  ranks  and  pulled  up  his  horse. 

‘In  the  first  action  you  may  win  your  epaulettes,’  he  said  to  him. 

Dolohov  looked  round  and  said  nothing.  There  was  no  change  in  the 
lines  of  his  ironically-smiling  mouth. 

‘Well,  that’s  all  right  then,’  the  general  went  on.  ‘A  glass  of  brandy  to 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


105 

every  man  from  me/  he  added,  so  that  the  soidiers  could  hear.  ‘I  thank 
you  all.  God  be  praised!’  And  riding  round  the  company,  he  galloped 
off  to  another. 

‘Well,  he’s  really  a  good  fellow,  one  can  get  on  very  well  under  him/ 
said  Timohin  to  the  subaltern  officer  walking  beside  him. 

‘The  king  of  hearts,  that’s  the  only  word  for  him/  the  subaltern  said, 
laughing.  (The  general  was  nicknamed  the  king  of  hearts.) 

The  cheerful  state  of  mind  of  the  officers  after  the  inspection  was 
shared  by  the  soldiers.  The  companies  went  along  merrily.  Soldiers’  voices 
could  be  heard  on  all  sides  chatting  away. 

‘Why,  don’t  they  say  Kutuzov’s  blind  in  one  eye?’ 

‘To  be  sure  he  is.  Quite  blind  of  one  eye.’ 

‘Nay  .  .  .  lads,  he’s  more  sharp-eyed  than  you  are.  See  how  he 
looked  at  our  boots  and  things.’  .  .  . 

‘I  say,  mate,  when  he  looked  at  my  legs  .  .  .  well,  thinks  I  .  .  .’ 

‘And  the  other  was  an  Austrian  with  him,  that  looked  as  if  he’d  been 
chalked  all  over.  As  white  as  flour.  I  bet  they  rub  him  up  as  we  rub 
up  our  guns.’ 

‘I  say,  Fedeshou  .  .  .  did  he  say  anything  as  to  when  the  battles  are 
going  to  begin?  You  stood  nearer.  They  did  say  Bonaparte  himself  was 
in  Brunovo.’ 

‘Bonaparte!  What  nonsense  the  fellow  talks!  What  won’t  you  know 
next!  Now  it’s  the  Prussian  that’s  revolting.  The  Austrian,  do  you  see, 
is  pacifying  him.  When  he’s  quiet,  then  the  war  will  begin  with  Bona¬ 
parte.  And  he  talks  of  Bonaparte’s  being  in  Brunovo!  It’s  plain  the  fel¬ 
low’s  a  fool.  You’d  better  keep  your  ears  open.’ 

‘Those  devils  of  quartermasters!  .  .  .  The  fifth  company’s  turned 
into  the  village  by  now,  and  they’re  cooking  their  porridge,  and  we’re 
not  there  yet.’ 

‘Give  us  a  biscuit,  old  man.’ 

‘And  did  you  give  me  tobacco  yesterday?  All  right,  my  lad.  Well, 
well,  God  be  with  you.’ 

‘They  might  have  made  a  halt,  or  we’ll  have  to  do  another  four 
miles  with  nothing  to  eat.’ 

‘I  say,  it  was  fine  how  those  Germans  gave  us  carriages.  One  drove 
along,  something  like.’ 

‘But  here,  lads,  the  folks  are  regularly  stripped  bare.  There  it  was 
all  Poles  of  some  sort,  all  under  the  Russian  crown,  but  now  we’ve  come 
to  the  regular  Germans,  my  boy.’ 

‘Singers  to  the  front/  the  captain  called.  And  from  the  different  ranks 
about  twenty  men  advanced  to  the  front.  The  drummer,  who  was  their 
leader,  turned  round  facing  the  chorus  and  waving  his  arm,  struck  up 
a  soldier’s  song,  beginning:  ‘The  sun  was  scarcely  dawning/  and  ending 
with  the  words:  ‘So,  lads,  we’ll  march  to  glory  with  Father  Kamensky.’ 
.  .  .  This  song  had  been  composed  in  Turkey,  and  now  was  sung  in 
Austria,  the  only  change  being  the  substitution  of  the  words  ‘Father 
Kutuzov’  for  ‘Father  Kamensky.’ 


io6 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

Jerking  out  the  last  words  in  soldierly  fashion  and  waving  his  arms, 
as  though  he  were  flinging  something  on  the  ground,  the  drummer,  a 
lean,  handsome  soldier  of  forty,  looked  sternly  at  the  soldier-chorus  and 
frowned.  Then,  having  satisfied  himself  that  all  eyes  were  fixed  upon 
him,  he  gesticulated,  as  though  he  were  carefully  lifting  some  unseen 
precious  object  over  his  head  in  both  hands,  holding  it  there  some  seconds, 
and  all  at  once  with  a  desperate  movement  flinging  it  away. 

‘Ah,  the  threshold  of  my  cottage, 

My  new  cottage.’ 

Here  twenty  voices  caught  up  the  refrain,  and  the  castanet  player,  in 
spite  of  the  weight  of  his  weapon  and  knapsack,  bounded  nimbly  for¬ 
ward,  and  walked  backwards  facing  the  company,  shaking  his  shoulders, 
and  seeming  to  menace  some  one  with  the  castanets.  The  soldiers  stepped 
out  in  time  to  the  song,  swinging  their  arms  and  unconsciously  falling 
into  step.  Behind  the  company  came  the  sound  of  wheels,  the  rumble  of 
springs,  and  the  tramp  of  horses.  Kutuzov  and  his  suite  were  going  back 
to  the  town.  The  commander-in-chief  made  a  sign  for  the  soldiers  to  go 
on  freely,  and  he  and  all  his  suite  looked  as  though  they  took  pleasure  in 
the  sound  of  the  singing,  and  the  spectacle  of  the  dancing  soldier  and  the 
gaily,  smartly  marching  men.  In  the  second  row  from  the  right  flank, 
beside  which  the  carriage  passed,  they  could  not  help  noticing  the  blue¬ 
eyed  soldier,  Dolohov,  who  marched  with  a  special  jauntiness  and  grace 
in  time  to  the  song,  and  looked  at  the  faces  of  the  persons  driving  by 
with  an  expression  that  seemed  to  pity  every  one  who  was  not  at  that 
moment  marching  in  the  ranks.  The  cornet  of  hussars,  the  officer  of 
Kutuzov’s  suite,  who  had  mimicked  the  general,  fell  back  from  the  car¬ 
riage  and  rode  up  to  Dolohov.  ) 

The  cornet  of  hussars,  Zherkov,  had  at  one  time  belonged  to  the  fast 
set  in  Petersburg,  of  which  Dolohov  had  been  the  leader.  Zherkov  had 
met  Dolohov  abroad  as  a  common  soldier,  and  had  not  seen  fit  to  recog¬ 
nise  him.  But  now,  after  Kutuzov’s  conversation  with  the  degraded 
officer,  he  addressed  him  with  all  the  cordiality  of  an  old  friend. 

‘Friend  of  my  heart,  how  are  you?’  he  said,  through  the  singing,  mak¬ 
ing  his  horse  keep  pace  with  the  marching  soldiers. 

‘How  am  I?’  Dolohov  answered  coldly.  ‘As  you  see.’  The  lively  song 
gave  a  peculiar  flavour  to  the  tone  of  free-and-easy  gaiety,  with  which 
Zherkov  spoke,  and  the  studied  coldness  of  Dolohov’s  replies. 

‘Well,  how  do  you  get  on  with  your  officers?’  asked  Zherkov. 

‘All  right;  they’re  good  fellows.  How  did  you  manage  to  poke  yourself 
on  to  the  staff?’ 

‘I  was  attached;  I’m  on  duty.’ 

They  were  silent. 


‘My  gay  goshawk  I  took  with  me, 
From  my  right  sleeve  I  set  him  free, 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


107 

said  the  song,  arousing  an  involuntary  sensation  of  courage  and  cheer¬ 
fulness.  Their  conversation  would  most  likely  have  been  different,  if 
they  had  not  been  talking  while  the  song  was  singing. 

‘Is  it  true,  the  Austrians-  have  been  beaten?’  asked  Dolohov. 

‘Devil  knows;  they  say  so.’ 

‘I’m  glad,’  Dolohov  made  a  brief,  sharp  reply,  as  was  required  to  fit 
in  with  the  tune. 

‘I  say,  come  round  to  us  some  evening;  we’ll  have  a  game  of  faro,' 
said  Zherkov. 

‘Is  money  so  plentiful  among  you?’ 

‘Do  come.’ 

‘I  can’t;  I’ve  sworn  not  to.  I  won’t  drink  or  play  till  I’m  promoted.’ 
‘Well,  but  in  the  first  action  .  .  .’ 

‘Then  we  shall  see.’  Again  they  paused. 

‘You  come,  if  you  want  anything;  one  can  always  be  of  use  on  the 
staff.  .  .  .’ 

Dolohov  grinned.  ‘Don’t  trouble  yourself.  What  I  want,  I’m  not 
going  to  ask  for;  I  take  it  for  myself.’ 

‘Oh,  well,  I  only  .  .  .’ 

‘Well,  and  I  only.’ 

‘Good-bye.’ 

‘Good-bye.’ 

‘And  far  and  free 
To  his  own  country.’ 

Zherkov  put  spurs  to  his  horse,  which  three  times  picked  up  its  legs 
excitedly,  not  knowing  which  to  start  from,  then  galloped  off  round  the 
company,  and  overtook  the  carriage,  keeping  time  too  to  the  song. 


Ill 

On  returning  from  the  review,  Kutuzov,  accompanied  by  the  Austrian 
.  general,  went  to  his  private  room,  and  calling  his  adjutant,  told  him  to 
give  him  certain  papers,  relating  to  the  condition  of  the  newly  arrived 
troops,  and  letters,  received  from  Archduke  Ferdinand,  who  was  in 
I  command  of  the  army  at  the  front.  Prince  Andrey  Bolkonsky  came  into 
the  commander-in-chief’s  room  with  the  papers  he  had  asked  for.  Kutuzov 
and  the  Austrian  member  of  the  Hofkriegsrath  were  sitting  over  a  plan 
|  that  lay  unfolded  on  the  table. 

‘Ah!’  .  .  .  said  Kutuzov,  looking  round  at  Bolkonsky;  and  inviting 
his  adjutant,  as  it  were,  by  this  word  to  wait,  he  went  on  in  French  with 
the  conversation. 

‘I  have  only  one  thing  to  say,  general,’  said  Kutuzov,  with  an  agreeable 
elegance  of  expression  and  intonation,  that  forced  one  to  listen  for  each 
deliberately  uttered  word.  It  was  evident  that  Kutuzov  himself  listened 
to  his  voice  with  pleasure.  ‘I  can  only  say  one  thing,  that  if  the  matter 


io8 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

depended  on  my  personal  wishes,  the  desire  of  his  majesty,  the  Emperor 
Francis,  should  long  ago  have  been  accomplished;  I  should  long  ago 
have  joined  the  archduke.  And,  upon  my  h<  nour,  believe  me  that  for 
me  personally  to  hand  over  the  chief  command  of  the  army  to  more 
experienced  and  skilful  generals — such  as  Austria  is  so  rich  in — and  to 
throw  off  all  this  weighty  responsibility,  for  me  personaliy  would  be  a 
relief.  But  circumstances  are  too  strong  for  us,  general.’  And  Kutuzov 
smiled  with  an  expression  that  seemed  to  say:  ‘You  are  perfectly  at 
liberty  not  to  believe  me,  and  indeed  it’s  a  matter  of  perfect  indifference 
to  me  whether  you  believe  me  or  not,  but  you  have  no  grounds  for  saying 
so.  And  that’s  the  whole  point.’  The  Austrian  general  looked  dissatisfied, 
but  he  had  no  choice  but  to  answer  Kutuzov  in  the  same  tone. 

‘On  the  contrary,’  he  said  in  a  querulous  and  irritated  voice,  that 
contrasted  with  the  flattering  intention  of  the  words  he  uttered;  ‘on  the 
contrary,  the  participation  of  your  most  high  excellency  in  common 
action  is  highly  appreciated  by  his  majesty.  But  we  imagine  that  the 
present  delay  robs  the  gallant  Russian  troops  and  their  commander-in¬ 
chief  of  the  laurels  they  are  accustomed  to  winning  in  action/  he  con-  ; 
eluded  a  phrase  he  had  evidently  prepared  beforehand. 

Kutuzov  bowed,  still  with  the  same  smile. 

‘But  I  am  convinced  of  this,  and  relying  on  the  last  letter  with  which  ! 
his  Highness  the  Archduke  Ferdinand  has  honoured  me,  I  imagine  that 
the  Austrian  troops  under  the  command  of  so  talented  a  leader  as  General 
Mack,  have  by  now  gained  a  decisive  victory  and  have  no  longer  need  } 
of  our  aid,’  said  Kutuzov. 

The  general  frowned.  Though  there  was  no  positive  news  of  the  1 
defeat  of  the  Austrians,  there  were  too  many  circumstances  in  confirma¬ 
tion  of  the  unfavourable  reports;  and  so  Kutuzov’s  supposition  in  regard 
to  an  Austrian  victory  sounded  very  much  like  a  sneer.  But  Kutuzov 
smiled  blandly,  still  with  the  same  expression,  which  seemed  to  say  that 
he  had  a  right  to  suppose  so.  And  in  fact  the  last  letter  he  had  received 
from  the  army  of  General  Mack  had  given  him  news  of  victory,  and 
of  the  most  favourable  strategical  position  of  the  army. 

‘Give  me  that  letter,’  said  Kutuzov,  addressing  Prince  Andrey.  ‘Here, 
if  you  will  kindly  look’ — and  Kutuzov,  with  an  ironical  smile  about  the 
corners  of  his  mouth,  read  in  German  the  following  passage  from  the  i 
letter  of  the  Archduke  Ferdinand: 

‘We  have  a  force,  perfectly  kept  together,  of  nearly  70,000  men,  in  i 
order  to  attack  and  defeat  the  enemy  if  they  should  pass  the  Lech.  As 
we  are  masters  of  Ulm,  we  cannot  lose  the  advantage  of  remaining  masters 
also  of  both  sides  of  the  Danube;  and  moreover  able,  should  the  enemy 
not  cross  the  Lech,  to  pass  over  the  Danube  at  any  moment,  throw  our-  i 
selves  upon  their  line  of  communications,  recross  the  Danube  lower  < 
down,  and  entirely  resist  the  enemy’s  aim  if  they  should  attempt  to  turn 
their  whole  force  upon  our  faithful  ally.  In  this  way  we  shall  await  1 
courageously  the  moment  when  the  Imperial  Russian  is  ready,  and  shall  ii 


iog 


,  WAR  AND  PEACE 
then,  in  conjunction,  easily  find  a  possibility  of  preparing  for  the  foe 
that  fate  which  he  so  richly  deserves.’ 

Kutuzov  concluded  this  period  with  a  heavy  sigh  and  looked  intently 
and  genially  at  the  membe’’  of  the  Hofkriegsrath. 

‘But  you  know,  your  excellency,  the  sage  precept  to  prepare  for  the 
worst,’  said  the  Austrian  general,  obviously  wishing  to  have  done  with 
jests  and  to  come  to  business.  He  could  not  help  glancing  round  at  the 
adjutant. 

‘Excuse  me,  general,’  Kutuzov  interrupted  him,  and  he,  too,  turned  to 
Prince  Andrey.  ‘Here,  my  dear  boy,  get  all  the  reports  from  our  scouts 
from  Kozlovsky.  Here  are  two  letters  from  Count  Nostits,  here  is  a  letter 
from  his  Highness  the  Archduke  Ferdinand,  here  is  another,’  he  said, 
giving  him  several  papers.  ‘And  of  all  this  make  out  clearly  in  French  a 
memorandum  showing  all  the  information  we  have  had  of  the  movements 
of  the  Austrian  Army.  Well,  do  so,  and  then  show  it  to  his  excellency.’ 

Prince  Andrey  bowed  in  token  of  understanding  from  the  first  word 
not  merely  what  had  been  said,  but  also  what  Kutuzov  would  have  liked 
to  have  said  to  him.  He  gathered  up  the  papers,  and  making  a  compre¬ 
hensive  bow,  stepped  softly  over  the  carpet  and  went  out  into  the  recep¬ 
tion-room. 

Although  so  short  a  time  had  passed  since  Prince  Andrey  had  left 
Russia,  he  had  changed  greatly  during  that  time.  In  the  expression  of  his 
face,  in  his  gestures,  in  his  gait,  there  was  scarcely  a  trace  to  be  seen  now 
of  his  former  affectation,  ennui,  and  indolence.  He  had  the  air  of  a  man 
who  has  not  time  to  think  of  the  impression  he  is  making  on  others,  and 
is  absorbed  in  work,  both  agreeable  and  interesting.  His  face  showed 
more  satisfaction  with  himself  and  those  around  him.  His  smile  and  his 
glance  were  more  light-hearted  and  attractive, 
i  Kutuzov,  whom  he  had  overtaken  in  Poland,  had  received  him  very 
cordially,  had  promised  not  to  forget  him,  had  marked  him  out  among 
the  other  adjutants,  had  taken  him  with  him  to  Vienna  and  given  him 
the  more  serious  commissions.  From  Vienna,  Kutuzov  had  written  to 
his  old  comrade,  Prince  Audrey’s  father. 

‘Your  son,’  he  wrote,  ‘gives  promise  of  becoming  an  officer,  who  will 
make  his  name  by  his  industry,  firmness,  and  conscientiousness.  I  con¬ 
sider  myself  lucky  to  have  such  an  assistant  at  hand.’ 

On  Kutuzov’s  staff,  among  his  fellow-officers,  and  in  the  army  gen¬ 
erally,  Prince  Andrey  had,  as  he  had  had  in  Petersburg  society,  two 
quite  opposite  reputations.  Some,  the  minority,  regarded  Prince  Andrey 
as  a  being  different  from  themselves  and  from  all  other  men,  expected 
great  things  of  him,  listened  to  him,  were  enthusiastic  in  his  praise,  and 
imitated  him,  and  with  such  people  Prince  Andrey  was  frank  and  agree¬ 
able.  Others,  the  majority,  did  not  like  Prince  Andrey,  and  regarded  him 
as  a  sulky,  cold,  and  disagreeable  person.  But  with  the  latter  class,  too, 
Prince  Andrey  knew  how  to  behave  so  that  he  was  respected  and  even 
[feared  by  them. 


1 10 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

Coming  out  of  Kutuzov’s  room  into  the  reception-room,  Prince  Andrey 
went  in  with  his  papers  to  his  comrade,  the  adjutant  on  duty,  Kozlovsky, 
who  was  sitting  in  the  window  with  a  book. 

‘What  is  it,  prince?’  queried  Kozlovsky. 

‘I  am  told  to  make  a  note  of  the  reason  wfciy  we  are  not  moving  for¬ 
ward.’ 

‘And  why  aren’t  we?’ 

Prince  Andrey  shrugged  his  shoulders. 

‘No  news  from  Mack?’  asked  Kozlovsky. 

‘No.’ 

‘If  it  were  true  that  he  had  been  beaten,  news  would  have  come.’ 

‘Most  likely,’  said  Prince  Andrey,  and  he  moved  towards  the  door  to 
go  out.  But  he  was  met  on  the  way  by  a  tall  man  who  at  that  instant 
walked  into  the  reception-room,  slamming  the  door.  The  stranger,  who 
had  obviously  just  arrived,  was  an  Austrian  general  in  a  long  coat,  with 
a  black  kerchief  tied  round  his  head,  and  the  order  of  Maria  Theresa 
on  his  neck.  Prince  Andrey  stopped  short. 

‘Commander-in-chief  Kutuzov?’  the  general  asked  quickly,  speaking 
with  a  harsh  German  accent.  He  looked  about  him  on  both  sides,  and 
without  a  pause  walked  to  the  door  of  the  private  room. 

‘The  commander-in-chief  is  engaged,’  said  Kozlovsky,  hurriedly  going 
up  to  the  unknown  general  and  barring  his  way  to  the  door.  ‘Whom  am 
I  to  announce?’ 

The  unknown  general  looked  disdainfully  down  at  the  short  figure  of 
Kozlovsky,  as  though  surprised  that  they  could  be  ignorant  of  his 
identity. 

‘The  commander-in-chief  is  engaged,’  Kozlovsky  repeated  tranquilly.  , 

The  general’s  face  contracted,  his  lips  twitched  and  quivered.  He  took 
out  a  notebook,  hurriedly  scribbled  something  in  pencil,  tore  out  the 
leaf,  handed  it  to  Kozlovsky,  and  with  rapid  steps  walked  to  the  window, 
dropped  on  to  a  chair  and  looked  round  at  the  persons  in  the  room,  as 
though  asking  what  they  were  looking  at  him  for.  Then  the  general 
lifted  his  head,  craned  his  neck  forward  as  though  intending  to  say  some¬ 
thing,  but  immediately,  as  though  carelessly  beginning  to  hum  to  him¬ 
self,  uttered  a  strange  sound  which  broke  off  at  once.  The  door  of  the  i 
private  room  opened,  and  Kutuzov  appeared  in  the  doorway. 

The  general  with  the  bandaged  head,  bent  forward  as  though  fleeing 
from  danger,  strode  towards  Kutuzov,  his  thin  legs  moving  swiftly. 

‘You  see  the  unfortunate  Mack,’  he  articulated  in  French  in  a  break-; 
ing  voice. 

The  face  of  Kutuzov,  as  he  stood  in  the  doorway,  remained  for  several 
instants  perfectly  unmoved.  Then  a  frown  seemed  to  run  over  his  face,) 
like  a  wave,  leaving  his  forehead  smooth  again;  he  bowed  his  head: 
respectfully,  closed  his  eyes,  ushered  Mack  in  before  him  without  a  word, 
and  closed  the  door  behind  him. 

The  report,  which  had  been  in  circulation  before  this,  of  the  defeat! 
of  the  Austrians  and  the  surrender  of  the  whole  army  at  Ulm,  turned  out 


Ill 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

to  be  the  truth.  Within  half  an  hour  adjutants  had  been  despatched  in 
various  directions  with  orders.  It  was  evident  that  the  Russian  troops 
which  had  hitherto  been  inactive,  were  destined  soon  to  meet  the  enemy. 

Prince  Andrey  was  one  of  those  rare  staff-officers  whose  interests  were 
concentrated  on  the  general  progress  of  the  war.  On  seeing  Mack  and 
learning  the  details  of  his  overthrow,  he  grasped  the  fact  that  half  the 
campaign  was  lost;  he  perceived  all  the  difficulty  of  the  position  of  the 
Russian  troops,  and  vividly  pictured  to  himself  what  lay  before  the 
army,  and  the  part  he  would  have  to  play  in  the  work  in  store  for  them. 
He  could  not  help  feeling  a  rush  of  joyful  emotion  at  the  thought  of  the 
humiliation  of  self-confident  Austria,  and  the  prospect  within  a  week, 
perhaps,  of  seeing  and  taking  part  in  the  meeting  of  the  Russians  with 
the  French,  the  first  since  Suvorov’s  day.  But  he  was  afraid  of  the 
genius  of  Bonaparte,  which  might  turn  out  to  be  more  powerful  than 
all  the  bravery  of  the  Russian  troops;  and  at  the  same  time  he  could 
not  bear  to  entertain  the  idea  of  the  disgrace  of  his  favourite  hero. 

Excited  and  irritated  by  these  ideas,  Prince  Andrey  went  towards  his 
own  room  to  write  to  his  father,  to  whom  he  wrote  every  day.  In  the 
corridor  he  met  Nesvitsky,  the  comrade  with  whom  he  shared  a  room, 
and  the  comic  man,  Zherkov.  They  were,  as  usual,  laughing  at  some 
joke. 

‘What  are  you  looking  so  dismal  about?’  asked  Nesvitsky,  noticing 
Prince  Andrey’s  pale  face  and  gleaming  eyes. 

‘There’s  nothing  to  be  gay  about,’  answered  Bolkonsky. 

Just  as  Prince  Andrey  met  Nesvitsky  and  Zherkov,  there  came  towards 
them  from  the  other  end  of  the  corridor  Strauch,  an  Austrian  general, 
who  was  on  Kutuzov’s  staff  in  charge  of  the  provisioning  of  the  Russian 
army,  and  the  member  of  the  Hofkriegsrath,  who  had  arrived  the  previous 
evening.  There  was  plenty  of  room  in  the  wide  corridor  for  the  generals 
to  pass  the  three  officers  easily.  But  Zherkov,  pulling  Nesvitsky  back 
by  the  arm,  cried  in  a  breathless  voice: 

‘They  are  coming!  .  .  .  they  are  coming!  .  .  .  move  aside,  make 
way!  please,  make  way.’ 

The  generals  advanced  with  an  air  of  wishing  to  avoid  burdensome 
honours.  The  face  of  the  comic  man,  Zherkov,  suddenly  wrore  a  stupid 
smile  of  glee,  which  he  seemed  unable  to  suppress. 

‘Your  Excellency,’  he  said  in  German,  moving  forward  and  addressing 
the  Austrian  general,  ‘I  have  the  honour  to  congratulate  you.’  He  bowed, 
rnd  awkwardly,  as  children  do  at  dancing-lessons,  he  began  scraping 
arst  with  one  leg  and  then  with  the  other.  The  member  of  the  Hof- 
vriegsrath  looked  severely  at  him,  but  seeing  the  seriousness  of  his  stupid 
anile,  he  could  not  refuse  him  a  moment’s  attention.  He  screwed  up  his 
;yes  and  showed  that  he  was  listening. 

‘I  have  the  honour  to  congratulate  you.  General  Mack  has  arrived, 
}uite  well,  only  slightly  wounded  here,’  he  added,  pointing  with  a  beam- 
ng  smile  to  his  head. 

The  general  frowned,  turned  away  and  went  on. 


1 1 2 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Gott,  wie  naivl’  he  said  angrily,  when  he  was  a  few  steps  away. 

Nesvitsky  with  a  chuckle  threw  his  arms  round  Prince  Andrey,  but 
Bolkonsky,  turning  even  paler,  pushed  him  away  with  a  furious  expres¬ 
sion,  and  turned  to  Zherkov.  The  nervous  irritability,  into  which  he 
had  been  thrown  by  the  sight  of  Mack,  the  news  of  his  defeat  and  the 
thought  of  what  lay  before  the  Russian  army,  found  a  vent  in  anger  at 
the  misplaced  jest  of  Zherkov. 

‘If  you,  sir,’  he  began  cuttingly,  with  a  slight  trembling  in  his  lower 
jaw,  ‘like  to  be  a  clown,  I  can’t  prevent  your  being  so,  but  if  you  dare 
to  play  the  fool  another  time  in  my  presence,  I’ll  teach  you  how  to 
behave.’ 

Nesvitsky  and  Zherkov  were  so  astounded  at  this  outburst  that  they 
gazed  at  Bolkonsky  with  open  eyes. 

‘Why,  I  only  congratulated  them,’  said  Zherkov. 

‘I  am  not  jesting  with  you;  be  silent,  please!’  shouted  Bolkonsky,  and 
taking  Nesvitsky’s  arm,  he  walked  away  from  Zherkov,  who  could  not 
find  any  reply. 

‘Come,  what  is  the  matter,  my  dear  boy?’  said  Nesvitsky,  trying  to 
soothe  him. 

‘What’s  the  matter?’  said  Prince  Andrey,  standing  still  from  excite¬ 
ment.  ‘Why,  you  ought  to  understand  that  we’re  either  officers,  who 
serve  their  Tsar  and  their  country  and  rejoice  in  the  success,  and  grieve 
at  the  defeat  of  the  common  cause,  or  we’re  hirelings,  who  have  no  interest 
in  our  master’s  business.  Forty  thousand  men  massacred  and  the  army  of 
our  allies  destroyed,  and  you  find  something  in  that  to  laugh  at,’  he 
said,  as  though  by  this  French  phrase  he  were  strengthening  his  view. 1 
'It  is  all  very  well  for  a  worthless  fellow  like  that  individual  of  whom  you 
have  made  a  friend,  but  not  for  you,  not  for  you.  None  but  schoolboys  can  j 
find  amusement  in  such  jokes,’  Prince  Andrey  added  in  Russian,  uttering 
the  word  with  a  French  accent.  He  noticed  that  Zherkov  could  still  hear 
him,  and  waited  to  see  whether  the  cornet  would  not  reply.  But  the 
cornet  turned  and  went  out  of  the  corridor. 


IV 

The  Pavlogradsky  regiment  of  hussars  was  stationed  two  miles  from 
Braunau.  The  squadron  in  which  Nikolay  Rostov  was  serving  as  ensign 
was  billeted  on  a  German  village,  Salzeneck.The  officer  in  command  of 
the  squadron,  Captain  Denisov,  known  through  the  whole  cavalry  division 
under  the  name  of  Vaska  Denisov,  had  been  assigned  the  best  quarters 
in  the  village.  Ensign  Rostov  had  been  sharing  his  quarters,  ever  since 
he  overtook  the  regiment  in  Poland. 

On  the  8tn  of  October,  the  very  day  when  at  headquarters  all  was 
astir  over  the  news  of  Mack’s  defeat,  the  routine  of  life  was  going  on 
as  before  among  the  officers  of  this  squadron. 

Denisov,  who  had  been  losing  all  night  at  cards,  had  not  yet  returned 


WARANDPEACE  113 

home,  when  Rostov  rode  back  early  in  the  morning  from  a  foraging 
expedition.  Rostov,  in  his  ensign’s  uniform,  rode  up  to  the  steps,  with  a 
jerk  to  his  horse,  swung  his  leg  over  with  a  supple,  youthful  action, 
stood  a  moment  in  the  stirrup  as  though  loath  to  part  from  the  horse, 
at  last  sprang  down  and  called  the  orderly. 

‘Ah,  Bondarenko,  friend  of  my  heart/  he  said  to  the  hussar  who 
rushed  headlong  up  to  his  horse.  ‘Walk  him  up  and  down,  my  dear 
fellow,’  he  said,  with  that  gay  and  brotherly  cordiality  with  which  good- 
hearted  young  people  behave  to  every  one,  when  they  are  happy. 

‘Yes,  your  excellency,’  answered  the  Little  Russian,  shaking  his  head 
good-humouredly. 

‘Mind  now,  walk  him  about  well!’ 

Another  hussar  rushed  up  to  the  horse  too,  but  Bondarenko  had  al¬ 
ready  hold  of  the  reins. 

It  was  evident  that  the  ensign  was  liberal  with  his  tips,  and  that  his 
service  was  a  profitable  one.  Rostov  stroked  the  horse  on  the  neck  and 
then  on  the  haunch,  and  lingered  on  the  steps. 

‘Splendid!  What  a  horse  he  will  be!’  he  said  to  himself,  and  smiling 
and  holding  his  sword,  he  ran  up  the  steps,  clanking  his  spurs.  The  Ger¬ 
man,  on  whom  they  were  billeted,  looked  out  of  the  cowshed,  wearing 
a  jerkin  and  a  pointed  cap,  and  holding  a  fork,  with  which  he  was 
clearing  out  the  dung.  The  German’s  face  brightened  at  once  when  he 
saw  Rostov.  He  smiled  good-humouredly  and  winked.  ‘Good-morning, 
good-morning!’  he  repeated,  apparently  taking  pleasure  in  greeting  the 
young  man. 

‘At  work  already!’  said  Rostov,  still  with  the  same  happy,  fraternal 
smile  that  was  constantly  on  his  eager  face.  ‘Long  live  the  Austrians! 
Long  live  the  Russians!  Hurrah  for  the  Emperor  Alexander!’  he  said, 
repeating  phrases  that  had  often  been  uttered  by  the  German.  The  Ger¬ 
man  laughed,  came  right  out  of  the  cowshed,  pulled  off  his  cap,  and 
waving  it  over  his  head,  cried: 

‘And  long  live  all  the  world!’ 

Rostov  too,  like  the  German,  waved  his  cap  over  his  head,  and  laugh¬ 
ing  cried:  ‘And  hurrah  for  all  the  world!’  Though  there  was  no  reason 
for  any  special  rejoicing  either  for  the  German,  clearing  out  his  shed, 
or  for  Rostov,  coming  back  from  foraging  for  hay,  both  these  persons 
gazed  at  one  another  in  delighted  ecstasy  and  brotherly  love,  wagged 
their  heads  at  each  other  in  token  of  their  mutual  affection,  and  parted 
with  smiles,  the  German  to  his  cowshed,  and  Rostov  to  the  cottage  he 
shared  with  Denisov. 

‘Where’s  your  master?’  he  asked  of  Lavrushka,  Denisov’s  valet,  well 
known  to  all  the  regiment  as  a  rogue. 

‘His  honour’s  not  been  in  since  the  evening.  He’s  been  losing,  for 
sure,’  answered  Lavrushka.  ‘I  know  by  now,  if  he  wins,  he’ll  come  home 
early  to  boast  of  his  luck;  but  if  he’s  not  back  by  morning,  it  means  that 
he’s  lost, — he’ll  come  back  in  a  rage.  Shall  I  bring  coffee?’ 

‘Yes,  bring  it.’ 


II*  w  A  R  A  N  D  P  E  A  C  E 

Ten  minutes  later,  Lavrushka  brought  in  the  coffee. 

‘He’s  coming!’  said  he;  ‘now  for  trouble!’ 

Rostov  glanced  out  of  the  window  and  saw  Denisov  returning  home. 
Denisov  was  a  little  man  with  a  red  face,  sparkling  black  eyes,  towzled 
black  whiskers  and  hair.  He  was  wearing  an  unbuttoned  tunic,  wide 
breeches  that  fell  in  folds,  and  on  the  back  of  his  head  a  crushed  hussar’s 
cap.  Gloomily,  with  downcast  head,  he  drew  near  the  steps. 

‘Lavrushka,’  he  shouted,  loudly  and  angrily,  lisping  the  r,  ‘come,  take 
it  off,  blockhead !  ’ 

‘Well,  I  am  taking  it  off,’  answered  Lavrushka’s  voice. 

‘Ah!  you  are  up  already,’  said  Denisov,  coming  into  the  room. 

‘Long  ago,’  said  Rostov;  ‘I’ve  been  out  already  after  hay,  and  I  have 
seen  Fraulein  Mathilde.’ 

‘Really?  And  I’ve  been  losing,  my  boy,  all  night,  like  the  son  of  a 
dog,’  cried  Denisov,  not  pronouncing  his  r’s.  ‘Such  ill-luck!  such  ill-luck! 
.  .  .  As  soon  as  you  left,  my  luck  was  gone.  Hey,  tea?’ 

Denisov,  puckering  up  his  face  as  though  he  were  smiling,  and  showing 
his  short,  strong  teeth,  began  with  his  short-fingered  hands  ruffling  up 
his  thick,  black  hair,  that  was  tangled  like  a  forest. 

‘The  devil  was  in  me  to  go  to  that  rat’  (the  nickname  of  an  officer), 
he  said,  rubbing  his  brow  and  face  with  both  hands.  ‘Only  fancy,  he 
didn’t  deal  me  one  card,  not  one,  not  one  card!  ’  Denisov  took  the  lighted 
pipe  that  was  handed  to  him,  gripped  it  in  his  fist,  and  scattering  sparks, 
he  tapped  it  on  the  floor,  still  shouting. 

‘He  lets  me  have  the  simple,  and  beats  the  parole;  lets  me  get  the 
simple,  and  beats  the  parole.’ 

He  scattered  the  sparks,  broke  the  pipe,  and  threw  it  away.  Then 
Denisov  paused,  and  all  at  once  he  glanced  brightly  at  Rostov  with 
his  gleaming  black  eyes. 

‘If  there  were  only  women.  But  here,  except  drinking,  there’s  nothing 
to  do.  If  only  we  could  get  to  fighting  soon.  .  .  .  Hey,  who’s  there?’  he 
called  towards  the  door,  catching  the  sounds  of  thick  boots  and  clanking 
spurs  that  came  to  a  stop,  and  of  a  respectful  cough. 

‘The  sergeant!’  said  Lavrushka.  Denisov  puckered  up  his  face  more 
than  ever. 

‘That’s  a  nuisance,’  he  said,  flinging  down  a  purse  with  several  gold 
coins  in  it.  ‘Rostov,  count,  there’s  a  dear  boy  how  much  is  left,  and  put 
the  purse  under  the  pillow,’  he  said,  and  he  went  out  to  the  sergeant. 
Rostov  took  the  money  and  mechanically  sorting  and  arranging  in  heaps 
the  old  and  new  gold,  he  began  counting  it  over. 

‘Ah,  Telyanin!  Good-morning!  I  was  cleaned  out  last  night,’  he  heard 
Denisov’s  voice  saying  from  the  other  room. 

‘Where  was  that?  At  Bykov’s?  at  the  rat’s?  ...  I  knew  it,’  said  a 
thin  voice,  and  thereupon  there  walked  into  the  room  Lieutenant  Telya¬ 
nin,  a  little  officer  in  the  same  squadron. 

Rostov  put  the  purse  under  the  pillow,  and  shook  the  damp  little 
hand  that  was  offered  him.  Telyanin  had  for  some  reason  been  transferred 


WAR  AND  PEACE  115 

from  the  guards  just  before  the  regiment  set  out.  He  had  behaved  very 
well  in  the  regiment,  but  he  was  not  liked,  and  Rostov,  in  particular, 
could  not  endure  him,  and  could  not  conceal  his  groundless  aversion  for 
this  officer. 

‘Well,  young  cavalryman,  how  is  my  Rook  doing  for  you?’  (Rook  was 
a  riding-horse  Telyanin  had  sold  to  Rostov.)  The  lieutenant  never  looked 
the  person  he  was  speaking  to  in  the  face.  His  eyes  were  continually 
flitting  from  one  object  to  another.  ‘I  saw  you  riding  to-day  .  .  .’ 

‘Oh,  he’s  all  right;  a  good  horse,’  answered  Rostov,  though  the  horse, 
for  which  he  had  paid  seven  hundred  roubles,  was  not  worth  half  that 
sum.  ‘He’s  begun  to  go  a  little  lame  in  the  left  fore  leg  .  .  .’  he  added. 

‘The  hoof  cracked!  That’s  no  matter.  I’ll  teach  you,  I’ll  show  you  the 
sort  of  thing  to  put  on  it.’ 

‘Yes,  please  do,’  said  Rostov. 

‘I’ll  show  you,  I’ll  show  you;  it’s  not  a  secret.  But  you’ll  be  grateful 
to  me  for  that  horse.’ 

‘Then  I’ll  have  the  horse  brought  round,’  said  Rostov,  anxious  to  be 
rid  of  Telyanin.  He  went  out  to  order  the  horse  to  be  brought  round. 

In  the  outer  room  Denisov  was  squatting  on  the  threshold  with  a  pipe, 
facing  the  sergeant,  who  was  giving  him  some  report.  On  seeing  Rostov, 
Denisov  screwed  up  his  eyes,  and  pointing  over  his  shoulder  with  his 
thumb  to  the  room  where  Telyanin  was  sitting,  he  frowned  and  shook 
his  head  with  an  air  of  loathing. 

‘Ugh!  I  don’t  like  the  fellow,’  he  said,  regardless  of  the  presence  of 
the  sergeant. 

Rostov  shrugged  his  shoulders  as  though  to  say,  ‘Nor  do  I,  but  what’s 
one  to  do?’  And  having  given  his  order,  he  went  back  to  Telyanin. 

The  latter  was  still  sitting  in  the  same  indolent  pose  in  which  Rostov 
had  left  him,  rubbing  his  little  white  hands. 

‘What  nasty  faces  there  are  in  this  world!  ’  thought  Rostov  as  he  went 
into  the  room. 

‘Well,  have  you  given  orders  for  the  horse  to  be  fetched  out?’  said 
Telyanin,  getting  up  and  looking  carelessly  about  him. 

‘Yes.’ 

‘Well,  you  come  along  yourself.  I  only  came  round  to  ask  Denisov 
about  yesterday’s  order.  Have  you  got  it,  Denisov?’ 

‘Not  yet.  But  where  are  you  off  to?’ 

‘I’m  going  to  show  this  young  man  here  how  to  shoe  a  horse,’  said 
Telyanin. 

They  went  out  down  the  steps  and  into  the  stable.  The  lieutenant 
showed  how  to  put  on  the  remedy,  and  went  away  to  his  own  quarters. 

When  Rostov  went  back  there  was  a  bottle  of  vodka  and  some  sausage 
on  the  table.  Denisov  was  sitting  at  the  table,  and  his  pen  was  squeaking 
over  the  paper.  He  looked  gloomily  into  Rostov’s  face. 

‘I  am  writing  to  her,’  he  said.  He  leaned  his  elbow  on  the  table  with 
the  pen  in  his  hand,  and  obviously  rejoiced  at  the  possibility  of  saying 
by  word  of  mouth  all  he  meant  to  write,  he  told  the  contents  of  his  letter 


ii6  WARANDPEACE 

to  Rostov.  ‘You  see,  my  dear  boy,’  he  said,  ‘we  are  plunged  in  slumber, 
we  are  the  children  of  dust  and  ashes,  until  we  love  .  .  .  but  love,  and 
you  are  a  god,  you  are  pure,  as  on  the  first  day  of  creation.  .  .  .  Who’s 
that  now?  Send  him  to  the  devil!  I’ve  no  time!  ’  he  shouted  to  Lavrushka, 
who,  not  in  the  slightest  daunted,  went  up  to  him. 

‘Why,  who  should  it  be?  You  told  him  to  come  yourself.  The  sergeant 
has  come  for  the  money.’ 

Denisov  frowned,  seemed  about  to  shout  some  leply,  but  did  not 
speak. 

‘It’s  a  nuisance,’  he  said  to  himself.  ‘How  much  money  was  there  left 
there  in  the  purse?’  he  asked  Rostov. 

‘Seven  new  and  three  old  gold  pieces.’ 

‘Oh,  it’s  a  nuisance!  Well,  why  are  you  standing  there,  you  mummy? 
Send  the  sergeant!’  Denisov  shouted  to  Lavrushka. 

‘Please,  Denisov,  take  the  money  from  me;  I’ve  plenty,’  said  Rostov, 
blushing. 

‘I  don’t  like  borrowing  from  my  own  friends;  I  dislike  it,’  grumbled 
Denisov. 

‘But  if  you  won’t  take  money  from  me  like  a  comrade,  you’ll  offend 
me.  I’ve  really  got  it,’  repeated  Rostov. 

‘Oh,  no.’  And  Denisov  went  to  the  bed  to  take  the  purse  from  under 
the  pillow. 

‘Where  did  you  put  it,  Rostov?’ 

‘Under  the  lower  pillow.’ 

‘But  it’s  not  there.’  Denisov  threw  both  the  pillows  on  the  floor.  There 
was  no  purse.  ‘Well,  that’s  a  queer  thing.’ 

‘Wait  a  bit,  haven’t  you  dropped  it?’  said  Rostov,  picking  the  pillows 
up  one  at  a  time  and  shaking  them.  He  took  off  the  quilt  and  shook  it. 
The  purse  was  not  there. 

‘Could  I  have  forgotten?  No,  for  I  thought  that  you  keep  it  like  a 
secret  treasure  under  your  head,’  said  Rostov.  ‘I  laid  the  purse  here. 
Where  is  it?’  He  turned  to  Lavrushka. 

‘I  never  came  into  the  room.  Where  you  put  it,  there  it  must  be.’ 

‘But  it  isn’t.’ 

‘You’re  always  like  that;  you  throw  things  down  anywhere  and  forget 
them.  Look  in  your  pockets.’ 

‘No,  if  I  hadn’t  thought  of  its  being  a  secret  treasure,’  said  Rostov, 
‘but  I  remember  where  I  put  it.’ 

Lavrushka  ransacked  the  whole  bed,  glanced  under  it  and  under  the 
table,  ransacked  the  whole  room  and  stood  still  in  the  middle  of  the 
room.  Denisov  watched  Lavrushka’s  movements  in  silence,  and  when 
Lavrushka  flung  up  his  hands  in  amazement  to  signify  that  it  was  no¬ 
where,  he  looked  round  at  Rostov. 

‘Rostov,  none  of  your  schoolboy  jokes.’ 

Rostov,  feeling  Denisov’s  eyes  upon  him,  lifted  his  eyes  and  instantly 
dropped  them  again.  All  his  blood,  which  felt  as  though  it  had  been 


WARANDPEACE  n; 

locked  up  somewhere  belo\v  his  throat,  rushed  to  his  face  and  eyes.  He 
could  hardly  draw  his  breath. 

‘And  there’s  been  no  one  in  the  room  but  the  lieutenant  and  your¬ 
selves.  It  must  be  here  somewhere,’  said  Lavrushka. 

‘Now  then,  you  devil’s  puppet,  bestir  yourself  and  look  for  it!  ’  Denisov 
shouted  suddenly,  turning  purple  and  dashing  at  the  valet  with  a  threat¬ 
ening  gesture.  ‘The  purse  is  to  be  found,  or  I’ll  flog  you!  I’ll  flog  you  all!  ’ 

Rostov,  his  eyes  avoiding  Denisov,  began  buttoning  up  his  jacket, 
fastening  on  his  sword,  and  putting  on  his  forage-cap. 

‘I  tell  you  the  purse  is  to  be  found,’  roared  Denisov,  shaking  the 
orderly  by  the  shoulders  and  pushing  him  against  the  wall. 

‘Denisov,  let  him  be;  I  know  who  has  taken  it,’  said  Rostov,  going 
towards  the  door  without  raising  his  eyes. 

Denisov  stopped,  thought  a  moment,  and  evidently  understanding 
Rostov’s  hint,  he  clutched  him  by  the  arm. 

‘Nonsense!’  he  roared  so  that  the  veins  stood  out  on  his  neck  and 
forehead  like  cords.  ‘I  tell  you,  you’ve  gone  out  of  your  mind;  I  won’t 
allow  it.  The  purse  is  here;  I’ll  flay  the  skin  off  this  rascal,  and  it  will 
be  here.’ 

‘I  know  who  has  taken  it,’  repeated  Rostov,  in  a  shaking  voice,  and 
he  went  to  the  door. 

‘And  I  tell  you,  you’re  not  to  dare  to  do  it,’  shouted  Denisov,  making 
a  dash  at  the  ensign  to  detain  him.  But  Rostov  pulled  his  arm  away,  lifted 
his  eyes,  and  looked  directly  and  resolutely  at  Denisov  with  as  much 
fury  as  if  he  had  been  his  greatest  enemy. 

‘Do  you  understand  what  you’re  saying?’  he  said  in  a  tremblirig  voice; 
‘except  me,  there  has  been  no  one  else  in  the  room.  So  that,  if  it’s  not  so, 
why  then  .  .  .’ 

He  could  not  utter  the  rest,  and  ran  out  of  the  room. 

‘Oh,  damn  you  and  all  the  rest,’  were  the  last  words  Rostov  heard. 

Rostov  went  to  Telyanin’s  quarters. 

‘The  master’s  not  at  home,  he’s  gone  to  the  staff,’  Telyanin’s  orderly 
told  him.  ‘Has  something  happened?’  the  orderly  added,  wondering  at 
the  ensign’s  troubled  face. 

‘No,  nothing.’ 

‘You’ve  only  just  missed  him,’  said  the  orderly. 

The  staff  quarters  were  two  miles  and  a  half  from  Salzeneck.  Not 
having  found  him  at  home,  Rostov  took  his  horse  and  rode  to  the  quarters 
of  the  staff.  In  the  village,  where  the  staff  was  quartered,  there  was  a 
restaurant  which  the  officers  frequented.  Rostov  reached  the  restaurant 
and  saw  Telyanin’s  horse  at  the  entry. 

In  the  second  room  the  lieutenant  was  sitting  over  a  dish  of  sausages 
and  a  bottle  of  wine. 

‘Ah,  you  have  come  here  too,  young  man,’  he  said,  smiling  and  lifting 
his  eyebrows. 

‘Yes,’  said  Rostov,  speaking  as  though  the  utterance  of  the  word  cost 
him  great  effort ;  and  he  sat  down  at  the  nearest  table. 


IIS  WAR  AND  PEACE 

Both  were  silent ;  there  were  two  Germans  and  a  Russian  officer  in  the 
room.'  Every  one  was  mute,  and  the  only  sounds  audible  were  the  clatter 
of  knives  on  the  plates  and  the  munching  of  the  lieutenant.  When 
Telyanin  had  finished  his  lunch,  he  took  out  of  his  pocket  a  double 
purse;  with  his  little  white  fingers,  that  were  curved  at  the  tips,  he  parted 
the  rings,  took  out  some  gold,  and  raising  his  eyebrows,  gave  the  money 
to  the  attendant. 

‘Make  haste,  please,’  he  said. 

The  gold  was  new.  Rostov  got  up  and  went  to  Telyanin. 

‘Let  me  look  at  the  purse,’  he  said  in  a  low  voice,  scarcely  audible. 

With  shifting  eyes,  but  eyebrows  still  raised,  Telyanin  gave  him  the 
purse. 

‘Yes,  it’s  a  pretty  purse  .  .  .  yes  .  .  .’  he  said,  and  suddenly  he 
turned  white.  ‘You  can  look  at  it,  young  man,’  he  added. 

Rostov  took  the  purse  in  his  hand  and  looked  both  at  it  and  at  the 
money  in  it,  and  also  at  Telyanin.  The  lieutenant  looked  about  him,  as 
his  way  was,  and  seemed  suddenly  to  have  grown  very  good-humoured. 

‘If  we  go  to  Vienna,  I  suspect  I  shall  leave  it  all  there,  but  now  there’s 
nowhere  to  spend  our  money  in  these  wretched  little  places,.’  he  said. 
‘Come,  give  it  me,  young  man;  I’m  going.’ 

Rostov  did  not  speak. 

‘What  are  you  going  to  do?  have  lunch  too?  They  give  you  decent 
food,’  Telyanin  went  on.  ‘Give  it  me.’  He  put  out  his  hand  and  took  hold 
of  the  purse.  Rostov  let  go  of  it.  Telyanin  took  the  purse  and  began 
carelessly  dropping  it  into  the  pocket  of  his  riding  trousers,  while  his 
eyebrows  were  carelessly  lifted  and  his  mouth  stood  a  little  open,  as 
though  he  would  say:  ‘Yes,  yes,  I’m  putting  my  purse  in  my  pocket,  and 
that’s  a  very  simple  matter,  and  no  one  has  anything  to  do  with  it.’ 

‘Well,  young  man?’  he  said  with  a  sigh,  and  from  under  his  lifted 
eyebrows  he  glanced  into  Rostov’s  eyes.  A  kind  of  gleam  passed  with 
the  swiftness  of  an  electric  flash  from  Telyanin’s  eyes  to  the  eyes  of 
Rostov,  and  back  again  and  back  again  and  again,  all  in  one  instant. 

‘Come  here,’  said  Rostov,  taking  Telyanin  by  the  arm.  He  almost 
dragged  him  to  the  window.  ‘That’s  Denisov’s  money;  you  took  it  .  . 
he  whispered  in  his  ear. 

‘What?  .  .  .  what?  .  .  .  How  dare  you?  What?’  .  .  .  said  Telyanin. 
But  the  words  sounded  like  a  plaintive,  despairing  cry  and  prayer  for 
forgiveness.  As  soon  as  Rostov  heard  the  sound  of  his  voice,  a  great 
weight  of  suspense,  like  a  stone,  rolled  off  his  heart.  He  felt  glad,  and 
at  the  same  instant  he  pitied  the  luckless  creature  standing  before  him, 
but  he  had  to  carry  the  thing  through  to  the  end. 

‘God  knows  what  the  people  here  may  think,’  muttered  Telyanin, 
snatching  up  his  forage-cap  and  turning  towards  a  small  empty  room. 
‘You  must  explain  .  .  .’ 

‘I  know  that,  and  I’ll  prove  it,’  said  Rostov. 

‘I  .  .  .’ 

The  terrified,  white  face  of  Telyanin  began  twitching  in  every  muscle; 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


,«9 

his  eyes  still  moved  uneasily,  but  on  the  ground,  never  rising  to  the  level 
of  Rostov’s  face,  and  tearful  sobs  could  be  heard. 

‘Count!  .  .  .  don’t  ruin  a  young  man  .  .  here  is  the  wretched 

money,  take  it.’  ...  He  threw  it  on  the  table.  ‘I’ve  an  old  father  and 
mother!’  .  .  . 

Rostov  took  the  money,  avoiding  Telyanin’s  eyes,  and  without  utter¬ 
ing  a  word,  he  went  out  of  the  room.  But  in  the  doorway  he  stopped 
and  turned  back. 

‘My  God!’  he  said,  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  ‘how  could  you  do  it?’ 

‘Count,’  said  Telyanin,  coming  nearer  to  the  ensign. 

‘Don’t  touch  me,’  said  Rostov,  drawing  back.  ‘If  you’re  in  need,  take 
the  money.’ 

He  thrust  a  purse  on  him  and  ran  out  of  the  restaurant. 


V 

In  the  evening  of  the  same  day  a  lively  discussion  was  taking  place  in 
Denisov’s  quarters  between  some  officers  of  the  squadron. 

‘But  I  tell  you,  Rostov,  that  you  must  apologise  to  the  colonel,’  the 
tall  staff-captain  was  saying,  addressing  Rostov,  who  was  crimson  with 
excitement.  The  staff-captain,  Kirsten,  a  man  with  grizzled  hair,  im¬ 
mense  whiskers,  thick  features  and  a  wrinkled  face,  had  been  twice 
degraded  to  the  ranks  for  affairs  of  honour,  and  had  twice  risen  again 
to  holding  a  commission. 

‘I  permit  no  one  to  tell  me  I’m  lying!  ’  cried  Rostov.  ‘He  told  me  I  was 
lying  and  I  told  him  he  was  lying.  And  there  it  rests.  He  can  put  me 
on  duty  every  day,  he  can  place  me  under  arrest,  but  no  one  can  compel 
me  to  apologise,  because  if  he,  as  the  colonel,  considers  it  beneath  his 
dignity  to  give  me  satisfaction,  then  .  .  .’ 

‘But  you  wait  a  bit,  my  good  fellow;  you  listen  to  me,’  interrupted  the 
staff -captain  in  his  bass  voice,  calmly  stroking  his  long  whiskers.  ‘You  tell 
the  colonel  in  the  presence  of  other  officers  that  an  officer  has  stolen - ’ 

‘I’m  not  to  blame  for  the  conversation  being  in  the  presence  of  other 
officers.  Possibly  I  ought  not  to  have  spoken  before  them,  but  I’m  not 
a  diplomatist.  That’s  just  why  I  went  into  the  hussars;  I  thought  that 
here  I  should  have  no  need  of  such  finicky  considerations,  and  he  tells 
me  I’m  a  liar  ...  so  let  him  give  me  satisfaction.’ 

‘That’s  all  very  fine,  no  one  imagines  that  you’re  a  coward;  but  that’s 
not  the  point.  Ask  Denisov  if  it’s  not  utterly  out  of  the  question  for  an 
ensign  to  demand  satisfaction  of  his  colonel?’ 

Denisov  was  biting  his  moustache  with  a  morose  air,  listening  to  the 
conversation,  evidently  with  no  desire  to  take  part  in  it.  To  the  cap¬ 
tain’s  question,  he  replied  by  a  negative  shake  of  the  head. 

‘You  speak  to  the  colonel  in  the  presence  of  other  officers  of  this  dirty 
business,’  pursued  the  staff-captain.  ‘Bogdanitch’  (Bogdanitch  was  what 
they  called  the  colonel)  ‘snubbed  you  .  .  .’ 


I  20 


A  R  AND  PEACE 

‘No,  he  didn’t.  He  said  I  was  telling  an  untruth.’ 

‘Quite  so,  and  you  talked  nonsense  to  him,  and  you  must  apologise.’ 

‘Not  on  any  consideration!’  shouted  Rostov. 

‘I  shouldn’t  have  expected  this  of  you,’  said  the  staff-captain  seriously 
and  severely.  ‘You  won’t  apologise,  but,  my  good  sir,  it’s  not  only  him, 
but  all  the  regiment,  all  of  us,  that  you’ve  acted  wrongly  by;  you’re  to 
blame  all  round.  Look  here;  if  you’d  only  thought  it  over,  and  taken 
advice  how  to  deal  with  the  matter,  but  you  must  go  and  blurt  it  all 
straight  out  before  the  officers.  What  was  the  colonel  to  do  then?  Is  he 
to  bring  the  officer  up  for  trial  and  disgrace  the  whole  regiment?  On 
account  of  one  scoundrel  is  the  whole  regiment  to  be  put  to  shame?  Is 
that  the  thing  for  him  to  do,  to  your  thinking?  It  is  not  to  our  thinking. 
And  Bogdanitch  did  the  right  thing.  He  told  you  that  you  were  telling 
an  untruth.  It’s  unpleasant,  but  what  could  he  do?  you  brought  it  on 
yourself.  And  now  when  they  try  to  smooth  the  thing  over,  you’re  so 
high  and  mighty,  you  won’t  apologise,  and  want  to  have  the  whole  story 
out.  You’re  huffy  at  being  put  on  duty,  but  what  is  it  for  you  to  apologise 
to  an  old  and  honourable  officer!  Whatever  Bogdanitch  may  be,  any 
way  he’s  an  honourable  and  gallant  old  colonel;  you’re  offended  at  that, 
but  disgracing  the  regiment’s  nothing  to  you.’  The  staff-captain’s  voice 
began  to  quaver.  ‘You,  sir,  have  been  next  to  no  time  in  the  regiment; 
you’re  here  to-day,  and  to-morrow  you’ll  be  passed  on  somewhere  as  an 
adjutant;  you  don’t  care  a  straw  for  people  saying:  “There  are  thieves 
among  the  Pavlograd  officers!”  But  we  do  care!  Don’t  we,  Denisov? 
Do  we  care?’ 

Denisov  still  did  not  speak  or  stir;  his  gleaming  black  eyes  glanced 
now  and  then  at  Rostov. 

‘Your  pride  is  dear  to  you,  you  don’t  want  to  apologise,’  continued  the 
staff-captain,  ‘but  we  old  fellows,  as  we  grew  up  in  the  regiment  and, 
please  God,  we  hope  to  die  in  it,  it’s  the  honour  of  the  regiment  is  dear 
to  us,  and  Bogdanitch  knows  that.  Ah,  isn’t  it  dear  to  us!  But  this  isn’t 
right;  it’s  not  right!  You  may  take  offence  or  not;  but  I  always  speak 
the  plain  truth.  It’s  not  right!  ’ 

And  the  staff-captain  got  up  and  turned  away  from  Rostov. 

‘That’s  the  truth,  damn  it!’  shouted  Denisov,  jumping  up.  ‘Come, 
Rostov,  come!’ 

Rostov,  turning  crimson  and  white  again,  looked  first  at  one  officer 
and  then  at  the  other. 

‘No,  gentlemen,  no  .  .  .  you  mustn’t  think  ...  I  quite  understand, 
you’re  wrong  in  thinking  that  of  me  ...  I  ...  for  me  ...  for  the 
honour  of  the  regiment  I’d  .  .  .  but  why  talk?  I’ll  prove  that  in  action 
and  for  me  the  honour  of  the  flag  .  .  .  well,  never  mind,  it’s  true,  I’m 
to  blame!’  .  .  .  There  were  tears  in  his  eyes.  ‘I’m  wrong,  wrong  all 
round!  Well,  what  more  do  you  want?’  .  .  . 

‘Come,  that’s  right,  count,’  cried  the  staff-captain,  turning  round  and 
clapping  him  on  the  shoulder  with  his  big  hand. 

‘I  tell  you,’  shouted  Denisov,  ‘he’s  a  capital  fellow.’ 


I  2  I 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘That’s  better,  count/  repeated  the  captain,  beginning  to  address  him 
by  his  title  as  though  in  acknowledgment  of  his  confession.  ‘Go  and 
apologise,  your  excellency.’ 

‘Gentlemen,  I’ll  do  anything,  no  one  shall  hear  a  word  from  me/ 
Rostov  protested  in  an  imploring  voice,  ‘but  I  can’t  apologise,  by  God, 
I  can’t,  say  what  you  will!  How  can  I  apologise,  like  a  little  boy  beg¬ 
ging  pardon! ’ 

Denisov  laughed. 

‘It’ll  be  the  worse  for  you,  if  you  don’t.  Bogdanitch  doesn’t  forget 
things;  he’ll  make  you  pay  for  your  obstinacy,’  said  Kirsten. 

‘By  God,  it’s  not  obstinacy!  I  can’t  describe  the  feeling  it  gives  me. 
I  can’t  do  it.’ 

‘Well,  as  you  like/  said  the  staff-captain.  ‘What  has  the  scoundrel  done 
with  himself?’  he  asked  Denisov. 

‘He  has  reported  himself  ill;  to-morrow  the  order’s  given  for  him  to 
be  struck  off/  said  Denisov. 

‘It  is  an  illness,  there’s  no  other  way  of  explaining  it/  said  the  staff- 
captain. 

‘Whether  it’s  illness  or  whether  it’s  not,  he’d  better  not  cross  my  path 
— I’d  kill  him,’  Denisov  shouted  bloodthirstily. 

Zherkov  walked  into  the  room. 

‘How  do  you  come  here?’  the  officers  cried  to  the  newcomer  at  once. 

‘To  the  front,  gentlemen.  Mack  has  surrendered  with  his  whole  army.’ 

‘Nonsense!  ’ 

‘I’ve  seen  him  myself.’ 

‘What?  Seen  Mack  alive,  with  all  his  arms  and  legs?’ 

‘To  the  front!  to  the  front!  Give  him  a  bottle  for  such  news.  How 
did  you  come  here?’ 

‘I’ve  been  dismissed  back  to  the  regiment  again  on  account  of  that 
devil,  Mack.  The  Austrian  general  complained  of  me.  I  congratulated 
him  on  Mack’s  arrival.  .  .  .  What  is  it,  Rostov,  you  look  as  if  you’d 
just  come  out  of  a  hot  bath?’ 

‘We’ve  been  in  such  a  mess  these  last  two  days,  old  boy.’ 

The  regimental  adjutant  came  in  and  confirmed  the  news  brought 
by  Zherkov.  They  were  under  orders  to  advance  next  day. 

‘To  the  front,  gentlemen!’ 

‘Well,  thank  God!  we’ve  been  sticking  here  too  long.’ 


VI 

Kutuzov  fell  back  to  Vienna,  destroying  behind  him  the  bridges  over 
the  river  Inn  (in  Braunau)  and  the  river  Traun  (in  Linz).  On  the  23rd 
of  October  the  Russian  troops  crossed  the  river  Enns.  The  Russian 
baggage-waggons  and  artillery  and  the  columns  of  troops  were  in  the 
middle  of  that  day  stretching  in  a  long  string  across  the  town  of  Enns 
on  both  sides  of  the  bridge.  The  day  was  warm,  autumnal,  and  rainy. 


122 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

The  wide  view  that  opened  out  from  the  heights  where  the  Russian 
batteries  stood  guarding  the  bridge  was  at  times  narrowed  by  the  slant¬ 
ing  rain  that  shut  it  in  like  a  muslin  curtain,  then  again  widened  out,  and 
in  the  bright  sunlight  objects  could  be  distinctly  seen  in  the  distance, 
looking  as  if  covered  with  a  coat  of  varnish.  The  little  town  could  be 
seen  below  with  its  white  houses  and  its  red  roofs,  its  cathedral  and  its 
bridge,  on  both  sides  of  which  streamed  masses  of  Russian  troops, 
crowded  together.  At  the  bend  of  the  Danube  could  be  seen  ships  and  the 
island  and  a  castle  with  a  park,  surrounded  by  the  waters  formed  by  the 
Enns  falling  into  the  Danube,  and  the  precipitous  left  bank  of  the 
Danube,  covered  with  pine  forest,  with  a  mysterious  -distance  of  green 
tree-tops  and  bluish  gorges.  Beyond  the  pine  forest,  that  looked  wild  and 
untouched  by  the  hand  of  man,  rose  the  turrets  of  a  nunnery;  and  in  the 
far  distance  in  front,  on  the  hill  on  the  further  side  of  the  Enns,  could 
be  seen  the  scouts  of  the  enemy. 

Between  the  cannons  on  the  height  stood  the  general  in  command  of 
the  rear-guard  and  an  officer  of  the  suite  scanning  the  country  through 
a  field-glass.  A  little  behind  them,  there  sat  on  the  trunk  of  a  cannon, 
Nesvitsky,  who  had  been  despatched  by  the  commander-in-chief  to  the 
rear-guard.  The  Cossack  who  accompanied  Nesvitsky  had  handed  him 
over  a  knapsack  and  a  flask,  and  Nesvitsky  was  regaling  the  officers 
with  pies  and  real  doppel-kiimmel.  The  officers  surrounded  him  in  a 
delighted  circle,  some  on  their  knees,  some  sitting  cross-legged,  like 
Turks,  on  the  wet  grass. 

‘Yes,  there  was  some  sense  in  that  Austrian  prince  who  built  a  castle 
here.  It’s  a  magnificent  spot.  Why  aren’t  you  eating,  gentlemen?’  said 
Nesvitsky. 

‘Thank  you  very  much,  prince,’  answered  one  of  the  officers,  enjoying 
the  opportunity  of  talking  to  a  staff-official  of  such  importance.  ‘It’s  a 
lovely  spot.  We  marched  right  by  the  park;  we  saw  two  deer  and  such 
a  splendid  house-!’ 

‘Look,  prince,’  said  another,  who  would  dearly  have  liked  to  take 
another  pie,  but  was  ashamed  to,  and  therefore  affected  to.be  gazing  at 
the  countryside;  ‘look,  our  infantry  have  just  got  in  there.  Over  there, 
near  the  meadow  behind  the  village,  three  of  them  are  dragging  some¬ 
thing.  They  will  clean  out  that  palace  nicely,’  he  said,  with  evident 
approval. 

‘No  doubt,’  said  Nesvitsky.  ‘No;  but  what  I  should  like,’  he  added, 
munching  a  pie  in  his  moist,  handsome  mouth,  ‘would  be  to  slip  in  there.’ 
He  pointed  to  the  turreted  nunnery  that  could  be  seen  on  the  mountain-  : 
side.  He  smiled,  his  eyes  narrowing  and  gleaming.  ‘Yes,  that  would  be 
first-rate,  gentlemen!’  The  officers  laughed. 

‘One  might  at  least  scare  the  nuns  a  little.  There  are  Italian  girls,  they 
say,  among  them.  Upon  my  word,  I’d  give  five  years  of  my  life  for  it!’ 

‘They  must  be  bored,  too,’  said  an  officer  who  was  rather  bolder,  laugh¬ 
ing. 

Meanwhile  the  officer  of  the  suite,  who  was  standing  in  front,  pointed 


WAR  AND  PEACE  123 

something  out  to  the  general ;  the  general  looked  through  the  field-glass. 

‘Yes,  so  it  is,  so  it  is,’  said  the  general  angrily,  taking  the  field-glass 
away  from  his  eye  and  shrugging  his  shoulders;  ‘they  are  going  to  fire 
at  them  at  the  crossing  of  the  river.  And  why  do  they  linger  so?’ 

With  the  naked  eye,  looking  in  that  direction,  one  could  discern  the 
enemy  and  their  batteries,  from  which  a  milky-white  smoke  was  rising. 
The  smoke  was  followed  by  the  sound  of  a  shot  in  the  distance,  and 
our  troops  were  unmistakably  hurrying  to  the  place  of  crossing. 

Nesvitsky  got  up  puffing  and  went  up  to  the  general,  smiling. 

‘Wouldn’t  your  excellency  take  some  lunch,’  he  said. 

‘It’s  a  bad  business,’  said  the  general,  without  answering  him;  ‘our 
men  have  been  too  slow.’ 

‘Shouldn’t  I  ride  over,  your  excellency,’  said  Nesvitsky. 

‘Yes,  ride  over,  please,’  said  the  general,  repeating  an  order  that  had 
already  once  before  been  given  in  detail ;  ‘and  tell  the  hussars  that  they 
are  to  cross  last  and  to  burn  the  bridge,  as  I  sent  orders,  and  that  they’re 
to  overhaul  the  burning  materials  on  the  bridge.' 

‘Very  good,’  answered  Nesvitsky.  He  called  the  Cossack'  with  his 
horse,  told  him  to  pick  up  the  knapsack  and  flask,  and  lightly  swung 
his  heavy  person  into  the  saddle. 

‘Upon  my  word,  I  am  going  to  pay  a  visit  to  the  nuns,’  he  said  to  the 
officers  who  were  wTatching  him,  smiling,  and  he  rode  along  the  winding 
path  down  the  mountain. 

‘Now  then,  captain,  try  how  far  it’ll  carry,’  said  the  general,  turning 
to  the  artillery  officer.  ‘Have  a  little  fun  to  pass  the  time.’ 

‘Men,  to  the  guns!’  commanded  the  officer,  and  in  a  moment  the  gun¬ 
ners  ran  gaily  from  the  camp  fires  and  loaded  the  big  guns. 

‘One!’  they  heard  the  word  of  command.  Number  one  bounded  back 
nimbly.  The  cannon  boomed  with  a  deafening  metallic  sound,  and 
1  whistling  over  the  heads  of  our  men  under  the  mountainside,  the  grenade 
flew  across,  and  falling  a  long  way  short  of  the  enemy  showed  by  the 
rising  smoke  where  it  had  fallen  and  burst. 

The  faces  of  the  soldiers  and  officers  lightened  up  at  the  sotind.  Every 
one  got  up  and  busily  watched  the  movements  of  our  troops  below, 
which  could  be  seen  as  in  the  hollow  of  a  hand,  and  the  movements  of 
the  advancing  enemy.  At  the  same  instant,  the  sun  came  out  fully  from 
behind  the  clouds,  and  the  full  note  of  the  solitary  shot  and  the  brilliance 
of  the  bright  sunshine  melted  into  a  single  inspiriting  impression  of 
light-hearted  gaiety. 


VH 

)ver  the  bridge  two  of  the  enemy’s  shots  had  already  flown  and  there 
vas  a  crush  on  the  bridge.  In  the  middle  of  the  bridge  stood  Nesvitsky. 
in  had  dismounted  and  stood  with  his  stout  person  jammed  against  the 
‘flings.  He  looked  laughingly  back  at  his  Cossack,  who  was  standing 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


several  paces  behind  him  holding  the  two  horses  by  their  bridles.  Every 
time  Nesvitsky  tried  to  move  on,  the  advancing  soldiers  and  waggons 
bore  down  upon  him  and  shoved  him  back  against  the  railings.  There 
was  nothing  for  him  to  do  but  to  smile. 

'Hi  there,  my  lad,’  said  the  Cossack  to  a  soldier  in  charge  of  a 
waggon-load  who  was  forcing  his  way  through  the  foot-soldiers  that 
pressed  right  up  to  his  wheels  and  his  horses;  ‘what  are  you  about? 
No,  you  wait  a  bit;  you  see  the  general  wants  to  pass.’ 

But  the  convoy  soldier,  taking  no  notice  of  the  allusion  to  the  general, 
bawled  to  the  soldiers  who  blocked  the  way:  ‘Hi!  fellows,  keep  to  the 
left!  wait  a  bit!  ’  But  the  fellows,  shoulder  to  shoulder,  with  their  bayonets 
interlocked,  moved  over  the  bridge  in  one  compact  mass.  Looking  down 
over  the  rails,  Prince  Nesvitsky  saw  the  noisy,  rapid,  but  not  high  waves 
of  the  Enns,  which,  swirling  in  eddies  round  the  piles  of  the  bridge, 
chased  one  another  down  stream.  Looking  on  the  bridge  he  saw  the 
living  waves  of  the  soldiers,  all  alike  as  they  streamed  by:  shakoes  with 
covers  on  them,  knapsacks,  bayonets,  long  rifles,  and  under  the  shakoes 
broad-jawed  faces,  sunken  cheeks,  and  looks  of  listless  weariness,  and  i 
legs  moving  over  the  boards  of  the  bridge,  that  were  coated  with  sticky  j 
mud.  Sometimes  among  the  monotonous  streams  of  soldiers,  like  a  crest 
of  white  foam  on  the  waves  of  the  Enns,  an  officer  forced  his  way  through, 
in  a  cloak,  with  a  face  of  a  different  type  from  the  soldiers.  Sometimes, 
like  a  chip  whirling  on  the  river,  there  passed  over  the  bridge  among  the 
waves  of  infantry  a  dismounted  hussar,  an  orderly,  or  an  inhabitant  of 
the  town.  Sometimes,  like  a  log  floating  down  the  river,  there  moved  over 
the  bridge,  hemmed  in  on  all  sides,  a  baggage-waggon,  piled  up  high  and 
covered  with  leather  covers. 

‘Why,  they’re  like  a  river  bursting  its  banks,’  said  the  Cossack,  stop¬ 
ping  hopelessly.  ‘Are  there  many  more  over  there?’ 

‘A  million,  all  but  one!’  said  a  cheerful  soldier  in  a  torn  coat,  winking, 
as  he  passed  out  of  sight;  after  him  came  another  soldier,  an  older  man. 

‘If  he’  (he  meant  the  enemy)  ‘starts  popping  at  the  bridge  just  now,’ 
said  the  old  soldier  dismally,  addressing  his  companion,  ‘you’ll  forget 
to  scratch  yourself.’  And  he  passed  on.  After  him  came  another  soldier 
'  riding  on  a  waggon. 

‘Where  the  devil  did  you  put  the  leg-wrappers?’  said  an  orderly,  run¬ 
ning  after  the  waggon  and  fumbling  in  the  back  part  of  it.  And  he  too 
passed  on  with  the  waggon. 

Then  came  some  hilarious  soldiers,  who  had  unmistakably  been  drink-! 
ing. 

‘And  didn’t  he  up  with  the  butt  end  of  his  gun  and  give  him  one  rights 
in  the  teeth,’  one  soldier  was  saying  gleefully  with  a  wide  sweep  of  hi; 
arm. 

‘It  just  was  a  delicious  ham,’  answered  the  other  with  a  chuckle.  Ant / 
they  passed  on,  so  that  Nesvitsky  never  knew  who  had  received  the  blov 
in  his  teeth,  and  what  the  ham  had  to  do  with  it. 

‘Yes,  they’re  in  a  hurry  now!  When  he  let  fly  a  bit  of  cold  lead,/  j 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


I2S 

would  Lave  thought  they  were  all  being  killed,’  said  an  under  officer, 
angrily  and  reproachfully. 

‘When  it  whizzed  by  me,  uncle,  the  bullet,’  said  a  young  soldier  with 
a  huge  mouth,  scarcely  able  to  keep  from  laughing,  ‘I  turned  fairly 
numb.  Upon  my  soul,  wasn’t  I  in  a  fright,  to  be  sure!’  said  the  soldier, 
making  a  sort  of  boast  of  his  terror. 

He,  too,  passed  on.  After  him  came  a  waggon  unlike  all  that  had  passed 
over  before.  It  was  a  German  Vorspann  with  two  horses,  loaded,  it 
seemed,  with  the  goods  of  a  whole  household.  The  horses  were  led  by 
a  German,  and  behind  was  fastened  a  handsome,  brindled  cow  with  an 
immense  udder.  On  piled-up  feather-beds  sat  a  woman  with  a  small 
baby,  an  old  woman,  and  a  good-looking,  rosy-cheeked  German  girl. 
They  were  evidently  country  people,  moving,  who  had  been  allowed 
through  by  special  permit.  The  eyes  of  all  the  soldiers  were  turned  upon 
the  women,  and,  while  the  waggon  moved  by,  a  step  at  a  time,  all  the 
soldiers’  remarks  related  to  the  two  women.  Every  face  wore  almost 
the  same  smile,  reflecting  indecent  ideas  about  the  women. 

‘Hey,  the  sausage,  he’s  moving  away!’ 

‘Sell  us  your  missis,’  said  another  soldier,  addressing  the  German,  who 
strode  along  with  downcast  eyes,  looking  wrathful  and  alarmed. 

‘See  how  she’s  dressed  herself  up!  Ah,  you  devils!’ 

‘I  say,  wouldn’t  you  like  to  be  billeted  on  them,  Fedotov!’ 

‘I  know  a  thing  ov  two,  mate!’ 

‘Where  are  you  going?’  asked  the  infantry  officer,  who  was  eating  an 
apple.  He  too  was  half  smiling  and  staring  at  the  handsome  girl.  The 
German,  shutting  his  eyes,  signified  that  he  did  not  understand. 

‘Take  it,  if  you  like,’  said  the  officer,  giving  the  girl  an  apple.  The 
girl  smiled  and  took  it.  Nesvitsky,  like  all  the  men  on  the  bridge,  never 
itook  his  eyes  off  the  women  till  they  had  passed  by.  When  they  had 
passed  by,  again  there  moved  by  the  same  soldiers,  with  the  same  talk, 
and  at  last  all  came  to  a  standstill.  As  often  happens,  the  horses  in  a 
convoy-waggon  became  unmanageable  at  the  end  of  the  bridge,  and 
the  whole  crowd  had  to  wait. 

‘What  are  they  standing  still  for?  There’s  no  order  kept!’  said  the 
soldiers.  ‘Where  are  you  shoving?’  ‘Damn  it!’  ‘Can’t  you  wait  a  little?.’ 
It’ll  be  a  bad  look-out  if  he  sets  light  to  the  bridge.’ 

‘Look,  there’s  an  officer  jammed  in  too,’  the  soldiers  said  in  different 
parts  of  the  stationary  crowd,  as  they  looked  about  them  and  kept 
Pressing  forward  to  the  end  of  the  bridge.  Looking  round  at  the  waters 
of  the  Enns  under  the  bridge,  Nesvitsky  suddenly  heard  a  sound  new 
iO  him,  the  sound  of  something  rapidly  coming  nearer  .  .  .  something 
)ig,  and  then  a  splash  in  the  water. 

1  ‘Look  where  it  reaches  to!’  a  soldier  standing  near  said  sternly,  look- 
ng  round  at  the  sound. 

‘He’s  encouraging  us-  to  get  on  quicker,’  said  another  uneasily.  The 
rowd  moved  again.  Nesvitsky  grasped  that  it  was  a  cannon  ball. 


126 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Hey,  Cossack,  give  me  my  horse!’  he  said.  ‘Now  then,  stand  aside! 
stand  aside!  make  way!’ 

With  a  mighty  effort  he  succeeded  in  getting  to  his  horse.  Shouting 
continually,  he  moved  forward.  The  soldiers  pressed  together  to  make 
way  for  him,  but  jammed  upon  him  again,  so  that  they  squeezed  his  leg, 
and  those  nearest  him  were  not  to  blame,  for  they  were  pressed  forward 
even  more  violently  from  behind. 

‘Nesvitsky!  Nesvitsky!  You,  old  chap!’  he  heard  a  husky  voice  shout¬ 
ing  from  behind  at  that  instant. 

Nesvitsky  looked  round  and  saw,  fifteen  paces  away,  separated  from 
him  by  a  living  mass  of  moving  infantry,  the  red  and  black  and  towzled 
face  of  Vaska  DenisoV  with  a  forage-cap  on  the  back  of  his  head,  and 
a  pelisse  swung  jauntily  over  his  shoulder. 

‘Tell  them  to  make  way,  the  damned  devils!’  roared  Denisov,  who 
was  evidently  in  a  great  state  of  excitement.  He  rolled  his  flashing,  coal- 
black  eyes,  showing  the  bloodshot  whites,  and  waved  a  sheathed  sword, 
which  he  held  in  a  bare  hand  as  red  as  his  face.  ' 

‘Eh!  Vaska!  ’  Nesvitsky  responded  joyfully.  ‘But  what  are  you  about?’ 

‘The  squadron  can’t  advance!’  roared  Vaska  Denisov,  viciously  show-  j 
ing  his  white  teeth,  and  spurring  his  handsome,  raven  thoroughbred 
‘Bedouin,’  which,  twitching  its  ears  at  the  bayonets  against  which  it 
pricked  itself,  snorting  and  shooting  froth  from  its  bit,  tramped  with 
metallic  clang  on  the  boards  of  the  bridge,  and  seemed  ready  to  leap 
over  the  railings,  if  its  rider  would  let  it.. 

‘What  next!  like  sheep!  for  all  the  world  like  sheep!  back  .  .  .  make 
way!  .  .  .  Stand  there!  go  to  the  devil  with  the  waggon!  I’ll  cut  you 
down  with  my  sword!’  he  roared,  actually  drawing  his  sword  out  of  the 
sheath  and  beginning  to  brandish  it. 

The  soldiers,  with  terrified  faces,  squeezed  together,  and  Denisov  joined 
Nesvitsky. 

‘How  is  it  you’re  not  drunk  to-day?’  said  Nesvitsky,  when  he  came  up. 

‘They  don’t  even  give  us  time  to  drink!’  answered  Vaska  Denisov. 
‘They’ve  been  dragging  the  regiment  to  and  fro  the  whole  day.  Fighting’s 
all  very  well,  but  who  the  devil’s  to  know  what  this  is!’ 

‘How  smart  you  are  to-day!’  said  Nesvitsky,  looking  at  his  new 
pelisse  and  fur  saddle-cloth. 

Denisov  smiled,  pulled  out  of  his  sabretache  a  handkerchief  that 
diffused  a  smell  of  scent,  and  put  it  to  Nesvitsky’s  nose. 

‘To  be  sure,  I’m  going  into  action!  I’ve  shaved,  and  cleaned  my  teeth 
and  scented  myself!’ 

Nesvitsky’s  imposing  figure,  accompanied  by  his  Cossack,  and  the 
determination  of  Denisov,  waving  his  sword  and  shouting  desperately, 
produced  so  much  effect  that  they  stopped  the  infantry  and  got  to  the 
other  end  of  the  bridge.  Nesvitsky  found  at  the  entry  the  colonel,  tc 
whom  he  had  to  deliver  the  command,  and  having  executed  his  com-: 
mission  he  rode  back. 

Having  cleared  the  way  for  him,  Denisov  stopped  at  the  entrance  o: 


W  A  R  A  N  D  P  E  A  C  E  127 

the  bridge.  Carelessly  holding  in  his  horse,  who  neighed  to  get  to  his 
companions,  and  stamped  with  its  foot,  he  looked  at  the  squadron  mov¬ 
ing  towards  him.  The  clang  of  the  hoofs  on  the  boards  of  the  bridge 
sounded  as  though  several  horses  were  galloping,  and  the  squadron,  with 
the  officers  in  front,  drew  out  four  men  abreast  across  the  bridge  and 
began  emerging  on  the  other  side. 

The  infantry  soldiers,  who  had  been  forced  to  stop,  crowding  in  the 
trampled  mud  of  the  bridge,  looked  at  the  clean,  smart  hussars,  passing 
them  in  good  order,  with  that  special  feeling  of  aloofness  and  irony  with 
which  different  branches  of  the  service  usually  meet. 

‘They’re  a  smart  lot!  They  ought  to  be  on  the  Podnovinsky! ’ 

‘They’re  a  great  deal  of  use!  ThejPre  only  for  show!’  said  another. 

‘Infantry,  don’t  you  kick  up  a  dust!’  jested  a  hussar,  whose  horse, 
prancing,  sent  a  spurt  of  mud  on  an  infantry  soldier. 

‘I  should  like  to  see  you  after  two  long  marches  with  the  knapsack  on 
your  shoulder.  Your  frogs  would  be  a  bit  shabby,’  said  the  foot-soldier, 
rubbing  the  mud  off  his  face  with  his  sleeve;  ‘perched  up  there  you’re 
more  like  a  bird  than  a  man!’ 

‘Wouldn’t  you  like  to  be  popped  on  a  horse,  Zikin;  you'd  make  an 
elegant  rider,’  jested  a  corporal  at  a  thin  soldier,  bowed  down  by  the 
weight  of  his  knapsack. 

‘Put  a  stick  between  your  legs  and  you'd  have  a  horse  to  suit  you,' 
responded  the  hussar. 


VIII 

The  rest  of  the  infantry  pressed  together  into  a  funnel  shape  at  the 
entrance  of  the  bridge,  and  hastily  marched  across  it.  At  last  all  the 
baggage-waggons  had  passed  over;  the  crush  was  less,  and  the  last 
battalion  were  stepping  on  to  the  bridge.  Only  the  hussars  of  Denisov’s 
1  squadron  were  left  on  the  further  side  of  the  river  facing  the  enemy. 
The  enemy,  visible  in  the  distance  from  the  opposite  mountain,  could 
not  yet  be  seen  from  the  bridge  below,  as,  from  the  valley,  through  which 
the  river  flowed,  the  horizon  was  bounded  by  rising  ground  not  more 
than  half  a  mile  away.  In  front  lay  a  waste  plain  dotted  here  and  there 
;with  handfuls  of  our  scouting  Cossacks.  Suddenly  on  the  road,  where  it 
ran  up  the  rising  ground  opposite,  troops  came  into  sight  wearing  blue 
tunics  and  accompanied  by  artillery.  They  were  the  French.  A  scouting 
party  of  Cossacks  trotted  away  down  the  hillside.  Though  the  officers 
and  the  men  of  Denisov’s  squadron  tried  to  talk  of  other  things,  and 
to  look  in  other  directions,  they  all  thought  continually  of  nothing  else 
out  what  was  there  on  the  hillside,  and  kept  constantly  glancing  towards 
:he  dark  patches  they  saw  coming  into  sight  on  the  sky-line,  and  recog¬ 
nised  as  the  enemy’s  forces.  The  weather  had  cleared  again  after  mid¬ 
day,  and  the  sun  shone  brilliantly  as  it  began  to  go  down  over  the 
panube  and  the  dark  mountains  that  encircle  it.  The  air  was  still,  and 


12  8  VV  A  R  A  N  D  P  E  A  C  E 

from  the  hillside  there  floated  across  from  time  to  time  the  sound  of 
bugles  and  of  the  shouts  of  the  enemy.  Between  the  squadron  and  the 
enemy  there  was  no  one  now  but  a  few  scouting  parties.  An  empty- 
plain,  about  six  hundred  yards  across,  separated  them  from  the  hostile 
troops.  The  enemy  had  ceased  firing,  and  that  made  even  more  keenly 
felt  the  stern  menace  of  that  inaccessible,  unassailable  borderland  that 
-was  the  dividing-line  between  the  two  hostile  armies. 

‘One  step  across  that  line,  that  suggests  the  line  dividing  the  living 
from  the  dead,  and  unknown  sufferings  and  death.  And  what  is  there? 
and  who  is  there?  there,  beyond  that  field  and  that  tree  and  the  roofs 
with  the  sunlight  on  them?  No  one  knows,  and  one  longs  to  know  and 
dreads  crossing  that  line,  and  longs  to  cross  it,  and  one  knows  that 
sooner  or  later  one  will  have  to  cross  it  and  find  out  what  there  is  on  the 
other  side  of  the  line,  just  as  one  must  inevitably  find  out  what  is  on  the 
other  side  of  death.  Yet  one  is  strong  and  well  and  cheerful  and  nervously 
excited,  and  surrounded  by  men  as  strong  in  the  same  irritable  excite¬ 
ment.’  That  is  how  every  man,  even  if  he  does  not  think,  feels  in  the 
sight  of  the  enemy,  and  that  feeling  gives  a  peculiar  brilliance  and  de¬ 
lightful  keenness  to  one’s  impressions  of  all  that  takes  place  at  such 
moments. 

On  the  rising  ground  occupied  by  the  enemy,  there  rose  the  smoke  of 
a  shot,  and  a  cannon  ball  flew  whizzing  over  the  heads  of  the  squadron  j 
of  hussars.  The  officers,  who  had  been  standing  together,  scattered  in 
different  directions.  The  hussars  began  carefully  getting  their  horses 
back  into  line.  The  whole  squadron  subsided  into  silence.  All  the  men 
were  looking  at  the  enemy  in  front  and  at  the  commander  of  the  squad¬ 
ron,  expecting  an  order  to  be  given.  Another  cannon  ball  flew  by  them, 
and  a  third.  There  was  no  doubt  that  they  were  firing  at  the  hussars. 
But  the  cannon  balls,  whizzing  regularly  and  rapidly,  flew  over  the  heads 
of  the  hussars  and  struck  the  ground  beyond  them.  The  hussars  did  not 
look  round,  but  at  each  sound  of  a  flying  ball,  as  though  at  the  word 
of  command,  the  whole  squadron,  with  their  faces  so  alike,  through  all 
their  dissimilarity,  rose  in  the  stirrups,  holding  their  breath,  as  the  ball 
whizzed  by,  then  sank  again.  The  soldiers  did  not  turn  their  heads,  but 
glanced  out  of  the  corners  of  their  eyes  at  one  another,  curious  to  see 
the  effect  on  their  comrades.  Every  face  from  Denisov  down  to  the 
bugler  showed  about  the  lips  and  chin  the  same  lines  of  conflict  and 
nervous  irritability  and  excitement.  The  sergeant  frowned,  looking  the 
soldiers  up  and  down,  as  though  threatening  them  with  punishme’nt. 
Ensign  Mironov  ducked  at  the  passing  of  each  cannon  ball.  On  the  left 
flank,  Rostov  on  his  Rook — a  handsome  beast,  in  spite  of  his  unsound 
legs — had  the  happy  air  of  a  schoolboy  called  up  before  a  large  audience 
for  an  examination  in  which  he  is  confident  that  he  will  distinguish 
himself.  He  looked  serenely  and  brightly  at  every  one,  as  though  calling 
upon  them  all  to  notice  how  unconcerned  he  was  under  fire.  But  into  his 
face  too  there  crept,  against  his  will,  that  line  about  the  mouth  that 
betrayed  some  new  and  strenuous  feeling. 


WARANDPEACE  129 

‘Who’s  bobbing  up  and  down  there?  Ensign  Mironov!  Not  the  thing! 
look  at  me!’  roared  Denisov,  who  could  not  keep  still  in  one  place,  but 
galloped  to  and  fro  before  the  squadron. 

The  snub-nosed,  black,  hairy  face  of  Vaska  Denisov,  and  his  little, 
battered  figure,  and  the  sinewy,  short-fingered  hand  in  which  he  held  the 
hilt  of  his  naked  sword — his  whole  figure  was  just  as  it  always  was, 
especially  in  the  evening  after  he  had  drunk  a  couple  of  bottles.  He  was 
only  rather  redder  in  the  face  than  usual,  and  tossing  back  his  shaggy 
head,  as  birds  do  when  they  drink,  his  little  legs  mercilessly  driving  the 
spurs  into  his  good  horse  Bedouin,  he  galloped  to  the  other  flank  of  the 
squadron,  looking  as  though  he  were  falling  backwards  in  the  saddle, 
and  shouted  in  a  husky  voice  to  the  men  to  look  to  their  pistols.  He  rode 
up  to  Kirsten.  The  staff-captain  on  his  stout,  steady  charger  rode  at  a 
walking  pace  to  meet  him.  The  staff-captain’s  face  with  its  long  whiskers 
was  serious,  as  always,  but  his  eyes  looked  brighter  than  usual. 

‘Well,’  he  said  to  Denisov,  ‘it  won’t  come  to  a  fight.  You'll  see,  we 
shall  retreat  again.’ 

‘Devil  knows  what  they’re  about!’  growled  Denisov.  ‘Ah,  Rostov!’  he 
called  to  the  ensign,  noticing  his  beaming  face.  ‘Well,  you’ve  not  had 
long  to  wait.’  And  he  smiled  approvingly,  unmistakably  pleased  at  the 
sight  of  the  ensign.  Rostov  felt  perfectly  blissful.  At  that  moment  the 
colonel  appeared  at  the  bridge.  Denisov  galloped  up  to  him. 

‘Your  excellency,  let  us  attack!  we’ll  settle  them.’ 

‘Attack,  indeed!’  said  the  colonel  in  a  bored  voice,  puckering  his 
face  up  as  though  at  a  teasing  fly.  ‘And  what  are  you  stopping  here  for? 
You  see  the  flanks  are  retreating.  Lead  the  squadron  back.’ 

The  squadron  crossed  the  bridge  and  passed  out  of  range  of  the 
enemy’s  guns  without  losing  a  single  man.  It  was  followed  by  the 
i  second  squadron,  and  the  Cossacks  last  of  all  crossed,  leaving  the  further 
1  side  of  the  river  clear. 

The  two  squadrons  of  the  Pavlograd  regiment,  after  crossing  the 
bridge,  rode  one  after  the  other  up  the  hill.  Their  colonel,  Karl  Bog- 
j  danitch  Schubert,  had  joined  Denisov’s  squadron,  and  was  riding  at  a 
walking  pace  not  far  from  Rostov,  taking  no  notice  of  him,  though  this 
was  the  first  time  they  had  met  since  the  incident  in  connection  with 
Telyanin.  Rostov,  feeling  himself  at  the  front  in  the  power  of  the  man 
towards  whom  he  now  admitted  that  he  had  been  to  blame,  never  took 
his  eyes  off  the  athletic  back,  and  flaxen  head  and  red  neck  of  the 
colonel.  It  seemed  to  Rostov  at  one  time  that  Bogdanitch  was  only  feign¬ 
ing  inattention,  and  that  his  whole  aim  was  now  to  test  the  ensign’s 
pluck;  and  he  drew  himself  up  and  looked  about  him  gaily.  Then  he 
fancied  that  Bogdanitch  was  riding  close  by  him  on  purpose  to  show  off 
his  own  valour.  Then  the  thought  struck  him  that  his  enemy  was  now 
sending  the  squadron  to  a  hopeless  attack  on  purpose  to  punish  him, 
Rostov.  Then  he  dreamed  of  how  after  the  attack  he  would  go  up  to 
him  as  he  lay  wounded,  and  magnanimously  hold  out  his  hand  in  recon¬ 
ciliation.  The  high-shouldered  figure  of  Zherkov,  who  was  known  to  the 


i3o  WAR  AND  PEACE 

Pavlograd  hussars,  as  he  had  not  long  before  left  their  regiment,  rode 
up  to  the  colonel.  After  Zherkov  had  been  dismissed  from  the  staff  of  the 
commander-in-chief,  he  had  not  remained  in  the  regiment,  saying  that 
he  was  not  such  a  fool  as  to  go  to  hard  labour  at  the  front  when  he  could 
get  more  pay  for  doing  nothing  on  the  staff,  and  he  had  succeeded  in 
getting  appointed  an  orderly  on  the  staff  of  Prince  Bagration.  He  rode 
up  to  his  old  colonel  with  an  order  from  the  commander  of  the  rear 
guard. 

‘Colonel,’  he  said,  with  his  gloomy  seriousness,  addressing  Rostov’s 
enemy,  and  looking  round  at  his  comrades,  ‘there’s  an  order  to  go  back 
and  burn  the  bridge.’ 

‘An  order,  who  to?’  asked  the  colonel  grimly. 

‘Well,  I  don’t  know,  colonel,  who  to?’  answered  the  cornet,  seriously, 
‘only  the  prince  commanded  me:  “Ride  and  tell  the  colonel  the  hussars 
are  to  make  haste  back  and  burn  the  bridge.”  ’ 

Zherkov  was  followed  by  an  officer  of  the  suite,  who  rode  up  to  the 
colonel  with  the  same  command.  After  the  officer  of  the  suite  the  stout 
figure  of  Nesvitsky  was  seen  riding  up  on  a  Cossack’s  horse,  which  had 
some  trouble  to  gallop  with  him. 

‘Why,  colonel,’  he  shouted,  while  still  galloping  towards  him,  ‘I  told 
you  to  burn  the  bridge,  and  now  some  one’s  got  it  wrong;  they’re  all 
frantic  over  there,  there’s  no  making  out  anything.’ 

The  colonel  in  a  leisurely  way  stopped  the  regiment  and  turned  to 
Nesvitsky. 

‘You  told  me  about  burning  materials,’  he  said;  ‘but  about  burning 
it,  you  never  said  a  word.’ 

‘Why,  my  good  man,’  said  Nesvitsky,  as  he  halted,  taking  off  his 
forage-cap  and  passing  his  plump  hand  over  his  hair,  which  was  drenched 
with  sweat,  ‘what  need  to  say  the  bridge  was  to  be  burnt  when  you  put 
burning  materials  to  it?’ 

‘I’m  not  your  “good  man,”  M.  le  staff-officer,  and  you  never  told  me 
to  set  fire  to  the  bridge!  I  know  my  duty,  and  it’s  my  habit  to  carry  out 
my  orders  strictly.  You  said  the  bridge  will  be  burnt,  but  who  was  going 
to  burn  it  I  couldn’t  tell.’ 

‘Well,  that’s  always  the  way,’  said  Nesvitsky,  with  a  wave  of  his  arm. 
‘How  do  you  come  here?’  he  added,  addressing  Zherkov. 

‘Why,  about  the  same  order.  You’re  sopping  though,  you  want  to  be 
rubbed  down.’ 

‘You  said,  M.  le  staff-officer  .  .  .’  pursued  the  colonel  in  an  aggrieved 
tone. 

‘Colonel,’  interposed  the  officer  of  the  suite,  ‘there  is  need  of  haste, 
or  the  enemy  will  have  moved  up  their  grape-shot  guns.’ 

The  colonel  looked  dumbly  at  the  officer  of  the  suite,  at  the  stout 
staff-officer,  at  Zherkov,  and  scowled. 

‘I  will  burn  the  bridge,’  he  said  in  a  solemn  tone,  as  though  he  would 
express  that  in  spite  of  everything  they  might  do  to  annoy  him,  he  would 
still  do  what  he  ought. 


8 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


131 

Beating  his  long  muscular  legs  against  his  horse,  as  though  he  were 
to  blame  for  it  all,  the  colonel  mov,ed  forward  and  commanded  the 
second  squadron,  the  one  under  Denisov’s  command,  in  which  Rostov 
was  serving,  to  turn  back  to  the  bridge. 

‘Yes,  it  really  is  so,’  thought  Rostov,  ‘he  wants  to  test  me!’  His  heart 
throbbed  and  the  blood  rushed  to  his  face.  ‘Let  him  see  whether  I’m  a 
coward !  ’  he  thought. 

Again  all  the  light-hearted  faces  of  the  men  of  the  squadron  wore  that 
grave  line,  which  had  come  upon  them  when  they  were  under  fire.  Rostov 
looked  steadily  at  his  enemy,  the  colonel,  trying  to  find  confirmation  of 
his  suppositions  on  his  face.  But  the  colonel  never  once  glanced  at  Rostov, 
and  looked,  as  he  always  did  at  the  front,  stern  and  solemn.  The  word 
of  command  was  given. 

‘Look  sharp!  look  sharp!’  several  voices  repeated  around  him. 

Their  swords  catching  in  the  reins  and  their  spurs  jingling,  the  hussars 
dismounted  in  haste,  not  knowing  themselves  what  they  were  to  do. 
The  soldiers  crossed  themselves.  Rostov  did  not  look  at  the  colonel  now; 
he  had  no  time.  He  dreaded,  with  a  sinking  heart  he  dreaded,  being 
left  behind  by  the  hussars.  His  hand  trembled  as  he  gave  his  horse  to 
an  orderly,  and  he  felt  that  the  blood  was  rushing  to  his  heart  with  a 
thud.  Denisov,  rolling  backwards,  and  shouting  something,  rode  by  him. 
Rostov  saw  nothing  but  the  hussars  running  around  him,  clinking  spurs 
and  jingling  swords. 

‘Stretchers!’  shouted  a  voice  behind  him.  Rostov  did  not  think  of 
the  meaning  of  the  need  of  stretchers.  He  ran  along,  trying  only  to  be 
ahead  of  all.  But  just  at  the  bridge,  not  looking  at  his  feet,  he  got  into 
the  slippery,  trodden  mud,  and  stumbling  fell  on  his  hands.  The  others 
outstripped  him. 

‘On  both  sides,  captain,’  he  heard  shouted  by  the  colonel,  who,  riding 
on  ahead,  had  pulled  his  horse  up  near  the  bridge,  with  a  triumphant 
and  cheerful  face. 

Rostov,  rubbing  bis  muddy  hands  on  his  riding-breeches,  looked  round 
at  his  enemy,  and  would  have  run  on  further,  imagining  that  the  for¬ 
warder  he  went  the  better  it  would  be.  But  though  Bogdanitch  was  not 
looking,  and  did  not  recognise  Rostov,  he  shouted  to  him. 

‘Who  will  go  along  the  middle  of  the  bridge?  On  the  right  side?  Ensign, 
back!’  he  shouted  angrily,  and  he  turned  to  Denisov,  who  with  swagger¬ 
ing  bravado  rode  on  horseback  on  to  the  planks  of  the  bridge. 

‘Why  run  risks,  captain?  You  should  dismount,’  said  the  colonel. 

‘Eh!  it’ll  strike  the  guilty  one,’  said  Vaska  Denisov,  turning  in  his 
saddle. 

Meanwhile  Nesvitsky,  Zherkov,  and  the  officer  of  the  suite  were 
standing  together  out  of  range  of  the  enemy,  watching  the  little  group 
of  men  in  yellow  shakoes,  dark-green  jackets,  embroidered  with  frogs, 
and  blue  riding-breeches,  swarming  about  the  bridge,  and  on  the  other 
side  of  the  river  the  blue  tunics  and  the  groups  with  horses,  that  might 
so  easily  be  taken  for  guns,  approaching  in  the  distance. 


132  WAR  AND.  PEACE 

‘Will  they  burn  the  bridge  or  not?  Who’ll  get  there  first?  Will  they 
run  there  and  burn  it,  or  the  French  train  their  grape-shot  on  them  and 
kill  them?’  These  were  the  questions  that,  with  a  sinking  of  the  heart, 
each  man  was  asking  himself  in  the  great  mass  of  troops  overlooking  the 
bridge.  In  the  brilliant  evening  sunshine  they  gazed  at  the  bridge  and 
the  hussars,  and  at  the  blue  tunics,  with  bayonets  and  guns,  moving  up 
on  the  other  side. 

‘Ugh!  The  hussars  will  be  caught,’  said  Nesvitsky.  ‘They’re  not  out 
of  range  of  grape-shot  now.’ 

‘He  did  wrong  to  take  so  many  men,’  said  the  officer  of  the  suite. 

‘Yes,  indeed,’  said  Nesvitsky.  ‘If  he’d  sent  two  bold  fellows  it  Avould 
have  done  as  well.’ 

‘Ah,  your  excellency,’  put  in  Zherkov,  his  eyes  fixed  on  the  hussars, 
though  he  still  spoke  with  his  naive  manner,  from  which  one  could  not 
guess  whether  he  were  speaking  seriously  or  not.  ‘Ah,  your  excellency. 
How  you  look  at  things.  Send  two  men,  but  who  would  give  us  the 
Vladimir  and  ribbon  then?  But  as  it  is,  even  if  they  do  pepper  them, 
one  can  represent  the  squadron  and  receive  the  ribbon  oneself.  Our  good 
friend  Bogdanitch  knows  the  way  to  do  things.’ 

‘I  say,’  said  the  officer  of  the  suite,  ‘that’s  grape-shot.’ 

He  pointed  to  the  French  guns,  which  had  been  taken  out  of  the  gun- 
carriages,  and  were  hurriedly  moving  away. 

On  the  French  side,  smoke  rose  among  the  groups  that  had  cannons. 
One  puff,  a  second  and  a  third  almost  at  the  same  instant;  and  at  the 
very  moment  when  they  heard  the  sound  of  the  first  shot,  there  rose  the 
smoke  of  a  fourth;  two  booms  came  one  after  another,  then  a  third. 

‘Oh,  oh!  ’  moaned  Nesvitsky,  clutching  at  the  hand  of  the  officer  of  the 
suite,  as  though  in  intense  pain.  ‘Look,  a  man  has  fallen,  fallen,  fallen!’ 

‘Two,  I  think.’ 

‘If  I  were  Tsar,  I’d  never  go  to  war,’  said  Nesvitsky,  turning  away. 

The  French  cannons  were  speedily  loaded  again.  The  infantry  in  their 
blue  tunics  were  running  towards  the  bridge.  Again  the  puffs  of  smoke 
rose  at  different  intervals,  and  the  grape-shot  rattled  and  cracked  on  the 
bridge.  But  this  time  Nesvitsky  could  not  see  what  was  happening  at  the 
bridge.  A  thick  cloud  of  smoke  had  risen  from  it.  The  hussars  had  suc¬ 
ceeded  in  setting  fire  to  the  bridge,  and  the  French  batteries  were  firing 
at  them  now,  not  to  hinder  them,  but  because  their  guns  had  been 
brought  up  and  they  had  some  one  to  fire  at. 

The  French  had  time  to  fire  three  volleys  of  grape-shot  before  the 
hussars  got  back  to  their  horses.  Two  were  badly  aimed,  and  the  shot 
flew  over  them,  but  the  last  volley  fell  in  the  middle  of  the  group  of 
hussars  and  knocked  down  three  men. 

Rostov,  absorbed  by  his  relations  with  Bogdanitch,  stepped  on  the 
bridge,  not  knowing  what  he  had  to  do.  There  was  no  one  to  slash  at 
with  his  sword  (that  was  how  he  always  pictured  a  battle  to  himself), 
and  he  could  be  of  no  use  in  burning  the  bridge,  because  he  had  not 
brought  with  him  any  wisps  of  straw,  like  the  other  soldiers.  He  stood 


WAR  AND  PEACE  133 

and  looked  about  him,  when  suddenly  there  was  a  rattle  on  the  bridge, 
like  a  lot  of  nuts  being  scattered,  and  one  of  the  hussars,  the  one  standing 
nearest  him,  fell  with  a  groan  on  the  railing.  Rostov  ran  up  to  him  with 
the  others.  Again  some  one  shouted.  ‘Stretchers!’  Four  men  took  hold  of 
the  hussar  and  began  lifting  him  up.  ‘Oooo!  .  .  .  Let  me  be,  for  Christ’s 
sake!’  shrieked  the  wounded  man,  but  still  they  lifted  him  up  and  laid 
him  on  a  stretcher.  Nikolay  Rostov  turned  away,  and  began  staring  into 
the  distance,  at  the  waters  of  the  Danube,  at  the  sky,  at  the  sun,  as 
though  he  were  searching  for  something.  How  fair  that  sky  seemed,  how 
blue  and  calm  and  deep.  How  brilliant  and  triumphant  seemed  the  set¬ 
ting  sun.  With  what  an  enticing  glimmer  shone  the  water  of  the  far-away 
Danube.  And  fairer  still  were  the  far-away  mountains  that  showed  blue 
beyond  the  Danube,  the  nunnery,  the  mysterious  gorges,  the  pine  forests, 
filled  with  mist  to  the  tree-tops  .  .  .  there  all  was  peace  and  happiness. 
.  .  .  ‘There  is  nothing,  nothing  I  could  wish  for,  if  only  I  were  there,’ 
thought  Rostov.  ‘In  myself  alone  and  in  that  sunshine  there  is  so  much 
happiness,  while  here  .  .  .  groans,  agonies,  and  this  uncertainty,  this 
hurry.  .  .  .  Here  they  are  shouting  something  again  and  again,  all  of 
them  are  running  back  somewhere,  and  I’m  running  with  them,  and  here 
is  it,  it,  death  hanging  over  me,  all  round  me.  .  .  .  One  instant,  and  I 
shall  never  see  that  sunshine,  that  water,  that  mountain  gorge  again. 
.  .  .’  At  that  moment  the  sun  went  behind  the  clouds;  more  stretchers 
came  into  view  ahead  of  Rostov.  And  the  terror  of  death  and  of  the 
stretchers,  and  the  loss  of  the  sunshine  and  life,  all  blended  into  one 
sensation  of  sickening  fear. 

‘Good  God,  Thou  who  art  in  that  sky,  save  and  forgive,  and  protect 
me,’  Rostov  whispered  to  himself. 

The  hussars  ran  back  to  their  horses;  their  voices  grew  louder  and 
more  assured;  the  stretchers  disappeared  from  sight. 

‘Well,  lad,  so  you’ve  had  a  sniff  of  powder!’  Vaska  Denisov  shouted 
in  his  ear. 

‘It’s  all  over,  but  I  am  a  coward,  yes,  I  am  a  coward,’  thought  Rostov, 
and  with  a  heavy  sigh  he  took  his  Rook,  who  had  begun  to  go  lame 
of  one  leg,  from  the  man  who  held  him  and  began  mounting. 

‘What  was  that — grape-shot?’  he  asked  of  Denisov. 

‘Yes,  and  something  like  it  too,’  cried  Denisov;  ‘they  worked  their 
guns  in  fine  style.  But  it’s  a  nasty  business.  A  cavalry  attack’s  a  pleasant 
thing — slash  away  at  the  dogs;  but  this  is  for  all  the  devil  like  aiming 
at  a  target.’ 

And  Denisov  rode  away  to  a  group  standing  not  far  from  Rostov, 
consisting  of  the  colonel,  Nesvitsky,  Zherkov,  and  the  officer  of  the  suite. 

‘It  seems  as  if  no  one  noticed  it,  though,’  Rostov  thought  to  himself. 
And  indeed  no  one  had  noticed  it  at  all,  for  every  one  was  familiar  with 
the  feeling  that  the  ensign,  never  before  under  fire,  was  experiencing 
for  the  first  time. 

‘Now  you’ll  have  something  to  talk  about,’  said  Zherkov;  ‘they’ll  be 
promoting  me  a  sub-lieutenant  before  I  know  where  I  am,  eh?’ 


134  WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Inform  the  prince  that  I  have  burnt  the  bridge,’  said  the  colonel,  in 
a  cheerful  and  triumphant  tone. 

‘And  if  he  inquires  with  what  losses?’ 

‘Not  worth  mentioning,’  boomed  the  colonel;  ‘two  hussars  wounded, 
and  one  stark  dead  on  the  spot,’  he  said,  with  undisguised  cheerfulness. 
The  German  was  unable  to  repress  a  smile  of  satisfaction  as  he  sonorously 
enunciated  the  idiomatic  Russian  colloquialism  of  the  last  phrase. 


IX 

Pursued  by  the  French  army  of  a  hundred  thousand  men  under  the 
command  of  Bonaparte,  received  with  hostility  by  the  inhabitants,  los¬ 
ing  confidence  in  their  allies,  suffering  from  shortness  of  supplies,  and 
forced  to  act  under  circumstances  unlike  anything  that  had  been  fore¬ 
seen,  the  Russian  army  of  thirty-five  thousand  men,  under  the  command 
of  Kutuzov,  beat  a  hasty  retreat  to  the  lower  ground  about  the  Danube. 
There  they  halted,  and  were  overtaken  by  the  enemy,  and  fought  a  few 
rear-guard  skirmishes,  avoiding  an  engagement,  except  in  so  far  as  it 
was  necessary  to  secure  a  retreat  without  the  loss  of  their  baggage  and 
guns.  There  were  actions  at  Lambach,  at  Amsteten,  and  at  Melk;  but 
in  spite  of  the  courage  and  stubbornness — acknowledged  even  by  the 
enemy — with  which  the  Russians  fought,  the  only  consequence  of  these 
engagements  was  a  still  more  rapid  retreat.  The  Austrian  troops  that 
had  escaped  being  taken  at  Ulm,  and  had  joined  Kutuzov’s  forces  at 
Braunau,  now  parted  from  the  Russian  army,  and  Kutuzov  was  left 
unsupported  with  his  weak  and  exhausted  forces.  The  defence  of  Vienna 
could  no  longer  be  dreamed  of.  Instead  of  the  elaborately  planned  cam¬ 
paign  of  attack,  in  accordance  with  the  principles  of  the  modern  science 
of  strategy,  the  plan  of  which  had  been  communicated  to  Kutuzov  during 
his  sojourn  in  Vienna  by  the  Austrian  Hofkriegsrath,  the  sole  aim — al¬ 
most  a  hopeless  one — that  remained  now  for  Kutuzov  was  to  avoid  losing 
his  army,  like  Mack  at  Ulm,  and  to  effect  a  junction  with  the  fresh  troops 
marching  from  Russia. 

On  the  28th  of  October,  Kutuzov  took  his  army  across  to  the  left 
bank  of  the  Danube,  and  then  for  the  first  time  halted,  leaving  the 
Danube  between  his  army  and  the  greater  part  of  the  enemy’s  forces. 
On  the  30th  he  attacked  Mortier’s  division,  which  was  on  the  left  bank 
of  the  Danube,  and  defeated  it.  In  this  action  for  the  first  time  trophies 
were  taken — a  flag,  cannons,  and  two  of  the  enemy’s  generals.  For  the 
first  time,  after  retreating  for  a  fortnight,  the  Russian  troops  had  halted, 
and  after  fighting  had  not  merely  kept  the  field  of  battle,  but  had  driven 
the  French  off  it.  Although  the  troops  were  without  clothing  and  ex¬ 
hausted,  and  had  lost  a  third  of  their  strength  in  wounded,  killed,  and 
missing;  although  they  had  left  their  sick  and  wounded  behind  on  the 
other  side  of  the  Danube,  with  a  letter  from  Kutuzov  commending  them 
to  the  humanity  of  the  enemy;  although  the  great  hospitals  and  houses 


WARANDPEACE  135 

in  Krems  could  not  contain  all  the  sick  and  wounded, — in  spite  of  all 
that,  the  halt  before  Krems  and  the  victory  over  Mortier  had  greatly 
raised  tne  spirits  of  the  troops.  Throughout  the  wdiole  army,  and  also  at 
headquarters,  there  were  the  most  cheerful  but  groundless  rumours  of 
the  near  approach  of  the  columns  from  Russia,  of  some  victory  gained 
by  the  Austrians,  and  of  the  retreat  of  Bonaparte  panic-stricken. 

Prince  Andrey  had  been  during  the  engagement  in  attendance  on  the 
Austrian  general  Schmidt,  who  was  killed  in  the  battle.  His  horse  had 
been  wounded  under  him,  and  he  had  himself  received  a  slight  wound  on 
his  arm  from  a  bullet.  As  a  mark  of  special  favour  on  the  part  of  the 
commander-in-chief,  he  was  sent  with  the  news  of  this  victory  to  the 
Austrian  court,  now  at  Briinn,  as  Vienna  was  threatened  by  the  French. 
On  the  night  of  the  battle,  excited,  but  not  weary  (though  Prince  Andrey 
did  not  look  robustly  built,  he  could  bear  fatigue  better  than  very  strong 
men),  he  had  ridden  with  a  despatch  from  Dohturov  to  Krems  to  Kutu¬ 
zov.  The  same  night  he  had  been  sent  on  with  a  special  despatch  to 
Briinn.  This  commission,  apart  from  its  reward,  meant  an  important  step 
in  promotion. 

The  night  was  dark  and  starlit;  the  road  looked  black  in  the  white 
snow  that  had  fallen  on  the  day  of  the  battle.  With  his  mind  filled  with 
impressions  of  the  battle,  joyful  anticipations  of  the  effect  that  would 
be  produced  by  the  news  of  the  victory,  and  recollections  of  the  fare¬ 
wells  of  the  commander-in-chief  and  his  comrades,  Prince  Andrey  trotted 
along  in  a  light  posting  cart,  with  the  sensations  of  a  man  who,  after  long 
waiting,  has  at  last  attained  the  first  instalment  of  some  coveted  happi¬ 
ness.  As  soon  as  he  closed  his  eyes,  the  firing  of  guns  and  cannons  was 
echoing  in  his  ears,  and  that  sound  blended  with  the  rattle  of  the  wheels 
and  the  sensation  of  victory.  At  one  moment  he  would  begin  to  dream 
that  the  Russians  were  flying,  that  he  was  himself  slain;  but  he  waked 
up  in  haste,  and  with  fresh  happiness  realised  anew  that  that  was  all 
unreal,  and  that  it  was  the  French,  on  the  contrary,  who  were  put  to 
flight.  He  recalled  again  all  the  details  of  the  victory,  his  own  calm 
manliness  during  the  battle,  and,  reassured,  he  began  to  doze.  .  .  .  The 
)  dark,  starlit  night  was  followed  by  a  bright  and  sunny  morning.  The 
:  snow  was  thawing  in  the  sun,  the  horses  galloped  quickly,  and  new 
and  different-looking  forests,  fields,  and  trees  flew  by  on  both  sides  of 
1  the  road  alike. 

At  one  of  the  stations  he  overtook  a  convoy  of  Russian  wounded. 
The  Russian  officer  in  charge  of  the  transport  lay  lolling  back  in  the 
;  foremost  cart,  and  was  shouting  coarse  abuse  at  a  soldier.  In  each  of  the 
long  German  V or spanns  six  or  more  pale,  bandaged,  and  dirty  wounded 
:  men  were  being  jolted  over  the  stony  roads.  Some  of  them  were  talking 
I  (he  caught  the  sound  of  Russian  words),  others  were  eating  bread;  the 
most  severely  wounded  gazed  dumbly  at  the  posting  cart  trotting  by, 
with  the  languid  interest  of  sick  children. 

Prince  Andrey  told  the  driver  to  stop,  and  asked  a  soldier  in  what 
battle  they  had  been  wounded. 


136  W  A  R  A  N  D  P  E  A  C  E 

‘The  day  before  yesterday  on  the  Danube,’  answered  the  soldier.  Prince 
Andrey  took  out  his  purse  and  gave  the  soldier  three  gold  pieces. 

‘For  all,’  he  added,  addressing  the  officer  as  he  came  up.  ‘Get  well, 
lads,’  he  said  to  the  soldiers,  ‘there’s  a  lot  to  do  yet.’ 

‘What  news?’  asked  the  officer,  evidently  anxious  to  get  into  conversa¬ 
tion. 

‘Good  news!  Forward!’  he  called  to  the  driver,  and  galloped  on. 

It  was  quite  dark  when  Prince  Andrey  rode  into  Briinn,  and  saw  him¬ 
self  surrounded  by  high  houses,  lighted  shops,  the  lighted  windows  of 
houses,  and  street  lamps,  handsome  carriages  noisily  rolling  over  the 
pavement,  and  all  that  atmosphere  of  a  great  town  full  of  life,  which  is  ! 
so  attractive  to  a  soldier  after  camp.  In  spite  of  the  rapid  drive  and 
sleepless  night,  Prince  Andrey  felt  even  more  alert,  as  he  drove  up  to 
the  palace,  than  he  had  on  the  previous  evening.  Only  his  eyes  glittered 
with  a  feverish  brilliance,  and  his  ideas  followed  one  another  with  ex-  ■ 
treme  rapidity  and  clearness.  Fie  vividly  pictured  again  all  the  details 
of  the  battle,  not  A  confusion,  but  definitely,  in  condensed  shape,  as  he 
meant  to  present  them  to  the  Emperor  Francis.  He  vividly  imagined  the 
casual  questions  that  might  be  put  to  him,  and  the  answers  he  would 
make  to  them.  He  imagined  that  he  would  be  at  once  presented  tc  the 
Emperor.  But  at  the  chief  entrance  of  the  palace  an  official  ran  out 
to  meet  him,  and  learning  that  he  was  a  special  messenger,  led  him  to 
another  entrance. 

‘Turning  to  the  right  out  of  the  corridor,  Euer  Hochgcboren,  you  will 
find  the  adjutant  on  duty,’  the  official  said  to  him.  ‘He  will  conduct  you 
to  the  minister  of  war.’ 

The  adjutant  on  duty,  meeting  Prince  Andrey,  asked  him  to  wait, 
and  went  in  to  the  war  minister.  Five  minutes  later  the  adjutant  returned, 
and  with  marked  courtesy,  bowing  and  ushering  Prince  Andrey  before 
him,  he  led  him  across  the  corridor  to  the  private  room  of  the  war  : 
minister.  The  adjutant,  by  his  elaborately  formal  courtesy,  seemed  to  ; 
wish  to  guard  himself  from  any  attempt  at  familiarity  on  the  part  of 
the  Russian  adjutant.  The  joyous  feeling  of  Prince  Andrey  was  con-  ! 
siderably  damped  as  he  approached  the  door  of  the  minister’s  room.  He  ! 
felt  slighted,  and  the  feeling  of  being  slighted  passed  instantaneously — 
without  his  being  aware  of  it  himself — into  a  feeling  of  disdain,  which 
was  quite  uncalled  for.  His  subtle  brain  at  the  same  instant  supplied 
him  with  the  point  of  view  from  which  he  had  the  right  to  feel  disdain 
both  of  the  adjutant  and  the  minister  of  war.  ‘No  doubt  it  seems  to  them 
a  very  simple  matter  to  win  victories,  never  having  smelt  powder!’  he 
thought.  His  eyelids  drooped  disdainfully;  he  walked  with  peculiar  de¬ 
liberateness  into  the  war  minister’s  room.  This  feeling  was  intensified  : 
when  he  saw  the  minister  of  war  sitting  at  a  big  table,  and  for  the  first 
two  minutes  taking  no  notice  of  his  entrance.  The  minister  of  war  had  j 
his  bald  head,  with  grey  curls  on  the  temple,  held  low  between  two  wax  ; 
candles;  he  was  reading  some  papers,  and  marking  them  with  a  pencil. 


WAR  AND  PEACE  137 

He  went  on  reading  to  the  end,  without  raising  his  eyes  at  the  opening 
of  the  door  and  the  sound  of  footsteps. 

‘Take  this  and  give  it  him,’  said  the  minister  of  war  to  his  adjutant, 
handing  him  the  papers,  and  taking  no  notice  of  the  Russian  attache. 

Prince  Andrey  felt  that  either  the  minister  of  war  took  less  interest 
in  the  doings  of  Kutuzov’s  army  than  in  any  other  subject  demanding 
his  attention,  or  that  he  wanted  to  make  the  Russian  attache  feel  this. 
‘But  that’s  a  matter  of  complete  indifference  to  me,’  thought  he.  The 
minister  of  war  put  the  other  remaining  papers  together,  making  their 
edges  level,  and  lifted  his  head.  He  had  an  intellectual  and  characteristic 
head.  But  the  instant  he  turned  to  Prince  Andrey,  the  shrewd  and  de¬ 
termined  experssion  of  the  war  minister’s  face  changed  in  a  manner 
evidently  conscious  and  habitual.  On  his  face  was  left  the  stupid  smile — 
hypocritical,  and  not  disguising  its  hypocrisy — of  a  man  who  receives 
many  petitioners,  one  after  another. 

‘From  General — Field  Marshal  Kutuzov?’  he  queried.  ‘Good  news,  I 
hope?  Has  there  been  an  engagement  with  Mortier?  A  victory?  It  was 
high  time!  ’ 

He  took  the  despatch,  which  was  addressed  to  him,  and  began  to  read 
it  with  a  mournful  expression. 

‘Ah!  My  God!  my  God!  Schmidt!  ’  he  said  in  German.  ‘What  a  calam¬ 
ity!  what  a  calamity!  ’  Skimming  through  the  despatch,  he  laid  it  on  the 
table  and  glanced  at  Prince  Andrey,  visibly  meditating  on  something. 

‘Ah,  what  a  calamity!  So  the  action,  you  say,  was  a  decisive  one?’ 
f'Mortier  was  not  taken,  however,’  he  reflected.)  ‘Very  glad  you  have 
brought  good  news,  though  the  death  of  Schmidt  is  a  costly  price  for  the 
victory.  His  majesty  will  certainly  wish  to  see  you,  but  not  to-day.  I  thank 
you;  you  must  need  repose.  To-morrow,  be  at  the  levee  after  the  review. 
But  I  v/ill  let  you  know.’ 

The  stupid  smile,  which  had  disappeared  while  he  was  talking,  re¬ 
appeared  on  the  war  minister’s  face. 

‘Au  revoir,  I  thank  you  indeed.  His  majesty  the  Emperor  will  most 
likely  wish  to  see  you,’  he  repeated,  and  he  bowed  his  head. 

As  Prince  Andrey  left  the  palace,  he  felt  that  all  the  interest  and 
happiness  that  had  been  given  him  by  this  victory  had  been  left  behind 
by  him  now  in  the  indifferent  hands  of  the  minister  and  the  formal 
adjutant.  The  whole  tenor  of  his  thoughts  had  instantaneously  changed. 
The  battle  figured  in  his  mind  as  a  remote,  far-away  memory. 


X 

Prince  Andrey  stayed  at  Briinn  with  a  Russian  of  his  acquaintance- 
in  the  diplomatic  service,  Bilibin. 

‘Ah,  my  dear  prince,  there’s  no  one  I  could  have  been  more  pleased  to 
see,’  said  Bilibin,  coming  to  meet  Prince  Andrey.  ‘Franz,  take  the  prince’s 
things  to  my  bedroom,’  he  said  to  the  servant,  who  was  ushering  Bob 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

konsky  in.  ‘What,  a  messenger  of  victory?  That’s  capital.  I’m  kept  in¬ 
doors  ill,  as  you  see.’ 

After  washing  and  dressing,  Prince  Andrey  came  into  the  diplomat’s 
luxurious  study  and  sat  down  to  the  dinner  prepared  for  him.  Bilibin 
was  sitting  quietly  at  the  fireplace. 

Not  his  journey  only,  but  all  the  time  he  had  spent  with  the  army 
on  the  march,  deprived  of  all  the  conveniences  of  cleanliness  and  the 
elegancies  of  life,  made  Prince  Andrey  feel  now  an  agreeable  sense  of 
repose  among  the  luxurious  surroundings  to  which  he  had  been  accus¬ 
tomed  from  childhood.  Moreover,  after  his  Austrian  reception,  he  was 
glad  to  speak — if  not  in  Russian,  for  they  talked  French — at  least  to  a 
Russian,  who  would,  he  imagined,  share  the  general  Russian  dislike 
(which  he  felt  particularly  keenly  just  then)  for  the  Austrians. 

Bilibin  was  a  man  of  five-and-thirty,  a  bachelor,  of  the  same  circle 
as  Prince  Andrey.  They  had  been  acquainted  in  Petersburg,  but  had 
become  more  intimate  during  Prince  Andrey’s  last  stay  at  Vienna  with 
Kutuzov.  Just  as  Prince  Andrey  was  a  young  man,  who  promised  to  rise 
high  in  a  military  career,  Bilibin  promised  to  do  even  better  in  diplomacy. 
He  was  still  a  young  man,  but  not  a  young  diplomat,  as  he  had  been 
in  the  service  since  he  was  sixteen.  He  had  been  in  Paris  and  in  Copen¬ 
hagen;  and  now  in  Vienna  he  fdled  a  post  of  considerable  importance. 
Both  the  foreign  minister  and  our  ambassador  at  Vienna  knew  him  and 
valued  him.  He  was  not  one  of  that  great  multitude  of  diplomats  whose 
qualification  is  limited  to  the  possession  of  negative  qualities,  who  need 
simply  avoid  doing  certain  things  and  speak  French  in  order  to  be  very 
good  diplomats.  He  was  one  of  those  diplomats  who  like  work  and 
understand  it,  and  in  spite  of  his  natural  indolence,  he  often  spent 
nights  at  his  writing-able.  He  worked  equally  well  whatever  the  object 
of  his  work  might  be.  He  was  interested  not  in  the  question  ‘Why?’  but 
in  the  question  ‘How?’  What  constituted  his  diplomatic  work,  he  did 
not  mind,  but  to  draw  up  a  circular,  a  memorandum,  or  a  report  subtly, 
pointedly,  and  elegantly,  was  a  task  which  gave  him  great  pleasure. 
Apart  from  such  labours,  Bilibin’s  merits  were  esteemed  the  more  from 
his  ease  in  moving  and  talking  in  the  higher  spheres. 

Bilibin  enjoyed  conversation  just  as  he  enjoyed  work,  only  when  the 
conversation  could  be  elegantly  witty.  In  society  he  was  continually 
watching  for  an  opportunity  of  saying  something  striking,  and  did  not 
enter  into  conversation  except  under  such  circumstances.  Bilibin’s  con¬ 
versation  was  continually  sprinkled  with  original,  epigrammatic,  polished 
phrases  of  general  interest.  These  phrases  were  fashioned  in  the  inner 
laboratory  of  Bilibin’s  mind,  as  though  intentionally,  of  portable  form, 
so  that  insignificant  persons  could  easily  remember  them  and  carry  them 
from  drawing-room  to  drawing-room.  And  Bilibin’s  good  things  were 
hawked  about  in  Viennese  drawing-rooms  and  afterwards  had  an  in¬ 
fluence  on  so-called  great  events.  * 

His  thin,  lean,  yellow  face  was  all  covered  with  deep  creases,  which 
always  looked  as  clean  and  carefully  washed  as  the  tips  of  one’s  fingers 


WARANDPEACE  139 

after  a  bath.  The  movement  of  these  wrinkles  made  up  the  chief  play 
of  expression  of  his  countenance.  At  one  moment  his  forehead  wrinkled 
up  in  broad  furrows,  and  his  eyebrows  were  lifted,  at  another  moment 
his  eyebrows  drooped  again  and  deep  lines  creased  his  cheeks.  His  deep- 
set,  small  eyes  looked  out  frankly  and  good-humouredly. 

‘Come,  now,  tell  us  about  your  victories,’  he  said.  Bolkonsky  in  the 
most  modest  fashion,  without  once  mentioning  himself  in  connection 
with  it,  described  the  engagement,  and  afterwards  his  reception  by  the 
war  minister. 

‘They  received  me  and  my  news  like  a  dog  in  a  game  of  skittles,’  he 
concluded. 

Bilibin  grinned,  and  the  creases  in  his  face  disappeared. 

‘All  the  same,  my  dear  fellow,’  he  said,  gazing  from  a  distance  at  his 
finger-nails,  and  wrinkling  up  the  skin  over  his  left  eye,  ‘notwithstanding 
my  high  esteem  for  the  holy  Russian  armament,  I  own  that  your  victory 
is  not  so  remarkably  victorious.’ 

He  went  on  talking  in  French,  only  uttering  in  Russian  those  words 
to  which  he  wished  to  give  a  contemptuous  intonation. 

‘Why?  with  the  whole  mass  of  your  army  you  fell  upon  the  unlucky 
Mortier  with  one  division,  and  Mortier  slipped  through  your  fingers? 
Where’s  the  victory?’ 

‘Seriously  speaking,  though,’  answered  Prince  Andrey,  ‘we  can  at  least 
say  without  boasting  that  it’s  rather  better  than  Ulm  .  .  .’ 

‘Why  didn’t  you  capture  us  one,  at  least,  one  marshal?’ 

‘Because  everything  isn’t  done  as  one  expects  it  will  be,  and  things 
are  not  as  regular  as  on  parade.  We  had  expected,  as  I  told  you,  to 
attack  the  enemy  in  the  rear  at  seven  o’clock  in  the  morning,  but  we  did 
not  arrive  at  it  until  five  o’clock  in  the  evening.’ 

‘But  why  didn’t  you  do  it  at  seven  in  the  morning?  You  ought  to  have 
done  it  at  seven  in  the  morning,’  said  Bilibin,  smiling;  ‘you  ought  to 
have  done  it  at  seven  in  the  morning.’ 

‘Why  didn’t  you  succeed  in  impressing  on  Bonaparte  by  diplomatic 
methods  that  he  had  better  leave  Genoa  alone?’  said  Prince  Andrey  in 
the  same  tone. 

‘I  know,’  broke  in  Bilibin,  ‘you  are  thinking  that  it’s  very  easy  to 
capture  marshals,  sitting  on  the  sofa  by  one’s  fireside.  That’s  true,  but 
still  why  didn’t  you  capture  him?  And  you  needn’t  feel  surprised  if  the 
most  august  Emperor  and  King  Francis,  like  the  war  minister,  is  not 
very  jubilant  over  your  victory.  Why,  even  I,  a  poor  secretary  of  the 
Russian  Embassy,  feel  no  necessity  to  testify  my  rejoicing  by  giving 
my  Franz  a  thaler  and  sending  him  out  for  a  holiday  to  disport  himself 
with  his  Liebchen  on  the  Prater  .  .  .  though  it’s  true  there  is  no  Prater 
here  .  .  .’  He  looked  straight  at  Prince  Andrey  and  suddenly  let  the 
creases  drop  out  of  his  puckered  forehead. 

‘Now  it’s  my  turn  to  ask  you  “why,”  my  dear  boy,’  said  Bolkonsky.  x 
‘I  must  own  that  I  don’t  understand  it;  perhaps  there  are  diplomatic 
subtleties  in  it  that  are  beyond  my  feeble  intellect;  but  I  can’t  make  it 


i4o  WAR  AND  PEACE 

out.  Mack  loses  a  whole  army,  Archduke  Ferdinand  and  Archduke  Karl 
give  no  sign  of  life  and  make  one  blunder  after  another;  Kutuzov  alone 
gains  at  last  a  decisive  victory,  breaks  the  prestige  of  invincibility  of 
the  French,  and  the  minister  of  war  does  not  even  care  to  learn  the 
details! 5 

‘For  that  very  reason,  my  dear  boy,  don’t  you  see!  Hurrah  for  the 
Tsar,  for  Russia,  for  the  faith!  That’s  all  very  nice;  but  what  have  we, 
I  mean  the  Austrian  court,  to  do  with  your  victories?  You  bring  us 
good  news  of  a  victory  of  Archduke  Karl  or  Ferdinand — one  archduke’s 
as  good  as  the  other,  as  you  know — if  it’s  only  a  victory  over  a  fire 
brigade  of  Bonaparte,  and  it  will  be  another  matter,  it  will  set  the 
cannons  booming.  But  this  can  only  tantalise  us,  as  if  it  were  done  on 
purpose.  Archduke  Karl  does  nothing,  Archduke  Ferdinand  covers  him¬ 
self  with  disgrace,  you  abandon  Vienna,  give  up  its  defence,  as  though 
you  would  say  to  us,  God  is  with  us,  and  the  devil  take  you  and  your 
capital.  One  general,  whom  we  all  loved,  Schmidt,  you  put  in  the  way 
of  a  bullet,  and  then  congratulate  us  on  your  victory!  .  .  .  You  must 
admit  that  anything  more  exasperating  than  the  news  you  have  brought 
could  not  be  conceived.  It’s  as  though  it  were  done  on  purpose,  done  on 
purpose.  But  apart  from  that,  if  you  were  to  gain  a  really  brilliant  vic¬ 
tory,  if  Archduke  Karl  even  were  to  win  a  victory,  what  effect  could  it 
have  on  the  general  course  of  events?  It’s  too  late  now,  when  Vienna  is 
occupied  by  the  French  forces.’ 

‘Occupied?  Vienna  occupied?’ 

‘Not  only  is  Vienna  occupied,  but  Bonaparte  is  at  Schonbrunn,  and 
the  count — our  dear  Count  Urbna — is  setting  off  to  receive  his  orders.’ 

After  the  fatigues  and  impressions  of  his  journey  and  his  reception, 
and  even  more  after  the  dinner  he  had  just  eaten,  Bolkonsky  felt  that 
he  could  not  take  in  all  the  significance  of  the  words  he  had  just  heard. 

‘Count  Lichtenfels  was  here  this  morning,’  pursued  Bilibin,  ‘and  he 
showed  me  a  letter  containing  a  full  description  of  the  parade  of  the 
French  at  Vienna.  Prince  Murat  and  all  the  rest  of  it  .  .  .  You  see 
that  your  victory  is  not  a  great  matter  for  rejoicing,  and  that  you  can’t 
be  received  as  our  deliverer  .  .  .’ 

‘Really,  I  don’t  care  about  that,  I  don’t  care  in  the  slightest!’  said 
Prince  Andrey,  beginning  to  understand  that  his  news  of  the  battle  before 
Krems  was  really  of  little  importance  in  view  of  such  an  event  as  the 
taking  of  the  capital  of  Austria.  ‘Plow  was  Vienna  taken?  And  its  bridge 
and  its  famous  fortifications,  and  Prince  Auersperg?  We  heard  rumours 
that  Prince  Auersperg  was  defending  Vienna,’  said  he. 

‘Prince  Auersperg  is  stationed  on  this  side — our  side — and  is  defend¬ 
ing  us;  defending  us  very  ineffectually,  I  imagine,  but  any  way  he  is 
defending  us.  But  Vienna’s  on  the  other  side  of  the  river.  No,  the  bridge 
has  not  been  taken,  and  I  hope  it  won’t  be  taken,  because  it  is  mined  and 
orders  have  been  given  to  blow  it  up.  If  it  were  not  so,  we  should  have 
long  ago  been  in  the  mountains  of  Bohemia,  and  you  and  your  army 
would  have  spent  a  bad  quarter  of  an  hour  between  two  fires.’ 


wAR  AND  PEACE  141 

‘hui  still  that  doesn’t  mean  that  the  campaign  is  over,’  said  Prince 
Andrey. 

‘But  I  believe  that  it  is  over.  And  so  do  all  the  big-wigs  here,  though 
they  don’t  dare  to  say  so.  It  will  be  as  I  said  at  the  beginning  of  the 
campaign,  that  the  matter  will  not  be  settled  by  your  firing  before 
Durenstein,  not  by  gunpowder,  but  by  those  who  invented  it,’  said 
Bilibin,  repeating  one  of  his  mots,  letting  the  creases  run  out  of  his  fore¬ 
head  and  pausing.  ‘The  only  question  is  what  the  meeting  of  the  Emperor 
Alexander  and  the  Prussian  king  may  bring  forth.  If  Prussia  enters  the 
alliance,  they  will  force  Austria’s  hand  and  there  will  be  war.  If  not, 
the  only  point  will  be  to  arrange  where  to  draw  up  the  articles  of  the 
new  Campo  Formio.’ 

‘But  what  an  extraordinary  genius!’  cried  Prince  Andrey  suddenly, 
clenching  his  small  hand  and  bringing  it  down  on  the  table.  ‘And  what 
luck  the  man  has !  ’ 

‘Buonaparte?’  said  Bilibin  interrogatively,  puckering  up  his  forehead 
and  so  intimating  that  a  met  was  coming.  ‘Buonaparte?’  he  said,  with 
special  stress  on  the  u.  T  think,  though,  that  now  wThen  he  is  dictating 
laws  to  Austria  from  Schonbrunn,  we  must  let  him  off  the  u.  I  shall 
certainly  adopt  the  innovation,  and  call  him  simply  Bonaparte.’ 

‘No,  joking  apart,’  said  Prince  Andrey,  ‘do  you  really  believe  the 
campaign  is  over?’ 

‘I’ll  tell  you  what  I  think.  Austria  has  been  made  a  fool  of,  and  she 
is  not  used  to  that.  And  she’ll  avenge  it.  And  she  has  been  made  a  fool 
of,  because  in  the  first  place  her  provinces  have  been  pillaged  (they  say 
the  Holy  Russian  armament  is  plundering  them  cruelly),  her  army  has 
been  destroyed,  her  capital  has  been  taken,  and  all  this  for  the  sweet 
sake  of  his  Sardinian  Majesty.  And  so  between  ourselves,  my  dear  boy, 
my  instinct  tells  me  we  are  being  deceived;  my  instinct  tells  me  of  nego¬ 
tiations  with  France  and  projects  of  peace,  a  secret  peace,  concluded 
separately.’ 

‘Impossible!’  said  Prince  Andrey.  ‘That  would  be  too  base.’ 

‘Time  will  show,’  said  Bilibin,  letting  the  creases  run  off  his  forehead 
again  in  token  of  being  done  with  the  subject. 

When  Prince  Andrey  went  to  the  room  that  had  been  prepared  for 
him,  and  lay  down  in  the  clean  linen  on  the  feather-bed  and  warmed  and 
fragrant  pillows,  he  felt  as  though  the  battle  of  which  he  brought  tidings 
was  far,  far  away  from  him.  The  Prussian  alliance,  the  treachery  of 
Austria,  the  new  triumph  of  Bonaparte,  the  levee  and  parade  and  the 
audience  of  Emperor  Francis  next  day,  engrossed  his  attention.  He  closed 
his  eyes  and  instantly  his  ears  were  ringing  with  the  cannonade,  the  firing 
of  muskets,  and  the  creaking  of  wheels,  and  again  he  saw  the  long  line 
of  musketeers  running  down-hill  and  the  French  firing,  and  he  felt  his 
heart  beating  and  saw  himself  galloping  in  front  of  the  lines  with  Schmidt, 
and  the  bullets  whizzing  merrily  around  him,  and  he  knew  that  sense 
of  intensified  joy  in  living  that  he  had  not  experienced  since  childhood. 
He  waked  up. 


142  WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Yes,  that  all  happened!’  ...  he  said,  with  a  happy,  childlike  smile 
to  himself.  And  he  fell  into  the  deep  sleep  of  youth. 


XI 

Next  day  he  waked  up  late.  Going  over  the  impressions  of  the  past,  what 
he  recalled  most  vividly  was  that  he  was  to  be  presented  to  the  Emperor 
Francis;  he  remembered  the  minister  of  war,  the  ceremonious  adjutant, 
Bilibin,  and  the  conversation  of  the  previous  evening.  He  dressed  for  his 
attendance  at  court  in  full  court-dress,  which  he  had  not  worn  for  a  long 
time,  and  fresh,  eager,  and  handsome,  he  walked  into  Bilibin’s  room  with 
his  arm  in  a  sling.  Four  gentlemen  of  the  diplomatic  corps  were  already 
there.  With  Prince  Ippolit  Kuragin,  who  was  a  secretary  to  the  embassy, 
Bolkonsky  was  already  acquainted;  Bilibin  introduced  him  to  the  others. 

The  gentlemen  calling  on  Bilibin  were  a  set  of  fashionable,  wealthy,  and 
lively  young  men,  who  here,  as  at  Vienna,  made  up  a  circle  apart,  a  circle 
which  Bilibin,  its  leader,  spoke  of  as  les  notres.  This  circle,  consisting  al¬ 
most  exclusively  of  diplomatists,  evidently  had  its  own  interests — quite 
apart  from  the  war  and  politics — interests,  that  revolved  round  the  fash¬ 
ionable  world,  relations  wTith  certain  women  and  the  formal  side  of  the 
service.  They  gave  Prince  Andrey  an  unmistakably  cordial  reception,  as 
one  of  themselves  (a  distinction  they  allowed  to  few).  From  civility  and 
to  break  the  ice  they  asked  him  a  few  questions  about  the  army  and  the 
battle,  and  the  conversation  slipped  back  again  to  disconnected,  good- 
humoured  jests  and  gossip. 

‘But  what  was  so  particularly  nice,’  said  one,  relating  a  disaster  that  had 
befallen  a  colleague,  ‘was  that  the  minister  told  him  in  so  many  words  that 
his  appointment  to  London  was  a  promotion  and  that  that  was  how  he 
ought  to  regard  it.  Can  you  fancy  his  figure  at  the  moment?’  .  .  . 

‘But  the  worst  of  all  is  to  come,  gentlemen.  I’m  going  to  betray  Kuragin 
—here  is  this  Don  Juan  going  to  profit  by  his  misfortune;  he’s  a  shocking 
fellow!’ 

Prince  Ippolit  lounged  in  a  reclining  chair,  with  his  legs  over  the  arm. 
He  laughed. 

‘Tell  me  about  that,’  said  he. 

‘0  Don  Juan!  O  serpent!)  cried  the  voices. 

‘You’re  not  aware,  I  dare  say,  Bolkonsky,’  said  Bilibin,  turning  to 
Prince  Andrey,  ‘that  all  the  atrocities  of  the  French  army  (I  was  almost 
saying  of  the  Russian)  are  nothing  in  comparison  with  the  exploits  of  this 
fellow  among  the  ladies.’ 

‘Woman  ...  is  the  companion  of  man,’  Prince  Ippolit  enunciated,  and 
he  stared  through  his  eyeglass  at  his  elevated  legs. 

Bilibin  and  les  notres  roared,  looking  Ippolit  straight  in  the  face.  Prince 
Andrey  saw  that  this  Ippolit,  of  whom — he  could  not  disguise  it  from 
himself — he  had  been  almost  jealous  on  his  wife’s  account,  was  the  butt 
of  this  set. 


WARANDPEACE  143 

‘No,  I  must  entertain  you  with  a  specimen  of  Kuragin,’  said  Bilibin 
aside  to  Bolkonsky.  ‘He’s  exquisite,  when  he  airs  his  views  upon  politics; 
you  must  see  his  gravity.’ 

He  sat  down  by  Ippolit,  and,  wrinkling  up  his  forehead,  began  talking 
to  him  about  politics.  Prince  Andrey  and  the  others  stood  round  the  two. 

‘The  Berlin  cabinet  cannot  express  a  feeling  of  alliance,’  Ippolit  began, 
looking  consequentially  round  at  all  of  them,  ‘without  expressing  ...  as 
in  its  last  note  .  .  .  you  understand  .  .  .  you  understand  .  .  .  and  be¬ 
sides,  if  his  Majesty  the  Emperor  does  not  give  up  the  principle  of  our 
alliance.’ 

‘Wait,  I  have  not  finished,’  he  said  to  Prince  Andrey,  taking  him  by  the 
arm.  ‘I  suppose  that  intervention  will  be  stronger  than  non-intervention. 
And  .  .  .’  He  paused.  ‘Our  dispatch  of  the  28th  of  November  cannot  be 
reckoned  as  an  exception.  That  is  how  it  will  all  end.’  And  he  dropped 
Bolkonsky’s  arm  as  a  sign  that  he  had  now  quite  concluded. 

‘Demosthenes,  I  recognise  you  by  the  pebble  that  you  hide  in  your 
golden  mouth,’  said  Bilibin,  whose  thick  thatch  of  hair  moved  forward  on 
his  head  from  the  puckering  of  his  brows  with  delight. 

Every  one  laughed.  Ippolit  laughed  louder  than  any.  He  was  visibly 
distressed;  he  breathed  painfully,  but  he  could  not  help  breaking  into  a 
savage  laugh,  that  convulsed  his  usually  impassive  face. 

‘Well  now,  gentlerhen,’  said  Bilibin,  ‘Bolkonsky  is  my  guest  here  in 
Briinn  and  I  want  to  show  him,  as  far  as  I  can,  all  the  attractions  of  our 
life  here.  If  we  were  in  Vienna,  it  would  be  easy  enough;  but  here  in  this 
vile  Moravian  hole,  it  is  more  difficult,  and  I  beg  you  all  for  assistance.  We 
must  do  him  the  honour  of  Briinn.  You  undertake  the  theatre  and  I  will 
undertake  society;  you,  Ippolit,  of  course,  the  ladies.’ 

‘We  ought  to  let  him  see  Amelie;  she’s  exquisite!  ’  said  one  of  les  notres, 
kissing  his  finger-tips. 

‘Altogether,’  said  Bilibin,  ‘we  must  turn  this  bloodthirsty  man  to  more 
humane  interests.’ 

‘I  fear  I  can  hardly  take  advantage  of  your  hospitality,  gentlemen;  it’s 
time  I  was  off  even  now,’  said  Bolkonsky,  glancing  at  his  watch. 

‘Where  to?’ 

To  the  Emperor!  ’ 

‘Oh!  oh!  oh!’ 

‘Well,  au  revoir,  Bolkonsky!  An  revoir,  prince!  Come  early  to  dinner,’ 
said  voices.  ‘We  reckon  upon  you.’ 

‘Try  to  make  the  most  of  the  good  discipline  of  the  troops,  in  the  pro¬ 
visioning  of  supplies  and  on  the  lines  of  march,  when  you  talk  to  the 
Emperor,’  said  Bilibin,  accompanying  Bolkonsky  to  the  hall. 

‘I  should  like  to  speak  well  of  it,  but  as  far  as  my  observation  goes,  I 
can’t,’  answered  Bolkonsky,  smiling. 

‘Well,  talk  as  much  as  you  can,  any  way.  Audiences  are  his  passion,  but 
he  doesn’t  like  talking  himself,  and  can't  talk  either,  as  you  will  see  ’ 


144 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


XII 

At  the  levee  the  Emperor  Francis  only  looked  intently  into  Prince 
Andrey’s  face,  and  nodded  his  long  head  to  him  as  he  stood  in  the  place 
assigned  him  among  the  Austrian  officers.  But  after  the  levee  the  ad¬ 
jutant  of  the  previous  evening  ceremoniously  communicated  to  Bolkonsky 
the  Emperor's  desire  to  give  him  an  audience.  The  Emperor  Francis  re¬ 
ceived  him,  standing  in  the  middle  of  the  room.  Prince  Andrey  was  struck 
by  the  fact  that  before  beginning  the  conversation,  the  Emperor  seemed 
embarrassed,  didn’t  know  what  to  say,  and  reddened. 

‘Tell  me  when  the  battle  began,’  he  asked  hurriedly.  Prince  Andrey 
answered.  The  question  was  followed  by  others,  as  simple:  ‘Was  Kutuzov 
well?’  ‘How  long  was  it  since  he  left  Krems?’  and  so  on.  The  Emperor 
spoke  as  though  his  sole  aim  was  to  put  a  certain  number  of  questions.  The 
answers  to  these  questions,  as  was  only  too  evident,  could  have  no  in¬ 
terest  for  him. 

‘At  what  o’clock  did  the  battle  begin?’  asked  the  Emperor. 

‘I  cannot  inform  your  majesty  at  what  o’clock  the  battle  began  in  the 
front  lines,  but  at  Diirenstein,  where  I  was,  the  troops  began  the  attack 
about  six  in  the  evening,’  said  Bolkonsky,  growing  more  eager,  and  con¬ 
ceiving  that  now  there  was  a  chance  for  him  to  give  an  accurate  descrip¬ 
tion,  just  as  he  had  it  ready  in  his  head,  of  all  he  knew  and  had  seen.  But 
the  Emperor  smiled  and  interrupted  him : 

‘How  many  miles?’ 

‘From  where  to  where,  your  majesty?’ 

‘From  Diirenstein  to  Krems?’ 

‘Three  and  a  half  miles,  your  majesty.’ 

‘The  French  abandoned  the  left  bank?’ 

‘As  our  scouts  reported,  the  last  crossed  the  river  on  rafts  in  the  night.’ 

‘Have  you  enough  provisions  at  Krems?’ 

‘Provisions  have  not  been  furnished  to  the  amount  .  . 

The  Emperor  interrupted  him: 

‘At  what  o’clock  was  General  Schmidt  killed?’ 

‘At  seven  o’clock,  I  think.’ 

‘At  seven  o'clock?  Very  sad!  very  sad!’ 

The  Emperor  said  that  he  thanked  him,  and  bowed.  Prince  Andrey 
withdrew,  and  was  at  once  surrounded  by  courtiers  on  all  sides.  Every¬ 
where  he  saw  friendly  eyes  gazing  at  him,  and  heard  friendly  voices  ad¬ 
dressing  him.  The  adjutant  of  the  preceding  evening  reproached  him  for 
not  having  stopped  at  the  palace,  and  offered  him  his  own  house.  The 
minister  of  war  came  up  and  congratulated  him  on  the  Order  of  Maria 
Theresa  of  the  third  grade,  with  which  the  Emperor  was  presenting  him. 
The  Empress’s  chamberlain  invited  him  to  her  majesty.  The  arch¬ 
duchess,  too,  wished  to  see  him.  He  did  not  know  whom  to  answer,  and 
ror  a  few  seconds  he  was  trying  to  collect  his  ideas.  The  Russian  ambassa-:  : 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


I4S 

dor  took  him  by  the  shoulder,  led  him  away  to  a  window,  and  began  to 
talk  to  him. 

Contrary  to  Bilibin’s  prognostications,  the  news  he  brought  was  re¬ 
ceived  with  rejoicing.  A  thanksgiving  service  was  arranged.  Kutuzov  was 
decorated  with  the  great  cross  of  Maria  Theresa,  and  rewards  were  be¬ 
stowed  on  the  whole  army.  Bolkonsky  received  invitations  on  all  hands, 
and  had  to  spend  the  whole  morning  paying  visits  to  the  principal  person¬ 
ages  in  the  Austrian  Government.  After  paying  his  visits,  Prince  Andrey, 
at  five  o’clock  in  the  evening,  was  returning  homewards  to  Bilibin’s, 
mentally  composing  a  letter  to  his  father  about  the  battle  and  his  reception 
at  Briinn.  At  the  steps  of  Bilibin’s  house  stood  a  cart  packed  half  full  of 
things,  and  Franz,  Bilibin’s  servant,  came  out  of  the  doorway,  with  diffi¬ 
culty  dragging  a  travelling-trunk. 

Before  going  back  to  Bilibin’s  Prince  Andrey  had  driven  to  a  book¬ 
seller’s  to  lay  in  a  stock  of  books  for  the  campaign,  and  had  spent  some 
time  in  the  shop. 

‘What  is  it?’  asked  Bolkonsky. 

‘Ah,  your  excellency!’  said  Franz,  with  some  exertion  rolling  the  trunk 
on  the  cart.  ‘We  are  to  move  on  still  farther.  The  scoundrel  is  already  at 
our  heels  again!  ’ 

‘Eh?  what?’  queried  Prince  Andrey. 

Bilibin  came  out  to  meet  Bolkonsky.  His  ordinarily  composed  face 
looked  excited. 

‘No,  no,  confess  that  this  is  charming,’  he  said,  ‘this  story  of  the  bridge 
of  Tabor.  They  have  crossed  it  without  striking  a  blow.’ 

Prince  Andrey  could  not  understand. 

‘Why,  where  do  you  come  from  not  to  know  what  every  coachman  in 
the  town  knows  by  now?’ 

‘I  come  from  the  archduchess.  I  heard  nothing  there.’ 

‘And  didn’t  you  see  that  people  are  packing  up  everywhere?’ 

‘I  have  seen  nothing  .  .  .  But  what’s  the  matter?’  Prince  Andrey 
asked  impatiently. 

‘What’s  the  matter?  The  matter  is  that  the  French  have  crossed  the 
bridge  that  Auersperg  was  defending,  and  they  haven’t  blown  up  the 
bridge,  so  that  Murat  is  at  this  moment  running  along  the  road  to  Briinn, 
and  to-day  or  to-morrow  they’ll  be  here.’ 

‘Here?  But  how  is  it  the  bridge  wasn’t  blown  up,  since  it  was  mined?’ 

‘Why,  that’s  what  I  ask  you.  No  one — not  Bonaparte  himself — can  tell 
why.’  Bolkonsky  shrugged  his  shoulders. 

‘But  if  they  have  crossed  the  bridge,  then  it  will  be  all  over  with  the 
army;  it  will  be  cut  off,’  he  said. 

‘That’s  the  whole  point,’  answered  Bilibin.  ‘Listen.  The  French  enter 
Vienna,  as  I  told  you.  Everything  is  satisfactory.  Next  day,  that  is  yester¬ 
day,  Messieurs  les  Marechaux,  Murat,  Lannes,  and  Beliard  get  on  their 
horses  and  ride  off  to  the  bridge.  (Remark  that  all  three  are  Gascons.) 
'‘Gentlemen,”  says  one,  “you  know  that  the  Tabor  bridge  has  been  mined 
and  countermined,  and  is  protected  by  a  formidable  fortification  and 


146  WARANDPEACE 

fifteen  thousand  troops,  who  have  orders  to  blow  up  the  bridge  and  not  to 
let  us  pass.  But  our  gracious  Emperor  Napoleon  will  be  pleased  if  we  take 
the  bridge.  Let  us  go  us  three  and  take  it.”  “Yes,  let  us  go,”  say  the  others; 
and  they  start  off  and  take  the  bridge,  cross  it,  and  now  wi'th  their  whole 
army  on  this  side  of  the  Danube,  they  are  coming  straight  upon  us,  and 
upon  you  and  your  communications.’ 

‘Leave  off  jesting,’  said  Prince  Andrey,  with  mournful  seriousness.  The 
news  grieved  Prince  Andrey,  and  yet  it  gave  him  pleasure.  As  soon  as  he 
heard  that  the  Russian  army  was  in  such  a  hopeless  position,  the  idea 
struck  him  that  he  was  the  very  man  destined  to  extricate  the  Russian 
army  from  that  position,  and  that  it  had  come — the  Toulon — that  would 
lift  him  for  ever  from  out  of  the  ranks  of  unknown  officers,  and  open  the 
first  path  to  glory  for  him!  As  he  listened  to  Bilibin,  he  was  already  con¬ 
sidering  how,  on  reaching  the  army,  he  would,  at  a  council  of  war,  give  the 
opinion  that  alone  could  save  the  army,  and  how  he  would  be  entrusted 
alone  to  execute  the  plan. 

‘Leave  off  joking,’  he  said. 

‘I’m  not  joking,’  Bilibin  went  on.  ‘Nothing  could  be  more  truthful  or 
more  melancholy.  These  three  gentlemen  advance  to  the  bridge  alone  and 
wave  white  handkerchiefs;  they  declare  that  it’s  a  truce,  and  that  they, 
the  marshals,  are  come  for  a  parley  with  Prince  Auersperg.  The  officer  on 
duty  lets  them  into  the  tete  du  pout.  They  tell  him  a  thousand  Gascon 
absurdities;  say  that  the  war  is  over,  that  Emperor  Francis  has  arranged 
a  meeting  with  Bonaparte,  that  they  desire  to  see  Prince  Auersperg,  and 
so  on.  The  officer  sends  for  Auersperg.  These  Gascon  gentlemen  embrace 
the  officers,  make  jokes,  and  sit  about  on  the  cannons,  while  a  French 
battalion  meantime  advances  unnoticed  on  the  bridge,  flings  the  sacks  of 
inflammable  material  into  the  river,  and  marches  up  to  the  tete  du  pont. 
Finally  the  lieutenant-general  himself  appears,  our  dear  Prince  Auersperg 
von  Mautern.  “My  dear  enemy!  Flower  of  Austrian  chivalry!  hero  of  the 
Turkish  war!  Hostility  is  at  end,  we  can  take  each  other’s  hands  .  .  .  the 
Emperor  Napoleon  burns  with  impatience  to  make  the  acquaintance  of 
Prince  Auersperg.”  In  a  word,  these  gentlemen — not  Gascons  for  nothing 
— so  bewilder  Auersperg  with  fair  words — he  is  so  flattered  at  this  speedy 
intimacy  with  French  marshals,  so  dazzled  by  the  spectacle  of  their  cloaks, 
and  of  the  ostrich  feathers  of  Murat — that  their  fire  gets  into  his  eyes  and 
makes  him  forget  that  he  ought  to  be  firing  on  the  enemy’  (in  spite  of  the 
interest  of  his  story,  Bilibin  did  not  omit  to  pause  after  this  mot,  to  give 
time  for  its  appreciation).  ‘A  French  battalion  runs  into  the  tete  du  pont; 
spikes  the  cannons,  and  the  bridge  is  taken.  No,  but  really  the  best  part  of 
the  whole  episode,’  he  went  on,  his  excitement  subsiding  under  the  interest 
of  his  own  story,  ‘is  that  the  sergeant  in  charge  of  the  cannon  which  was 
to  give  the  signal  for  firing  the  mines  and  blowing  up  the  bridge,  this 
sergeant  seeing  the  French  troops  running  on  to  the  bridge  wanted  to  fire, 
but  Lannes  pulled  his  arm  away.  The  sergeant,  who  seems  to  have  been 
sharper  than  his  general,  goes  up  to  Auersperg  and  says:  “Prince,  they’re 
deceiving  you,  here  are  the  French!”  Murat  sees  the  game  is  up  if  he  lets 


WARANDPEACE  147 

the  sergeant  have  his  say.  With  an  affectation  of  surprise  (a  true  Gascon! ) 
he  addresses  Auersperg:  “Is  this  the  Austrian  discipline  so  highly  extolled 
all  over  the  world,”  says  he,  “do  you  let  a  man  of  low  rank  speak  to  you 
like  this?”  It  was  a  stroke  of  genius.  The  Prince  of  Auersperg  is  touched 
in  his  honour  and  has  the  sergeant  put  under  arrest.  No,  but  confess  that 
all  this  story  of  the  bridge  of  Tabor  is  charming.  It  is  neither  stupidity, 
nor  cowardice  .  .  .’ 

‘It  is  treason,  perhaps,’  said  Prince  Andrey,  vividly  picturing  to  himself 
grey  overcoats,  wounds,  the  smoke  and  sound  of  firing,  and  the  glory 
awaiting  him. 

‘Not  that  either.  This  puts  the  court  into  a  pretty  pickle,’  pursued 
Bilibin.  ‘It  is  not  treason,  nor  cowardice,  nor  stupidity;  it  is  just  as  it  was 
at  Ulm  .  .  .’  He  seemed  to  ponder,  seeking  the  phrase,  ‘it  is  .  .  .  c’est  du 
Mack.  Nous  sommes  mackes,’  he  said,  feeling  he  was  uttering  un  mot, 
and  a  fresh  one,  one  that  would  be  repeated.  His  creased-up  brows  let  the 
puckers  smooth  out  quickly  in  sign  of  satisfaction,  and  with  a  faint  smile 
he  fell  to  scrutinizing  his  finger-nails. 

‘Where  are  you  off  to?’  he  said,  suddenly  turning  to  Prince  Andrey,  who 
had  got  up  and  was  going  to  his  room. 

‘I  must  start.’ 

‘Where  to?’ 

‘To  the  army.’ 

‘But  you  meant  to  stay  another  two  days?’ 

‘But  now  I  am  going  at  once’;  and  Prince  Andrey,  after  a  few  words 
arranging  about  his  journey,  went  to  his  room. 

Do  you  know,  my  dear  boy,’  said  Bilibin,  coming  into  his  room,  ‘I  have 
been  thinking  about  you.  What  are  you  going  for?’  And  in  support  of  the 
irrefutability  of  his  arguments  on  the  subject,  all  the  creases  ran  off  his 
[  face. 

Prince  Andrey  looked  inquiringly  at  him  and  made  no  reply. 

‘Why  are  you  going?  I  know  you  consider  that  it’s  your  duty  to  gallop 
off  to  the  army  now  that  the  army  is  in  danger.  I  understand  that,  my  boy, 
it’s  heroism.’ 

‘Nothing  of  the  kind,’  said  Prince  Andrey. 

‘But  you  are  un  philosophe,  be  one  fully,  look  at  things  from  the  other 
;  side,  and  you  will  see  that  it  is  your  duty,  on  the  contrary,  to  take  care  of 
I  yourself.  Leave  that  to  others  who  are  no  good  for  anything  else  .  .  . 

You  have  received  no  orders  to  go  back,  and  you  are  not  dismissed  from 
!  here,  so  that  you  can  remain  and  go  with  us,  where  our  ill-luck  takes  us. 
:  They  say  they  are  going  to  Olmiitz.  And  Olmutz  is  a  very  charming  town. 

And  wre  can  travel  there  comfortably  together  in  my  carriage.’ 

1  ‘That’s  enough  joking,  Bilibin,’  said  Bolkonsky. 

‘I  am  speaking  to  you  sincerely  as  a  friend.  Consider  where  are  you 
going  and  with  what  object  now,  when  you  can  stay  here.  You  have  two 
j  alternatives  before  you’  ( he  puckered  up  the  skin  of  his  left  temple)  ‘either 
;  you  won’t  reach  the  army  before  peace  will  be  concluded,  or  you  will  share 


148  WARANDPEACE 

the  defeat  and  disgrace  with  Kutuzov’s  whole  army.’  And  Bilibin  let  his 
brow  go  smooth  again,  feeling  that  his  dilemma  was  beyond  attack. 

‘That  I  can’t  enter  into,’  said  Prince  Audrey  coldly,  but  he  thought:  ‘I 
am  going  to  save  the  army.’ 

‘My  dear  fellow,  you  are  a  hero,’  said  Bilibin. 


XIII 

The  same  night,  after  taking  leave  of  the  minister  of  war,  Bolkonsky  set 
off  to  join  the  army,  not  knowing  where  he  should  find  it,  at  the  risk  of 
being  caught  by  the  French  on  the  way  to  Krems. 

At  Briinn  all  the  court  and  every  one  connected  with  it  was  packing 
up,  and  the  heavy  baggage  was  already  being  despatched  to  Olmiitz.  Near 
Esselsdorf,  Prince  Andrey  came  out  on  the  road  along  which  the  Russian 
army  was  moving  in  the  utmost  haste  and  in  the  greatest  disorder.  The 
road  was  so  obstructed  with  baggage-wagons  that  it  was  impossible  to  get 
by  in  a  carriage.  Prince  Andrey  procured  a  horse  and  a  Cossack  from  the 
officer  in  command  of  the  Cossacks,  and  hungry  and  weary  he  threaded 
his  way  in  and  out  between  the  waggons  and  rode  in  search  of  the  com¬ 
mander-in-chief  and  his  own  luggage.  The  most  sinister  rumours  as  to 
the  position  of  the  army  reached  him  on  the  road,  and  the  appearance  of  | 
the  army  fieeing  in  disorder  confirmed  these  rumours. 

‘As  for  that  Russian  army  which  English  gold  has  brought  from  the 
ends  of  the  universe,  we  are  going  to  inflict  upon  it  the  same  fate  (the 
fate  of  the  army  of  Ulm)’;  he  remembered  the  words  of  Bonaparte’s  I 
address  to  his  army  at  the  beginning  of  the  campaign,  and  these  words 
aroused  in  him  simultaneously  admiration  for  the  genius  of  his  hero,  a 
feeling  of  mortified  pride,  and  the  hope  of  glory.  ‘And  if  there’s  nothing 
left  but  to  die?’  he  thought.  ‘Well,  if  it  must  be!  I  will  do  it  no  worse  than 
others.’ 

Prince  Andrey  looked  disdainfully  at  the  endless,  confused  mass  of 
companies,  of  baggagC-waggons,  parks  of  artillery,  and  again  store-wag¬ 
gons,  carts,  and  waggons  of  every  possible  form,  pursuing  one  another  and 
obstructing  the  muddy  road  three  and  four  abreast.  On  every  side,  behind  ; 
and  before,  as  far  as  the  ear  could  reach  in  every  direction  there  was  the  1 
rumble  of  wheels,  the  rattle  of  carts,  of  waggons,  and  of  gun-carriages, 
the  tramp  of  horses,  the  crack  of  whips,  the  shouts  of  drivers,  the  swearing  i 
of  soldiers,  of  orderlies,  and  officers.  At  the  sides  of  the  roads  he  saw  fallen 
horses,  and  sometimes  their  skinned  carcases,  broken-down  waggons,  with  ;  1 
solitary  soldiers  sitting  on  them,  waiting  for  something,  detached  groups  j  - 
of  soldiers  strayed  from  their  companies,  starting  off  to  neighbouring  P 
villages,  or  dragging  back  from  them  fowls,  sheep,  hay,  or  sacks  of  stores  J 
of  some  sort.  Where  the  road  went  uphill  or  downhill  the  crush  became  i  I 
greater,  and  there  was  an  uninterrupted  roar  of  shouts.  The  soldiers  !  iij 
floundering  knee-deep  in  the  mud  clutched  the  guns  and  clung  to  the  wag-  ti 
gons  in  the  midst  of  cracking  whips,  slipping  hoofs,  breaking  traces  and 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


149 

throat-splitting  yells.  The  officers  superintending  their  movements  rode 
to  and  fro  in  front  and  behind  the  convoys.  Their  voices  were  faintly 
audible  in  the  midst  of  the  general  uproar,  their  faces  betrayed  that  they 
despaired  of  the  possibility  of  checking  the  disorder. 

‘Voila  le  cher  holy  armament,’  thought  Bolkonsky,  recalling  Bilibin’s 
words. 

He  rode  up  to  a  convoy,  intending  to  ask  of  some  one  of  these  men  where 
he  could  find  the  commander-in-chief.  Directly  opposite  to  him  came  a 
strange  vehicle,  with  one  horse,  obviously  rigged  up  by  soldiers  with  the 
resources  at  their  disposal,  and  looking  like  something  between  a  cart,  a 
cabriolet,  and  a  coach.  A  soldier  was  driving  it,  and  under  the  leathern  tilt 
behind  a  cover  sat  a  woman,  muffled  up  in  shawls.  Prince  Andrey  rode  up 
and  was  just  addressing  a  question  to  the  soldier,  when  his  attention  was 
taken  off  by  the  despairing  shrieks  of  the  woman  in  this  conveyance.  The 
officer,  directing  the  traffic,  aimed  a  blow  at  the  soldier  who  sat  in  the 
coachman’s  seat,  for  trying  to  push  in  ahead  of  others,  and  the  lash  fell 
on  the  cover  of  the  equipage.  The  woman  shrieked  shrilly.  On  catching 
sight  of  Prince  Andrey,  she  looked  out  from  under  the  cover  and  putting 
her  thin  arms  out  from  the  shawls  and  waving  them,  she  screamed: 

‘Adjutant!  sir!  .  .  .  For  God’s  sake!  .  .  .  protect  me.  .  .  .  What 
will  happen  to  us?  ...  I  am  the  wife  oi  the  doctor  of  the  Seventh  Chas- 
1  seurs  .  .  .  they  won’t  let  us  pass,  we  have  dropped  behind,  lost  our  own 
people.  .  . 

‘I’ll  thrash  you  into  mincemeat!  turn  back!’  shouted  the  exasperated 
officer  to  the  soldier:  ‘turn  back  with  your  hussy!’ 

‘Sir,  protect  us.  What  does  it  mean?’  screamed  the  doctor’s  wife. 

‘Kindly  let  this  cart  get  through.  Don’t  you  see  that  it  is  a  woman?’ 
said  Prince  Andrey,  riding  up  to  the  officer. 

The  officer  glanced  at  him,  and  without  making  any  reply  turned  again 
to  the  soldier.  ‘I'll  teach  you  how  to  push  in.  .  .  .  Back!  .  .  .’ 

‘Let  it  pass,  I  tell  you,’  repeated  Prince  Andrey,  setting  his  lips  tightly. 

•  ‘And  who  are  you?'  cried  the  officer,  turning  upon  him  suddenly  with 
drunken  fury.  ‘Who  are  you?  Are  you ’  (he  put  a  peculiarly  offensive  in¬ 
tonation  into  the  word)  ‘in  command,  pray?  I’m  commanding  officer  here, 
not  you.  Back  you  go,’  he  repeated,  ‘or  I’ll  lash  you  into  mincemeat.’  The 
expression  evidently  pleased  the  officer. 

‘A  nice  snub  he  gave  the  little  adjutant,’  said  a  voice  in  the  background. 

Prince  Andrey  saw  that  the  officer  was  in  that  stage  of  drunken  un-' 

|j  reasoning  fury,  when  men  do  not  remember  what  they  say.  He  saw  that 
his  championship  of  the  doctor’s  wife  in  the  queer  conveyance  was  ex¬ 
posing  him  to  what  he  dreaded  more  than  anything  else  in  the  world, 
what  is  called  in  French  ridicule,  but  his  instinct  said  something  else. 
The  officer  had  hardly  uttered  the  last  words  when  Prince  Andrey  rode 
up  to  him  with  a  face  distorted  by  frenzied  anger,  and  raised  his  riding- 
whip:  ‘Let — them — pass!’ 

The  officer  flourished  his  arm  and  hurriedly  rode  away. 


15°  WAR  AND  PEACE 

'It’s  all  their  doing,  these  staff-officers,  all  the  disorder,’  he  grumbled, 
‘Do  as  you  like.’ 

Prince  Andrey,  without  lifting  his  eyes,  made  haste  to  escape  from 
the  doctor's  wife,  who  called  him  her  deliverer.  And  dwelling  on  the 
minutest  detail  of  this  humiliating  scene  with  loathing,  he  galloped  on 
towards  the  village,  where  he  was  told  that  the  commander-in-chief  was. 

On  reaching  the  village,  he  got  off  his  horse,  and  went  into  the  first 
house  with  the  intention  of  resting  for  a  moment  at  least,  eating  some¬ 
thing,  and  getting  all  the  mortifying  impressions  that  were  torturing  him 
into  some  clear  shape.  ‘This  is  a  mob  of  scoundrels,  not  an  army,’  he 
thought,  going  up  to  the  window  of  the  first  house,  when  a  familiar  voice 
called  him  by  his  name. 

He  looked  round.  Out  of  a  little  window  was  thrust  the  handsome  face 
of  Nesvitsky.  Nesvitsky,  munching  something  in  his  moist  mouth  and 
beckoning  to  him,  called  him  in. 

‘Bolkonsky!  Bolkonsky!  Don’t  you  hear,  eh?  Make  haste,’  he  shouted. 

Going  into  the  house,  Prince  Andrey  found  Nesvitsky  and  another 
adjutant  having  a  meal.  They  hastily  turned  to  Bolkonsky  with  the 
inquiry,  had  he  any  news?  On  their  familiar  faces  Prince  Andrey  read 
alarm  and  uneasiness.  That  expression  was  particularly  noticeable  in 
Nesvitsky’s  face,  usually  so  full  of  laughter. 

‘Where  is  the  commander-in-chief?’  asked  Bolkonsky. 

‘Here  in  this  house,’  answered  the  adjutant. 

‘Well,  is  it  true,  about  the  peace  and  capitulation?’  asked  Nesvitsky. 

‘I  ask  you.  I  know  nothing  except  that  I  have  had  great  difficulty  in 
getting  "through  to  you.’ 

‘And  the  things  that  have  been  going  on,  my  boy!  Awful!  I  was  wrong 
to  laugh  at  Mack;  there’s  worse  in  store  for  us,’  said  Nesvitsky.  ‘But  sit 
down,  have  something  to  eat.’ 

‘You  won’t  find  your  baggage  or  anything  now,  prince,  and  God  knows 
what’s  become  of  your  Pyotr,’  said  the  other  adjutant. 

‘Where  are  the  headquarters?’ 

‘We  shall  spend  the  night  in  Znaim.’ 

‘Well,  I  got  everything  I  wanted  packed  up  on  two  horses,’  said  Nes¬ 
vitsky;  ‘and  capital  packs  they  made  for  me,  fit  to  scamper  as  far  as 
the  Bohemian  mountains  at  least.  Things  are  in  a  bad  way,  my  boy. 
But,  I  say,  you  must  be  ill,  shivering  like  that?’  Nesvitsky  queried, 
noticing  how  Prince  Andrey  shuddered,  as  though  in  contact  with  a 
galvanic  battery. 

‘No;  I’m  all  right,’  answered  Prince  Andrey.  He  had  recalled  at  that 
instant  the  incident  with  the  doctor’s  wife  and  the  transport  officer. 

‘What  is  the  commander-in-chief  doing  here?’  he  asked. 

‘I  can’t  make  out  anything,’  said  Nesvitsky. 

‘I  know  one  thing,  that  it’s  all  loathsome,  loathsome,  loathsome,’  said 
Prince  Andrey,  and  he  went  into  the  house  where  the  commander-in-chief 
was  stopping. 

Passing  by  Kutuzov’s  carriage,  the  exhausted  saddle-horses  of  his 


WARANDPEACE  151 

suite,  and  the  Cossacks  talking  loudly  together,  Prince  Andrey  went 
into  the  outer  room.  Kutuzov  himself  was,  as  Prince  Andrey  had  been 
told,  in  the  inner  room  of  the  hut  with  Prince  Bagration  and  Weierother. 
The  latter  was  the  Austrian  general,  who  had  taken  Schmidt’s  place.  In 
the  outer  room  little  Kozlovsky  was  squatting  on  his  heels  in  front  of  a 
copying-clerk.  The  latter  was  sitting  on  a  tub  turned  upside  down,  he 
was  writing  rapidly  with  the  cuffs  of  his  uniform  tucked  up.  Kozlovsky’s 
face  was  careworn;  he  too  looked  as  if  he  had  not  slept  all  night.  He 
glanced  at  Prince  Andrey,  and  did  not  even  nod  to  him. 

‘The  second  line.  .  .  .  Ready?’  he  went  on,  dictating  to  the  clerk: 
‘the  Kiev  Grenadiers,  the  Podolsky  .  . 

‘Don’t  be  in  such  a  hurry,  your  honour,’  the  clerk  answered  rudely  and 
angrily,  looking  at  Kozlovsky.  Through  the  door  he  heard  at  that  mo¬ 
ment  Kutuzov’s  voice,  eager  and  dissatisfied,  and  other  unfamiliar  voices 
interrupting  him.  The  sound  of  those  voices,  the  inattention  with  which 
Kozlovsky  glanced  at  him,  the  churlishness  of  the  harassed  clerk,  the 
fact  that  the  clerk  and  Kozlovsky  were  sitting  round  a  tub  on  the  floor 
at  so  little  distance  from  the  commander-in-chief,  and  that  the  Cossacks 
holding  the  horses  laughed  so  loudly  at  the  window — all  made  Prince 
Andrey  feel  that  some  grave  calamity  was  hanging  over  them. 

Prince  Andrey  turned  to  Kozlovsky  with  urgent  questions. 

‘In  a  minute,  prince,’  said  Kozlovsky.  ‘The  disposition  of  Bagration’s 
troops  .  .  .’ 

‘What  about  capitulation?’ 

‘Nothing  of  the  sort;  arrangements  have  been  made  for  a  battle!’ 

Prince  Andrey  went  towards  the  door  from  which  the  sound  of  voices 
came.  But  at  the  moment  when  he  was  going  to  open  the  door,  the  voices 
in  the  room  paused,  the  door  opened  of  itself,  and  Kutuzov  with  his  eagle 
nose  and  podgy  face  appeared  in  the  doorway.  Prince  Andrey  was  stand¬ 
ing  exactly  opposite  Kutuzov;  but  from  the  expression  of  the  com- 
mander-in-chief’s  one  seeing  eye  it  was  evident  that  thought  and  anxiety 
so  engrossed  him  as  to  veil,  as  it  were,  his  vision.  He  looked  straight  into 
his  adjutant’s  face  and  did  not  recognise  him. 

‘Well,  have  you  finished?’  he  addressed  Kozlovsky. 

‘In  a  second,  your  Excellency.’ 

Bagration,  a  short  lean  man,  not  yet  elderly,  with  a  resolute  and 
impassive  face  of  oriental  type,  came  out  after  the  commander-in-chief. 

‘I  have  the  honour  to  report  myself,’  Prince  Andrey  said  for  the  second 
time,  rather  loudly,  as  he  handed  Kutuzov  an  envelope. 

‘Ah,  from  Vienna?  Very  good!  Later,  later!’  Kutuzov  went  out  to  the 
steps  with  Bagration. 

‘Well,  prince,  good-bye,’  he  said  to  Bagration.  ‘Christ  be  with  you! 
May  my  blessing  bring  you  a  great  victory!’  Kutuzov’s  face  suddenly 
softened,  and  there  were  tears  in  his  eyes.  With  his  left  arm  he  drew 
Bagration  to  him,  while  with  his  right  hand,  on  which  he  wore  a  ring,  he 
crossed  him  with  a  gesture  evidently  habitual.  He  offered  him  his  podgy 
cheek,  but  Bagration  kissed  him  on  the  neck.  ‘Christ  be  with  you!’  re- 


j  52  WAR  AND  PEACE 

peated  Kutuzov,  and  he  went  towards  his  carriage.  ‘Get  in  with  me,’  he 
said  to  Bolkonsky. 

‘Your  Most  High  Excellency,  I  should  have  liked  to  be  of  use  here. 
Allow  me  to  remain  in  Prince  Bagration’s  detachment.’ 

‘Get  in,’  said  Kutuzov,  and  noticing  that  Bolkonsky  still  delayed: 
‘I  have  need  of  good  officers  myself,  myself.’ 

They  took  their  seats  in  the  carriage  and  drove  for  some  minutes  in 
silence. 

‘There  is  a  great  deal,  a  great  deal  of  everything  still  before  us,’  he 
said,  with  an  expression  of  old-age  clairvoyance,  as  though  he  saw  all 
that  was  passing  in  Bolkonsky’s  heart.  ‘If  one-tenth  part  of  his  detach¬ 
ment  comes  in,  I  shall  thank  God,’  added  Kutuzov,  as  though  talking  to 
himself. 

Prince  Andrey  glanced  at  Kutuzov,  and  unconsciously  his  eyes  were 
caught  by  the  carefully  washed  seams  of  the  scar  on  his  temple,  where 
the  bullet  had  gone  through  his  head  at  Ismail,  and  the  empty  eyesocket, 
not  a  yard  from  him.  ‘Yes,  he  has  the  right  to  speak  so  calmly  of  the 
destruction  of  these  men,’  thought  Bolkonsky. 

‘That’s  why  I  ask  you  to  send  me  to  that  detachment,’  he  said. 

Kutuzov  made  no  reply,  tie  seemed  to  have  forgotten  what  was  said 
to  him,  and  sat  plunged  in  thought.  Five  minutes  later,  swaying  easily  in 
the  soft  carriage  springs,  Kutuzov  addressed  Prince  Andrey.  There  was 
no  trace  of  emotion  on  bis  face  now.  With  delicate  irony  he  questioned 
Prince  Andrey  about  the  details  of  his  interview  with  the  Emperor,  about 
the  comments  he  had  heard  at  Court  on  the  Krems  engagement,  and 
about  ladies  of  their  common  acquaintance. 


XIV 

Kutuzov  had,  on  the  ist  of  November,  received  from  one  of  his  spies 
information  that  showed  the  army  he  commanded  to  be  in  an  almost 
hopeless  position.  The  spy  reported  that  the  French,  after  crossing  the 
bridge  at  Vienna,  were  moving  in  immense  force  on  Kutuzov’s  line  of 
communications  with  the  reinforcements  marching  from  Russia.  If  Kutu¬ 
zov  were  to  determine  to  remain  at  Krems,  Napoleon’s  army  of  a  hundred 
and  fifty  thousand  men  would  cut  him  off  from  all  communications,  and 
would  surround  his  exhausted  army  of  forty  thousand,  and  he  would 
find  himself  in  the  position  of  Mack  before  Ulm.  If  Kutuzov  decided  to 
leave  the  road  leading  to  a  junction  with  the  Russian  reinforcements, 
he  would  have  to  make  his  way  with  no  road  through  unknown  country 
to  the  mountains  of  Bohemia,  pursued  by  the  cream  of  the  enemy’s 
forces,  and  to  give  up  all  hope  of  effecting  a  junction  with  Buxhevden.  If 
Kutuzov  decided  to  march  by  the  road  from  Krems  to  Olmiitz  to  join 
the  forces  from  Russia  he  ran  the  risk  of  finding  the  French,  who  had 
crossed  the  Vienna  bridge,  in  advance  of  him  on  this  road,  and  so  being 
forced  to  give  battle  on  the  march,  encumbered  with  all  his  stores  ana 


WARANDPEACE  153 

transport,  with  an  enemy  three  times  as  numerous  and  hemming  him  in 
■on  both  sides.  Kutuzov  chose  the  last  course. 

The  French,  after  crossing  the  river,  had,  as  the  spy  reported,  set  off 
at  a  quick  march  toward  Znaim,  which  lay  on  Kutuzov’s  line  of  route, 
more  than  a  hundred  versts  in  front  of  him.  To  reach  Znaim  before  the 
French  offered  the  best  hopes  of  saving  the  army.  To  allow  the  French 
to  get  to  Znaim  before  him  would  mean  exposing  the  whole  army  to  a 
disgrace  like  that  of  the  Austrians  at  Ulm,  or  to  complete  destruction. 
But  to  arrive  there  before  the  French  with  the  whole  army  was  impos¬ 
sible.  The  road  of  the  French  army  from  Vienna  to  Znaim  was  shorter 
and  better  than  the  Russians’  road  from  Krems  to  Znaim. 

On  the  night  of  receiving  the  news  Kutuzov  sent  Bagration’s  advance 
guard  of  four  thousand  soldiers  to  the  right  over  the  mountains  from 
the  Krems-Znaim  road  to  the  Vienna  and  Znaim  road.  Bagration  was 
to  make  a  forced  march,  to  halt  facing  towards  Vienna  and  with  his  back 
to  Znaim,  and  if  he  succeeded  in  getting  on  the  road  in  advance  of  the 
French,  he  was  to  delay  them  as  long  as  he  could.  Kutuzov  himself  with 
all  the  transport  was  making  straight  for  Znaim. 

Bagration  marched  forty-five  versts,  by  night  in  stormy  weather, 
through  the  mountains,  with  no  road,  and  with  hungry,  barefoot  soldiers 
Leaving  a  third  of  his  men  straggling  behind  him,  Bagration  reached 
Hollabrunn,  on  the  Vienna  and  Znaim  road,  a  few  hours  before  the 
French,  who  marched  upon  Hollabrunn  from  Vienna.  Kutuzov  heeded 
fully  another  twenty-four  hours  to  get  to  Znaim  with  all  the  transport, 
and  so  to  save  the  army  Bagration  would  have  had,  with  his  four  Thou¬ 
sand  hungry  and  exhausted  soldiers,  to  have  kept  at  bay  the  whvole 
army  of  the  enemy  confronting  him  at  Hollabrunn  for  four-and-twenty 
hours,  and  this  was  obviously  impossible.  But  a  freak  of  fate  made  the 
impossible  possible.  The  success  of  the  trick  that  had  given  the  Vienna 
bridge  into  the  hands  of  the  French  encouraged  Murat  to  try  and  take 
in  Kutuzov  too.  Murat,  on  meeting  Bagration’s  weak  detachment  on  the 
Znaim  road,  supposed  it  to  be  the  whole  army  of  Kutuzov.  To  give  this 
army  a  final  and  crushing  defeat  he  waited  for  the  troops  still  on  the 
road  from  Vienna,  and  to  that  end  he  proposed  a  truce  for  three  days, 
on  the  condition  that  neither  armies  should  change  their  positions  nor 
stir  from  where  they  were.  Murat  averred  that  negotiations  for  peace 
were  now  proceeding,  and  that  he  proposed  a  truce  therefore  to  avoid 
useless  bloodshed.  The  Austrian  general,  Nostits,  who  was  in  charge 
of  the  advance  posts,  believed  the  statements  of  Murat’s  messengers  and 
retired,  leaving  Bagration’s  detachment  unprotected.  The  other  mes¬ 
sengers  rode  off  to  the  Russian  line  to  make  the  same  announcement 
about  peace  negotiations,  and  to  propose  a  truce  of  three  days  to  the 
Russian  troops.  Bagration  replied  that  he  was  not  authorised  to  accept 
or  to  decline  a  truce,  and  sent  his  adjutant  to  Kutuzov  with  a  report 
of  the  proposition  made  to  him. 

A  truce  gave  Kutuzov  the  only  possibility  of  gaining  time,  of  letting 
Bagration’s  exhausted  forces  rest,  and  of  getting  the  transport  and  heavy 


jlo4  VVARANDPEACE 

convoys  (the  movement  of  which  was  concealed  from  the  French)  a  fur¬ 
ther  stage  on  their  journey.  The  offer  of  a  truce  gave  the  one — and  totally 
unexpected — chance  of  saving  the  army.  On  receiving  information  of  it, 
Kutuzov  promptly  despatched  the  general-adjutant,  Winzengerode,  who 
was  with  him,  to  the  enemy’s  camp.  Winzengerode  was  instructed  not 
only  to  accept  the  truce,  but  to  propose  terms  of  capitulation,  while 
Kutuzov  meanwhile  sent  his  adjutants  back  to  hasten  to  the  utmost 
the  transport  of  the  luggage  of  the  whole  army  along  the  Krems  and 
Znaim  road.  Bagration’s  hungry  and  exhausted  detachment  alone  was  to 
cover  the  movements  of  the  transport  and  of  the  whole  army,  by  remain¬ 
ing  stationary  in  face  of  an  enemy  eight  times  stronger  numerically. 

Kutuzov’s  anticipations  were  correct  both  as  to  the  proposals  of 
capitulation,  which  bound  him  to  nothing,  giving  time  for  part  of  the 
transport  to  reach  Znaim,  and  as  to  Murat’s  blunder  being  very  quickly 
discovered.  As  soon  as  Bonaparte,  who  was  at  Schonbrunn,  only  twenty- 
five  versts  from  Hollabrunn,  received  Murat’s  despatch  and  projects  of 
truqe  and  capitulation,  he  detected  the  deception  and  despatched  the 
following  letter  to  Murat: 

To  Prince  Murat. 

Schonbrunn,  25  Brumaire,  year  1805, 
at  8  o’clock  in  the  morning. 

‘It  ;is  impossible  to  find  terms  in  which  to  express  to  you  my  displeasure. 
You  only  command  my  advance  guard  and  you  have  no  right  to  make 
any  truce  without  my  order.  You  are  causing  me  to  lose  the  results  of  a 
'campaign.  Break  the  truce  immediately  and  march  upon  the  enemy. 
You  must  make  a  declaration  to  them  that  the  general  who  signed  this 
capitulation  had  no  right  to  do  so,  and  that  only  the  Emperor  of  Russia 
has  that  right. 

‘Whenever  the  Emperor  of  Russia  ratifies  the  aforesaid  convention, 
however,  I  will  ratify  it;  but  it  is  only  a  stratagem.  March  on,  destroy 
the  Russian  army  .  .  .  you  are  in  a  position  to  take  fits  baggage  and 
artillery. 

‘The  Emperor  of  Russia’s  aide-de-camp  is  a  .  .  .  Officers  are  nothing 
when  they  have  not  powers;  this  one  had  none.  .  .  .  The  Austrians  let 
themselves  be  tricked  about  the  crossing  of  the  bridge  of  Vienna,  you  are 
letting  yourself  be  tricked  by  one  of  the  Emperor’s  aides-de-camp. 

‘Napoleon.’ 

Bonaparte’s  adjutant  dashed  off  at  full  gallop  with  this  menacing 
letter  to  Murat.  Not  trusting  his  generals,  Bonaparte  himself  advanced 
to  the  field  of  battle  with  his  whole  guard,  fearful  of  letting  the  snared 
victim  slip  through  his  fingers.  Meanwhile  the  four  thousand  men  of 
Bagration’s  detachment,  merrily  lighting  camp-fires,  dried  and  warmed 
themselves,  and  cooked  their  porridge  for  the  first  time  for  three  days, 
and  not  one  among  them  knew  or  dreamed  of  what  was  in  store  for  them. 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


155 


XV 

Before  four  o’clock  in  the  afternoon  Prince  Andrey,  who  had  persisted 
in  his  petition  to  Kutuzov,  reached  Grunte,  and  joined  Bagration.  Bona¬ 
parte’s  adjutant  had  not  yet  reached  Murat’s  division,  and  the  battle 
had  not  yet  begun.  In  Bagration’s  detachment,  they  knew  nothing  of  the 
progress  of  events.  They  talked  about  peace,  but  did  not  believe  in  its 
possibility.  They  talked  of  a  battle,  but  did  not  believe  in  a  battle’s  being 
close  at  hand  either. 

Knowing  Bolkonsky  to  be  a  favourite  and  trusted  adjutant,  Bagration 
received  him  with  a  commanding  officer’s  special  graciousness  and  con¬ 
descension.  He  informed  him  that  there  would  probably  be  an  engage¬ 
ment  that  day  or  the  next  day,  and  gave  him  full  liberty  to  remain  in 
attendance  on  him  during  the  battle,  or  to  retire  to  the  rear-guard  to 
watch  over  the  order  of  the  retreat,  also  a  matter  of  great  importance. 

‘To-day,  though,  there  will  most  likely  be  no  action,’  said  Bagration, 
as  though  to  reassure  Prince  Andrey. 

‘If  this  is  one  of  the  common  run  of  little  staff  dandies,  sent  here 
to  win  a  cross,  he  can  do  that  in  the  rear-guard,  but  if  he  wants  to  be 
with  me,  let  him  .  .  .  he’ll  be  of  use,  if  he’s  a  brave  officer,’  thought 
Bagration.  Prince  Andrey,  without  replying,  asked  the  prince’s  permis¬ 
sion  to  ride  round  the  position  and  find  out  the  disposition  of  the  forces, 
so  that,  in  case  of  a  message,  he  might  know  where  to  take  it.  An  officer 
on  duty,  a  handsome  and  elegantly  dressed  man,  with  a  diamond  ring 
on  his  forefinger,  who  spoke  French  badly,  but  with  assurance,  was  sum¬ 
moned  to  conduct  Prince  Andrey. 

On  all  sides  they  saw  officers  drenched  through,  with  dejected  faces, 
apparently  looking  for  something,  and  soldiers  dragging  doors,  benches, 
and  fences  from  the  village. 

‘Here  we  can’t  put  a  stop  to  these  people,’  said  the  staff-officer,  point¬ 
ing  to  them.  ‘Their  commanders  let  their  companies  get  out  of  hand. 
And  look  here,’  he  pointed  to  a  canteen-keeper’s  booth,  ‘they  gather  here, 
and  here  they  sit.  I  drove  them  all  out  this  morning,  and  look,  it’s  full 
again.  I  must  go  and  scare  them,  prince.  One  moment.’ 

‘Let  us  go  together,  and  I’ll  get  some  bread  and  cheese  there,’  said 
Prince  Andrey,  who  had  not  yet  had  time  for  a  meal. 

‘Why  didn’t  you  mention  it,  prince?  I  would  have  offered  you  some¬ 
thing.’ 

They  got  off  their  horses  and  went  into  the  canteen-keeper’s  booth. 
Several  officers,  with  flushed  and  exhausted  faces,  were  sitting  at  the 
tables,  eating  and  drinking. 

‘Now  what  does  this  mean,  gentlemen?’  said  the  staff-officer,  in  the 
reproachful  tone  of  a  man  who  has  repeated  the  same  thing  several  times. 
‘You  mustn’t  absent  yourselves  like  this.  The  prince  gave  orders  that 
no  one  was  to  leave  his  post.  Come,  really,  captain,’  he  remonstrated  with 
a  muddy,  thin  little  artillery  officer,  who  in  his  stockings  (he  had  given 


156  WARANDPEACE 

his  bools  to  the  canteen-keeper  to  dry)  stood  up  at  their  entrance,  smiling 
not  quite  naturally. 

‘Now  aren’t  you  ashamed,  Captain  Tushin?’  pursued  the  staff-officer. 
'I  should  have  thought  you  as  an  artillery  officer  ought  to  set  an  example, 
and  you  have  no  boots  on.  They’ll  sound  the  alarm,  and  you’ll  be  in  a 
pretty  position  without  your  boots  on.’  (The  staff -officer  smiled.)  ‘Kindly 
return  to  your  posts,  gentlemen,  all,  all,’  he  added  in  a  tone  of  authority. 

Prince  Andrey  could  not  help  smiling  as  he  glanced  at  Captain  Tushin. 
Smiling,  without  a  word,  Tushin  shifted  from  one  bare  foot  to  the  other, 
looking  inquiringly,  with  his  big,  shrewd,  and  good-natured  eyes,  from 
Prince  Andrey  to  the  staff-officer. 

‘The  soldiers  say  it’s  easier  barefoot,’  said  Captain  Tushin,  smiling 
shyly,  evidently  anxious  to  carry  off  his  awkward  position  in  a  jesting 
tone.  But  before  he  had  uttered  the  words,  he  felt  that  his  joke  would 
not  do  and  had  not  come  off.  He  was  in  confusion. 

‘Kindly  go  to  your  places,’  said  the  staff-officer,  trying  to  preserve  his 
gravity. 

Prince  Andrey  glanced  once  more  at  the  little  figure  of  the  artillery 
officer.  There  was  something  peculiar  about  it,  utterly  unsoldierly,  rather 
comic,  but  very  attractive. 

The  staff-officer  and  Prince  Andrey  got  on  their  horses  and  rode  on. 

Riding  out  beyond  the  village,  continually  meeting  or  overtaking 
soldiers  and  officers  of  various  ranks,  they  saw  on  the  left  earthworks 
being  thrown  up,  still  red  with  the  freshly  dug  clay.  Several  battalions 
of  soldiers,  in  their  shirt-sleeves,  in  spite  of  the  cold  wind  were  toiling 
like  white  ants  at  these  entrenchments ;  from  the  trench  they  saw  spade¬ 
fuls  of  red  clay  continually  being  thrown  out  by  unseen  hands.  They 
rode  up  to  the  entrenchment,  examined  it,  and  were  riding  on  further. 
Close  behind  the  entrenchment  they  came  upon  dozens  of  soldiers  con¬ 
tinually  running  to  and  from  the  earthworks,  and  they  had  to  hold  their 
noses  and  put  their  horses  to  a  gallop  to  get  by  the  pestilential  atmosphere 
of  this  improvised  sewer. 

‘Voila  I’agrement  des  camps,  monsieur  le  prince,’  said  the  staff-officer. 
They  rode  up  the  opposite  hill.  From  that  hill  they  had  a  view  of  the 
French.  Prince  Andrey  stopped  and  began  looking  closer  at  what  lay 
before  them. 

‘You  see  here  is  where  our  battery  stands,’  said  the  staff-officer,  point¬ 
ing  to  the  highest  point,  ‘commanded  by  that  queer  fellow  sitting  with¬ 
out  his  boots;  from  there  you  can  see  everything;  let  us  go  there,  prince.’!) 

‘I  am  very  grateful  to  you,  I’ll  go  on  alone  now,’  said  Prince  Andrey, 
anxious  to  be  rid  of  the  staff-officer;  ‘don’t  trouble  yourself  further, 
please.’ 

The  staff-officer  left  him,  and  Prince  Andrey  rode  on  alone. 

The  further  forward  and  the  nearer  to  the  enemy  he  went,  the  more 
orderly  and  cheerful  he  found  the  troops.  The  greatest  disorder  and 
depression  had  prevailed  in  the  transport  forces  before  Znaim,  which  id 
Prince  Andrey  had  passed  that  morning,  ten  versts  from  the  French  i 


WAR  AND  PEACE  157 

At  Grunte  too  a  certain  alarm  and  vague  dread  could  be  felt.  But  the 
nearer  Prince  Andrey  got  to  the  French  line,  the  more  self-confident  was 
the  appearance  of  our  troops.  The  soldiers,  in  their  great-coats,  stood 
ranged  in  lines  with  their  sergeant,  and  the  captain  was  calling  over  the 
men,  poking  the  last  soldier  in  the  line  in  the  ribs,  and  telling  him  to  hold 
up  his  hand.  Soldiers  were  dotted  all  over  the  plain,  dragging  logs  and 
brushwood,  and  constructing  shanties,  chatting  together,  and  laughing 
good-humouredly.  They  were  sitting  round  the  fires,  dressed  and  stripped, 
drying  shirts  and  foot-gear.  Or  they  thronged  round  the  porridge-pots 
and  cauldrons,  brushing  their  boots  and  their  coats.  In  one  company 
dinner  was  ready,  and  the  soldiers,  with  greedy  faces,  watched  the  steam¬ 
ing  pots,  and  waited  for  the  sample,  which  was  being  taken  in  a  wooden 
bowl  to  the  commissariat  officer,  sitting  on  a  piece  of  wood  facing  his 
shanty. 

In  another  company — a  lucky  one,  for  not  all  had  vodka — the  soldiers 
stood  in  a  group  round  a  broad-shouldered,  pock-marked  sergeant,  who 
was  tilting  a  keg  of  vodka,  and  pouring  it  into  the  covers  of  the  canteens 
held  out  to  him  in  turn.  The  soldiers,  with  reverential  faces,  lifted  the 
covers  to  their  mouths,  drained  them,  and  licking  their  lips  and  rubbing 
them  with  the  sleeves  of  their  coats,  they  walked  away  looking  more 
good-humoured  than  before.  Every  face  was  as  serene  as  though  it  were 
all  happening  not  in  sight  of  the  enemy,  just  before  an  action  in  which 
at  least  half  of  the  detachment  must  certainly  be  left  on  the  field,  but 
somewhere  at  home  in  Russia,  with  every  prospect  of  a  quiet  halting- 
place.  Prince  Andrey  rode  by  the  Chasseur  regiment,  and  as  he  advanced 
into  the  ranks  of  the  Kiev  Grenadiers,  stalwart  fellows  all  engaged  in 
the  same  peaceful  pursuits,  not  far  from  the  colonel’s  shanty,  standing 
higher  than  the  rest,  he  came  upon  a  platoon  of  grenadiers,  before  whom 
lay  a  man  stripped  naked.  Two  soldiers  were  holding  him,  while  two 
others  were  brandishing  supple  twigs  and  bringing  them  down  at  regular 
intervals  on  the  man’s  bare  back.  The  man  shrieked  unnaturally.  A  stout 
major  was  walking  up  and  down  in  front  of  the  platoon,  and  regardless 
of  the  screams,  he  kept  saying:  ‘It’s  a  disgrace  for  a  soldier  to  steal;  a 
soldier  must  be  honest,  honourable,  and  brave,  and  to  steal  from  a  com¬ 
rade,  he  must  be  without  honour  indeed,  a  monster.  Again,  again!’ 

And  still  he  heard  the  dull  thuds  and  the  desperate  but  affected  scream. 

‘Again,  again,’  the  major  was  saying. 

A  young  officer,  with  an  expression  of  bewilderment  and  distress  in  his 
face,  walked  away  from  the  flogging,  looking  inquiringly  at  the  adjutant. 

Prince  Andrey,  coming  out  to  the  foremost  line,  rode  along  in  front 
of  it.  Our  line  and  the  enemy’s  were  far  from  one  another  at  the  left 
and  also  at  the  right  flank;  but  in  the  centre,  at  the  spot  where  in  the 
morning  the  messengers  had  met,  the  lines  came  so  close  that  the  soldiers 
>f  the  two  armies  could  see  each  other’s  faces  and  talk  together..  Besides 
‘these  soldiers,  whose  place  was  in  that  part  of  the  line,  many  others  had 
gathered  there  from  both  sides,  and  they  were  laughing,  as  they  scru- 
inised  the  strange  and  novel  dress  and  aspect  of  their  foes. 


I5S  WAR  AND  PEACE 

Since  early  morning,  though  it  was  forbidden  to  go  up  to  the  line,  the 
commanding  officers  could  not  keep  the  inquisitive  soldiers  back.  The 
soldiers,  whose  post  was  in  that  part  of  the  line,  like  showmen  exhibiting 
some  curiosity,  no  longer  looked  at  the  French,  but  made  observations 
on  the  men  who  came  up  to  look,  and  waited  with  a  bored  face  to  be 
relieved.  Prince  Andrey  stopped  to  look  carefully  at  the  French. 

‘Look’ee,  look’ee,’  one  soldier  was  saying  to  a  comrade,  pointing  to  a 
Russian  musketeer,  who  had  gone  up  to  the  lines  with  an  officer  and 
was  talking  warmly  and  rapidly  with  a  French  grenadier.  ‘I  say,  doesn’t 
he  jabber  away  fine!  I  bet  the  Frenchy  can’t  keep  pace  with  him.  Now, 
then,  Sidorov?’ 

‘Wait  a  bit;  listen.  Aye,  it’s  fine!’  replied  Sidorov,  reputed  a  regular 
scholar  at  talking  French. 

The  soldier,  at  whom  they  had  pointed  laughing,  was  Dolohov. 
Prince  Andrey  recognised  him  and  listened  to  what  he  was  saying. 
Dolohov,  together  with  his  captain,  had  come  from  the  left  flank,  where 
his  regiment  was  posted. 

‘Come,  again,  again!’  the  captain  urged,  craning  forward  and  trying 
not  to  lose  a  syllable  of  the  conversation,  though  it  was  unintelligible  to 
him.  ‘Please,  go  on.  What’s  he  saying?’ 

Dolohov  did  not  answer  the  captain;  he  had  been  drawn  into  a  hot 
dispute  with  the  French  grenadier.  They  were  talking,  as  was  to  be 
expected,  of  the  campaign.  The  Frenchman,  mixing  up  the  Austrians 
and  the  Russians,  was  maintaining  that  the  Russians  had  been  defeated 
and  had  been  fleeing  all  the  way  from  Ulm.  Dolohov  declared  that  the 
Russians  had  never  been  defeated,  but  had  beaten  the  French. 

‘We  have  orders  to  drive  you  away  from  here,  and  we  shall  too,’  said 
Dolohov. 

‘You  had  better  take  care  you  are  not  all  captured  with  all  your  Cos¬ 
sacks,’  said  the  French  grenadier. 

Spectators  and  listeners  on  the  French  side  laughed. 

‘We  shall  make  you  dance,  as  you  danced  in  Suvorov’s  day’  {on  vous  j 
)era  danser),  said  Dolohov. 

‘What  is  he  prating  about?’  said  a  Frenchman. 

‘Ancient  history,’  said  another,  guessing  that  the  allusion  was  to  former 
wars.  ‘The  Emperor  will  show  your  Souvorov,  like  the  others.  .  .  .’ 

‘Bonaparte  .  .  .’  Dolohov  was  beginning,  but  the  Frenchman  inter¬ 
rupted  him. 

‘Not  Bonaparte.  He  is  the  Emperor!  Sacre  nom  .  .  he  said  angrily. 

‘Damnation  to  him,  your  Emperor!’ 

And  Dolohov  swore  a  coarse  soldier’s  oath  in  R.ussian,  and,  shoulder¬ 
ing  his  gun,  walked  away. 

‘Come -along,  Ivan  Lukitch,’  he  said  to  his  captain. 

‘So  that’s  how  they  talk  French,’  said  the  soldiers  in  the  line.  ‘Now 
then,  you,  Sidorov.’  Sidorov  winked,  and,  turning  to  the  French,  he  fell 
to  gabbling  disconnected  syllables  very  rapidly. 


WAR  AND  PEACE  159 

‘Kari-ma-la-ta-fa-sa-fi-mu-tcr-kcss-ka,’  he  jabbered,  trying  to  give 
the  most  expressive  intonation  to  his  voice. 

‘Ho,  ho,  ho!  ha  ha!  ha  ha!  Oh!  00!’  the  soldiers  burst  into  a  roar  of 
such  hearty,  good-humoured  laughter,  in  which  the  French  line  too  could 
not  keep  from  joining,  that  after  it  it  seemed  as  though  they  must  unload 
their  guns,  blow  up  their  ammunition,  and  all  hurry  away  back  to  their 
homes.  But  the  guns  remained  loaded,  the  port-holes  in  the  houses  and 
earthworks  looked  out  as  menacingly  as  ever,  and  the  cannons,  taken 
off  their  platforms,  confronted  one  another  as  before. 


XVI 

After  making  a  circuit  round  the  whole  line  of  the  army,  from  the  right 
flank  to  the  left,  Prince  Andrey  rode  up  to  that  battery  from  which  the 
staff-officer  told  him  that  the  whole  field  could  be  seen.  Here  he  dis¬ 
mounted  and  stood  by  the  end  one  of  the  four  cannons,  which  had  been 
taken  off  their  platforms.  An  artilleryman  on  sentinel  duty  in  front  of 
the  cannons  was  just  confronting  the  officer,  but  at  a  sign  being  made 
to  him,  he  renewed  his  regular,  monotonous  pacing.  Behind  the  cannons 
stood  their  platforms,  and  still  further  behind,  the  picket-ropes  and 
camp-fires  of  the  artillerymen.  To  the  left,  not  far  from  the  end  cannon, 
was  a  little  newly  rigged-up  shanty,  from  which  came  the  sounds  of 
officers’  voices  in  eager  conversation.  From  the  battery  there  was  in  fact 
a  view  of  almost  the  whole  disposition  of  the  Russian  forces,  and  the 
greater  part  of  the  enemy’s.  Directly  facing  the  battery  on  the  skyline 
of  the  opposite  hill  could  be  seen  the  village  of  Schongraben;  to  the  left 
and  to  the  right  could  be  discerned  in  three  places  through  the  smoke  of 
the  camp-fires  masses  of  the  French  troops,  of  which  the  greater  number 
were  undoubtedly  in  the  village  itself  and  behind  the  hill.  To  the  left 
of  the  village  there  was  something  in  the  smoke  that  looked  like  a  battery, 
but  it  could  not  be  made  out  clearly  by  the  naked  eye.  Our  right  flank 
was  stationed  on  a  rather  steep  eminence,  which  dominated  the  French 
position.  About  it  were  disposed  our  infantry  regiments,  and  on  the 
very  ridge  could  be  seen  dragoons.  In  the  centre,  where  was  placed 
Tushin’s  battery,  from  which  Prince  Andrey  was  surveying  the  position, 
there  was  the  most  sloping  and  direct  descent  to  the  stream  that  separated 
us  from  Schongraben.  On  the  left  our  troops  were  close  to  a  copse,  where 
there  was  the  smoke  of  the  camp-fires  of  our  infantry,  chopping  wood 
in  it.  The  French  line  was  wider  than  ours,  and  it  was  obviously  easy  for 
the  French  to  outflank  us  on  both  sides.  Behind  our  position  was  a  pre¬ 
cipitous  and  deep  ravine,  down  which  it  would  be  difficult  to  retreat  with 
artillery  and  cavalry.  Prince  Andrey  leaned  his  elbow  on  the  cannon,  and 
taking  out  a  note-book,  sketched  for  himself  a  plan  of  the  disposition  of 
the  troops.  In  two  places  he  made  notes  with  a  pencil,  intending  to  speak 
)n  the  points  to  Bagration.  He  meant  to  suggest  first  concentrating  all 
he  artillery  in  the  centre,  and  secondly  drawing  the  cavalry  back  to  the 


:6o  W  A  R  A  X  D  PEACE 

further  side  of  the  ravine.  Prince  Andrey,  who  was  constantly  in  attend¬ 
ance  on  the  commander-in-chief,  watching  the  movements  of  masses  of 
men  and  manoeuvring  of  troops,  and  also  continually  studying  the  his¬ 
torical  accounts  of  battles,  could  not  help  viewing  the  course  of  the 
military  operations  that  were  to  come  only  in  their  general  features.  His 
imagination  dwelt  on  the  broad  possibilities,  such  as  the  following:  'If 
the  enemy  makes  the  right  flank  the  point  of  attack,’  he  said  to  himself, 
‘the  Kiev  grenadiers  and  Podoloskv  Chasseurs  will  have  to  defend 
their  position,  till  the  reserves  from  the  centre  come  to  their  sup¬ 
port.  In  that  case  the  dragoons  can  get  them  in  the  flank  and  drive 
them  back.  In  case  of  an  attack  on  the  centre,  we  station  on  this  height 
the  central  battery,  and  under  its  cover  we  draw  off  the  left  flank  and 
retreat  to  the  ravine  by  platoons,’  he  reasoned.  .  .  .  All  the  while  he  was 
on  the  cannon,  he  heard,  as  one  often  does,  the  sounds  of  the  voices  of 
the  officers  talking  in  the  shanty,  but  he  did  not  take  in  a  single  word  of 
what  thejr  were  saying.  Suddenly  a  voice  from  the  shanty  impressed  him 
by  a  tone  of  such  earnestness  that  lie  could  not  help  listening. 

'No,  my  dear  fellow,’  said  a  pleasant  voice  that  seemed  somehow 
familiar  to  Prince  Andrey.  ‘I  say  that  if  one  could  know  what  wall  happen 
after  death,  then  not  one  of  us  would  be  afraid  of  death.  That’s  so,  my 
dear  fellow.’ 

Another  younger  voice  interrupted  him:  ‘But  afraid  or  not  afraid, 
there’s  no  escaping  it.’ 

'Why,  you’re  always  in  fear!  Fie  on  you  learned  fellows,’  said  a  third, 
a  manly  voice,  interrupting  both.  'To  be  sure,  you  artillerymen  are 
clever  fellows,  because  you  can  carry  everything  with  you  to  eat  and 
to  drink.’ 

And  the  owner  of  the  manly  voice,  apparently  an  infantry  officer, 
laughed. 

‘Still  one  is  in  fear,’  pursued  the  first  voice,  the  one  Prince  Andrey 
knew.  ‘One’s  afraid  of  the  unknown,  that’s  what  it  is.  It’s  all  very  well 
to  say  the  soul  goes  to  heaven  ,  .  .  but  this  we  do  know,  that  there  is 
no  heaven,  but  only  atmosphere.’ 

Again  the  manly  voice  interrupted. 

'Come,  give  us  a  drop  of  your  herb-brandy,  Tushin,’  it  said. 

‘Oh,  it’s  the  captain,  who  had  his  boots  off  in  the  booth,’  thought  Prince 
Andrey,  recognising  with  pleasure  the  agreeable  philosophising  voice. 

‘Herb-brandy  by  all  means,’  said  Tushin;  ‘but  still  to  conceive  of  a 
future  life  .  .  .’  He  did  not  finish  his  sentence. 

At  that  moment  there  was  a  whiz  heard  in  the  air:  nearer,  nearer, 
faster  and  more  distinctly,  and  faster  it  came;  and  the  cannon-ball,  as 
though  not  uttering  all  it  had  to  say,  thudded  into  the  earth  not  far  from 
the  shanty,  tearing  up  the  soil  with  superhuman  force.  The  earth  seemed 
to  moan  at  the  terrible  blow.  At  the  same  instant  there  dashed  out  of 
the  shanty,  before  any  of  the  rest,  little  Tushin  with  his  short  pipe  in  his 
mouth;  his  shrewd,  good-humoured  face  was  rather  pale.  After  him 


i6i 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

emerged  the  owner  of  the  manly  voice,  a  stalwart  infantry  officer,  who 
ran  off  to  his  company,  buttoning  his  coat  as  he  ran. 


XVII 

Prince  Andrey  mounted  his  horse  but  lingered  at  the  battery,  looking 
at  the  smoke  of  the  cannon  from  which  the  ball  had  flown.  His  eyes 
moved  rapidly  over  the  wide  plain.  He  only  saw  that  the  previously  im¬ 
mobile  masses  of  the  French  were  heaving  to  and  fro,  and  that  it  really 
was  a  battery  on  the  left.  The  smoke  still  clung  about  it.  Two  Frenchmen 
on  horseback,  doubtless  adjutants,  were  galloping  on  the  hill.  A  small 
column  of  the  enemy,  distinctly  visible,  were  moving  downhill,  probably 
to  strengthen  the  line.  The  smoke  of  the  first  shot  had  not  cleared  away, 
when  there  was  a  fresh  puff  of  smoke  and  another  shot.  The  battle  was 
beginning.  Prince  Andrey  turned  his  horse  and  galloped  back  to  Grunte 
to  look  for  Prince  Bagration.  Behind  him  he  heard  the  cannonade  be¬ 
coming  louder  and  more  frequent.  Our  men  were  evidently  beginning  to 
reply.  Musket  shots  could  be  heard  below  at  the  spot  where  the  lines 
were  closest.  Lemarrois  had  only  just  galloped  to  Murat  with  Napoleon's 
menacing  letter,  and  Murat,  abashed  and  anxious  to  efface  his  error,  at 
once  moved  his  forces  to  the  centre  and  towards  both  flanks,  hoping 
before  evening  and  the  arrival  of  the  Emperor  to  destroy  the  insignificant 
detachment  before  him. 

‘It  has  begun!  Here  it  comes!  ’  thought  Prince  Andrey,  feeling  the  blood 
rush  to  his  heart.  ‘But  where?  What  form  is  my  Toulon  to  take?’  he 
wondered. 

Passing  between  the  companies  that  had  been  eating  porridge  and 
drinking  vodka  a  quarter  of  an  hour  before,  he  saw  everywhere  nothing 
but  the  same  rapid  movements  of  soldiers  forming  in  ranks  and  getting 
their  guns,  and  on  every  face  he  saw  the  same  eagerness  that  he  felt  in 
his  heart.  ‘It  has  begun!  Here  it  comes!  Terrible  and  delightful!’  said 
the  face  of  every  private  and  officer.  Before  he  reached  the  earthworks 
that  were  being  thrown  up,  he  saw  in  the  evening  light  of  the  dull  autumn 
day  men  on  horseback  crossing  towards  him.  The  foremost,  wearing  a 
cloak  and  an  Astrachan  cap,  was  riding  on  a  white  horse.  It  was  Prince 
Bagration.  Prince  Andrey  stopped  and  waited  for  him  to  come  up.  Prince 
Bagration  stopped  his  horse,  and  recognising  Prince  Andrey  nodded  to 
him.  He  still  gazed  on  ahead  while  Prince  Andrey  told  him  what  he 
had  been  seeing. 

The  expression:  ‘It  has  begun!  it  is  coming!’  was  discernible  even  on 
Prince  Bagration’s  strong,  brown  face,  with  his  half-closed,  lustreless, 
sleepy-looking  eyes.  Prince  Andrey  glanced  with  uneasy  curiosity  at  that 
impassive  face,  and  he  longed  to  know:  Was  that  man  thinking  and  f  cel¬ 
ling,  and  what  was  he  thinking  and  feeling  at  that  moment?  ‘Is  there 
anything  at  all  there  behind  that  impassive  face?’  Prince  Andrey  won¬ 
dered,  looking  at  him.  Prince  Bagration  nodded  in  token  of  his  assent 


162 


WAR  AND  PEACE  » 

to  Prince  Andrey’s  words,  and  said:  ‘Very  good,’  with  an  expression  that 
seemed  to  signify  that  all  that  happened,  and  all  that  was  told  him,  was 
exactly  what  he  had  foreseen.  Prince  Andrey,  panting  from  his  rapid 
ride,  spoke  quickly.  Prince  Bagration  uttered  his  words  in  his  Oriental 
accent  with  peculiar  deliberation,  as  though  impressing  upon  him  that 
there  was  no  need  of  hurry.  He  did,  however,  spur  his  horse  into  a  gallop 
in  the  direction  of  Tushin’s  battery.  Prince  Andrey  rode  after  him  with 
his  suite.  The  party  consisted  of  an  officer  of  the  suite,  Bagration’s 
private  adjutant,  Zherkov,  an  orderly  officer,  the  staff-officer  on  duty, 
riding  a  beautiful  horse  of  English  breed,  and  a  civilian  official,  the 
auditor,  who  had  asked  to  be  present  from  curiosity  to  see  the  battle. 
The  auditor,  a  plump  man  with  a  plump  face,  looked  about  him  with  a 
naive  smile  of  amusement,  swaying  about  on  his  horse,  and  cutting  a 
queer  figure  in  his  cloak  on  his  saddle  among  the  hussars,  Cossacks,  and 
adjutants. 

‘This  gentleman  wants  to  see  a  battle,’  said  Zherkov  to  Bolkonsky,  in¬ 
dicating  the  auditor,  ‘but  has  begun  to  feel  queer  already.’ 

‘Come,  leave  off,’  said  the  auditor,  with  a  beaming  smile  at  once  naive 
and  cunning,  as  though  he  were  flattered  at  being  the  object  of  Zherkov’s 
jests,  and  was  purposely  trying  to  seem  stupider  than  he  was  in  reality. 

‘It’s  very  curious,  mon  Monsieur  Prince,’  said  the  staff-officer  on  duty. 
(He  vaguely  remembered  that  the  title  prince  was  translated  in  some 
peculiar  way  in  French,  but  could  not  get  it  quite  right.)  By  this  time 
they  were  all  riding  up  to  Tushin’s  battery,  and  a  ball  struck  the  ground 
before  them. 

‘What  was  that  falling?’  asked  the  auditor,  smiling  naively. 

‘A  French  pancake,’  said  Zherkov. 

‘That’s  what  they  hit  you  with,  then?’  asked  the  auditor.  ‘How  awful!  ’ 
And  he  seemed  to  expand  all  over  with  enjoyment.  He  had  hardly  uttered 
the  words  when  again  there  was  a  sudden  terrible  whiz,  which  ended 
abruptly  in  a  thud  into  something  soft,  and  flop — a  Cossack,  riding  a 
little  behind  and  to  the  right  of  the  auditor,  dropped  from  his  horse 
to  the  ground.  Zherkov  and  the  staff-officer  bent  forward  over  their 
saddles  and  turned  their  horses  away.  The  auditor  stopped  facing  the; 
Cossack,  and  looking  with  curiosity  at  him.  The  Cossack  was  dead,  the 
horse  was  still  struggling.  J  f 

Prince  Bagration  dropped  his  eyelids,  looked  round,  and  seeing  the  ( 
cause  of  the  delay,  turned  away  indifferently,  seeming  to  ask,  ‘Why  t 
notice  these  trivial  details?’  With  the  ease  of  a  first-rate  horseman  he  it 
stopped  his  horse,  bent  over  a  little  and  disengaged  his  sabre,  which  had:  (a 
caught  under  his  cloak.  The  sabre  was  an  old-fashioned  one,  unlike  whatj  | 
are  worn  now.  Prince  Andrey  remembered  the  story  that  Suvorov  had  ft 
given  his  sabre  to  Bagration  in  Italy,  and  the  recollection  was  particu-  m 
larly  pleasant  to  him  at  that  moment.  They  had  ridden  up  to  the  very  u 
battery  from  which  Prince  Andrey  had  surveyed  the  field  of  battle. 

‘Whose  company?’  Prince  Bagration  asked  of  the  artilleryman  stand-L 
ing  at  the  ammunition  boxes.  liiti 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


163 

He  asked  in  words:  ‘Whose  company?’  but  what  he  was  really  asking 
was,  ‘You’re  not  in  a  panic  here?’  And  the  artilleryman  understood  that. 

‘Captain  Tushin’s,  your  excellency,’  the  red-haired,  freckled  artillery¬ 
man  sang  out  in  a  cheerful  voice,  as  he  ducked  forward. 

‘To  be  sure,  to  be  sure,’  said  Bagration,  pondering  something,  and  he 
rode  by  the  platforms  up  to  the  end  cannon.  Just  as  he  reached  it,  a  shot 
boomed  from  the  cannon,  deafening  him  and  his  suite,  and  in  the  smoke 
that  suddenly  enveloped  the  cannon  t'he  artillerymen  could  be  seen  haul¬ 
ing  at  the  cannon,  dragging  and  rolling  it  back  to  its  former  position. 
A  broad-shouldered,  gigantic  soldier,  gunner  number  one,  with  a  mop, 
darted  up  to  the  wheel  and  planted  himself,  his  legs  wide  apart;  while 
number  two,  with  a  shaking  hand,  put  the  charge  into  the  cannon’s 
mouth;  a  small  man  with  stooping  shoulders,  the  officer  Tushin,  stum¬ 
bling  against  the  cannon,  dashed  forward,  not  noticing  the  general,  and 
looked  out,  shading  his  eyes  with  his  little  hand. 

‘Another  two  points  higher,  and  it  will  be  just  right,’  he  shouted  in  a 
shrill  voice,  to  which  he  tried  to  give  a  swaggering  note  utterly  out  of 
keeping  with  his  figure.  ‘Two!  ’  he  piped.  ‘Smash  away,  Medvyedev!  ’ 

Bagration  called  to  the  officer,  and  Tushin  went  up  to  the  general, 
putting  three  fingers  to  the  peak  of  his  cap  with  a  timid  and  awkward 
gesture,  more  like  a  priest  blessing  some  one  than  a  soldier  saluting. 
Though  Tushin’s  guns  had  been  intended  to  cannonade  the  valley,  he  was 
throwing  shells  over  the  village  of  Schongraben,  in  part  of  which  im¬ 
mense  masses  of  French  soldiers  were  moving  out. 

No  one  had  given  Tushin  instructions  at  what  or  with  what  to  fire,  and 
after  consulting  his  sergeant,  Zaharchenko,  for  whom  he  had  a  great 
respect,  he  had  decided  that  it  would  be  a  good  thing  to  set  fire  to  the 
village.  ‘Very  good!’  Bagration  said,  on  the  officer’s  submitting  that  he 
had  done  so,  and  he  began  scrutinizing  the  whole  field  of  battle  that  lay 
unfolded  before  him.  He  seemed  to  be  considering  something.  The 
French  had  advanced  nearest  on  the  right  side.  In  the  hollow  where  the 
stream  flowed,  below  the  eminence  on  which  the  Kiev  regiment  was  sta¬ 
tioned,  could  be  heard  a  continual  roll  and  crash  of  guns,  the  din  of 
which  was  overwhelming.  And  much  further  to  the  right,  behind  the 
dragoons,  the  officer  of  the  suite  pointed  out  to  Bagration  a  column  of 
French  outflanking  our  flank.  On  the  left  the  horizon  was  bounded  by 
the  copse  close  by.  Prince  Bagration  gave  orders  for  two  battalions  from 
the  centre  to  go  to  the  right  to  reinforce  the  flank.  The  officer  of  the 
suite  ventured  to  observe  to  the  prince  that  the  removal  of  these  bat¬ 
talions  would  leave  the  cannon  unprotected.  Prince  Bagration  turned  to 
the  officer  of  the  suite  and  stared  at  him  with  his  lustreless  eyes  in  silence. 
P  -ince  Andrey  thought  that  the  officer’s  observation  was  a  very  just  one, 
And  that  really  there  was  nothing  to  be  said  in  reply.  But  at  that  instant 
fan  adjutant' galloped  up  with  a  message  from  the  colonel  of  the  regiment 
:n  the  hollow  that  immense  masses  of  the  French  were  coming  dowm 
jpon  them,  that  his  men  were  in  disorder  and  retreating  upon  the  Kiev 
grenadiers.  Prince  Bagration  nodded  to  signify  his  assent  and  approval. 


1 64  WAR  AND  PEACE 

He  rode  at  a  walking  pace  to  the  right,  and  sent  an  adjutant  to  the 
dragoons  with  orders  to  attack  the  French.  But  the  adjutant  returned 
half  an  hour  later  with  the  news  that  the  colonel  of  the  dragoons  had 
already  retired  beyond  the  ravine,  as  a  destructive  fire  had  been  opened 
upon  him,  and  he  was  losing  his  men  for  nothing,  and  so  he  had  con¬ 
centrated  his  men  in  the  wood. 

‘Very  good!’  said  Bagration. 

Just  as  he  was  leaving  the  battery,  shots  had  been  heard  in  the  wood 
on  the  left  too;  and  as  it  was  too  far  to  the  left  flank  for  him  to  go 
himself,  Prince  Bagration  despatched  Zherkov  to  tell  the  senior  general 
— the  general  whose  regiment  had  been  inspected  by  Kutuzov  at  Braunau 
— to  retreat  as  rapidly  as  possible  beyond  the  ravine,  as  the  right  flank 
would  probably  not  long  be  able  to  detain  the  enemy.  Tushin,  and  the 
battalion  that  was  to  have  defended  his  battery,  was  forgotten.  Prince 
Andrey  listened  carefully  to  Prince  Bagration's  colloquies  with  the  com¬ 
manding  officers,  and  to  the  orders  he  gave  them,  and  noticed,  to  his 
astonishment,  that  no  orders  were  really  given  by  him  at  all,  but  that 
Prince  Bagration  confined  himself  to  trying  to  appear  as  though  every¬ 
thing  that  was  being  done  of  necessity,  by  chance,  or  at  the  will  of 
individual  officers,  was  all  done,  if  not  by  his  orders,  at  least  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  his  intentions.  Prince  Andrey  observed,  however,  that,  thanks 
to  the  tact  shown  by  Prince  Bagration,  notwithstanding  that  what  was 
done  was  due  to  chance,  and  not  dependent  on  the  commander’s  will, 
his  presence  was  of  the  greatest  value.  Commanding  officers,  who  rode  up 
to  Bagration  looking  distraught,  regained  their  composure;  soldiers  and 
officers  greeted  him  cheerfully,  recovered  their  spirits  in  his  presence,  and 
were  unmistakably  anxious  to  display  their  pluck  before  him. 


XVIII 

After  riding  up  to  the  highest  point  of  our  right  flank,  Prince  Bagration  I 
began  to  go  downhill,  where  a  continuous  roll  of  musketry  was  heard  ; 
and  nothing  could  be  seen  for  the  smoke.  The  nearer  they  got  to  the  j 
hollow  the  less  they  could  see,  and  the  more  distinctly  could  be  felt 
the  nearness  of  the  actual  battlefield.  They  began  to  meet  wounded 
men.  Two  soldiers  were  dragging  one  along,  supporting  him  on  each  side. 
His  head  was  covered  with  blood;  he  had  no  cap,  and  was  coughing  and  1 
spitting.  The  bullet  had  apparently  entered  his  mouth  or  throat.  Another  ' 
one  came  towards  them,  walking  pluckily  alone  without  his  gun,  groan-  1 
ing  aloud  and  wringing  his  hands  from  the  pain  of  a  wound  from  which  « 
the  blood  was  flowing,  as  though  from  a  bottle,  over  his  greatcoat.  His  n 
face  looked  more  frightened  than  in  pain.  He  had  been  wounded  only  a  i 
moment  before.  Crossing  the  road,  they  began  going  down  a  deep  de-l  i; 
scent,  and  on  the  slope  they  saw  several  men  lying  on  the  ground.  They  ft 
were  met  by  a  crowd  of  soldiers,  among  them  some  who  were  not  wounded. 
The  soldiers  were  hurrying  up  the  hill,  gasping  for  breath,  and  in  spite 


W  A  R  A  N  D  P  E  A  C  E  165 

of  the  general’s  presence,  they  were  talking  loudly  together  and  gesticu¬ 
lating  with  their  arms.  In  the  smoke  ahead  of  them  they  could  see  now 
rows  of  grey  coats,  and  the  commanding  officer,  seeing  Bagration,  ran 
after  the  group  of  retreating  soldiers,  calling  upon  them  to  come  back. 
Bagration  rode  up  to  the  ranks,  along  which  there  was  here  and  there  a 
rapid  snapping  of  shots  drowning  the  talk  of  the  soldiers  and  the  shouts 
of  the  officers.  The  whole  air  was  reeking  with  smoke.  The  soldiers’  faces 
were  all  full  of  excitement  and  smudged  with  powder.  Some  were  plug¬ 
ging  with  their  ramrods,  others  were  putting  powder  on  the  touch-pans, 
and  getting  charges  out  of  their  pouches,  others  were  firing  their  guns. 
But  it  was  impossible  to  see  at  whom  they  were  firing  from  the  smoke, 
which  the  wind  did  not  lift.  The  pleasant  hum  and  whiz  of  the  bullets 
was  repeated  pretty  rapidly.  'What  is  it?’  wondered  Prince  Andrey,  as 
he  rode  up  to  the  crowd  of  soldiers.  ‘It  can’t  be  the  line,  for  they  are 
all  crowded  together;  it  can’t  be  an  attacking  party,  for  they  are  not 
moving;  it  can’t  be  a  square,  they  are  not  standing  like  one.’ 

A  thin,  weak-looking  colonel,  apparently  an  old  man,  with  an  amiable 
smile,  and  eyelids  that  half-covered  his  old-looking  eyes  and  gave  him 
a  mild  air,  rode  up  to  Prince  Bagration  and  received  him  as  though  he 
were  welcoming  an  honoured  guest  into  his  house.  He  announced  to  Prince 
Bagration  that  his  regiment  had  had  to  face  a  cavalry  attack  of  the 
French,  that  though  the  attack  had  been  repulsed,  the  regiment  had  lost 
more  than  half  of  its  men.  The  colonel  said  that  the  attack  had  been 
repulsed,  supposing  that  to  be  the  proper  military  term  for  what  had 
happened;  but  he  did  not  really  know  himself  what  had  been  taking 
place  during  that  half  hour  in  the  troops  under  his  command,  and  could 
not  have  said  with  any  certainty  whether  the  attack  had  been  repelled 
or  his  regiment  had  been  beaten  by  the  attack.  All  he  knew  was  that  at 
the  beginning  of  the  action  balls  and  grenades  had  begun  flying  all  about 
his  regiment,  and  killing  men,  that  then  some  one  had  shouted  ‘cavalry,’ 
and  our  men  had  begun  firing.  And  they  were  firing  still,  though  not  now 
at  the  cavalry,  who  had  disappeared,  but  at  the  French  infantry,  who 
had  made  their  appearance  in  the  hollow  and  were  firing  at  our  men. 
Prince  Bagration  nodded  his  head  to  betoken  that  all  this  was  exactly 
what  he  had  desired  and  expected.  Turning  to  an  adjutant,  he  commanded 
him  to  bring  down  from  the  hill  the  two  battalions  of  the  Sixth  Chasseurs, 
by  whom  they  had  just  come.  Prince  Andrey  was  struck  at  that  instant 
by  the  change  that  had  come  over  Prince  Bagration’s  face.  His  face  wore 
the  look  of  concentrated  and  happy  determination,  which  may  be  seen 
in  a  man  who  in  a  hot  day  takes  the  final  run  before  a  header  into  the 
water.  The  lustreless,  sleepy  look  in  the  eyes,  the  affectation  of  profound 
thought  had  gone.  The  round,  hard,  eagle  eyes  looked  ecstatically  and 
rather  disdainfully  before  him,  obviously  not  resting  on  anything,  though 
there  was  still  the  same  deliberation  in  his  measured  movements. 

The  colonel  addressed  a  protest  to  Prince  Bagration,  urging  him  to  go 
back,  as  there  it  was  too  dangerous  for  him.  'I  beg  of  you,  your  excellency, 


i66 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

for  God’s  sake!’  he  kept  on  saying,  looking  for  support  to  the  officer  of 
the  suite,  who  only  turned  away  from  him. 

‘Only  look,  your  excellency!’  He  called  his  attention  to  the  bullets 
which  were  continually  whizzing,  singing,  and  hissing  about  them.  He 
spoke  in  the  tone  of  protest  and  entreaty  with  which  a  carpenter  speaks  to 
a  gentleman  who  has  picked  up  a  hatchet.  ‘We  are  used  to  it,  but  you  may 
blister  your  fingers.’  He  talked  as  though  these  bullets  could  not  kill 
him,  and  his  half-closed  eyes  gave  a  still  more  persuasive  effect  to  his 
words.  The  staff-officer  added  his  protests  to  the  colonel,  but  Bagration 
made  them  no  answer.  He  merely  gave  the  order  to  cease  firing,  and  to 
form  so  as  to  make  room  for  the  two  battalions  of  reinforcements.  Just 
as  he  was  speaking  the  cloud  of  smoke  covering  the  hollow  was  lifted 
as  by  an  unseen  hand  and  blown  by  the  rising  wind  from  right  to  left, 
and  the  opposite  hill  came  into  sight  with  the  French  moving  across  it. 
All  eyes  instinctively  fastened  on  that  French  column  moving  down  upon 
them  and  winding  in  and  out  over  the  ups  and  downs  of  the  ground. 
Already  they  could  see  the  fur  caps  of  the  soldiers,  could  distinguish 
officers  from  privates,  could  see  their  flag  flapping  against  its  staff. 

‘How  well  they’re  marching,’  said  some  one  in  Bagration’s  suite. 

The  front  part  of  the  column  was  already  dipping  down  into  the  hol¬ 
low.  The  engagement  would  take  place  then  on  the  nearer  side  of  the 
slope  ... 

The  remnants  of  the  regiment  that  had  already  been  in  action,  form¬ 
ing  hurriedly,  drew  off  to  the  right;  the  two  battalions  of  the  Sixth 
Chasseurs  marched  up  in  good  order,  driving  the  last  stragglers  before 
them.  They  had  not  yet  reached  Bagration,  but  the  heavy,  weighty  tread 
could  be  heard  of  the  whole  mass  keeping  step.  On  the  left  flank,  nearest 
of  all  to  Bagration,  marched  the  captain,  a  round-faced  imposing-looking 
man,  with  a  foolish  and  happy  expression  of  face.  It  was  the  same  in¬ 
fantry  officer  who  had  run  out  of  the  shanty  after  Tushin.  He  was  obvi¬ 
ously  thinking  of  nothing  at  the  moment,  but  that  he  was  marching  before 
his  commander  in  fine  style.  With  the  complacency  of  a  man  on  parade, 
he  stepped  springing  on  his  muscular  legs,  drawing  himself  up  without 
the  slightest  effort,  as  though  he  were  swinging,  and  this  easy  elasticity 
was  a  striking  contrast  to  the  heavy  tread  of  the  soldiers  keeping  step 
with  him.  He  wore  hanging  by  his  leg  an  unsheathed,  slender,  narrow 
sword  (a  small  bent  sabre,  more  like  a  toy  than  a  weapon),  and  looking 
about  him,  now  at  the  commander,  now  behind,  he  turned  his  whole 
powerful  frame  round  without  getting  out  of  step.  It  looked  as  though  all 
the  force  of  his  soul  was  directed  to  marching  by  his  commander  in  the 
best  style  possible.  And  conscious  that  he  was  accomplishing  this,  he  was 
happy.  ‘Left  .  .  .  left  .  .  .  left  .  .  .’  he  seemed  to  be  inwardly  repeat¬ 
ing  at  each  alternate  step.  And  the  wall  of  soldierly  figures,  weighed  down 
by  their  knapsacks  and  guns,  with  their  faces  all  grave  in  different  ways, 
moved  by  in  the  same  rhythm,  as  though  each  of  the  hundreds  of  soldiers 
were  repeating  mentally  at  each  alternate  step,  ‘Left  .  .  .  left  .  .  .  left 
.  .  .’  A  stout  major  skirted  a  bush  on  the  road,  puffing  and  shifting  his 


WARANDPEACE  167 

step.  A  soldier,  who  had  dropped  behind,  trotted  after  the  company,  look¬ 
ing  panic-stricken  at  his  own  defection.  A  cannon  ball,  whizzing  through 
the  air,  flew  over  the  heads  of  Prince  Bagration  and  his  suite,  and  in 
time  to  the  same  rhythm,  ‘Left  .  .  .  left  .  .  .’  it  fell  into  the  column. 

‘Close  the  ranks!’  rang  out  the  jaunty  voice  of  the  captain.  The 
soldiers  marched  in  a  half  circle  round  something  in  the  place  where  the 
ball  had  fallen,  and  an  old  cavalryman,  an  under  officer,  lingered  behind 
near  the  dead,  and  overtaking  his  line,  changed  feet  with  a  hop,  got  into 
step,  and  looked  angrily  about  him.  ‘Left  .  .  .  left  .  .  .  left  .  . 
seemed  to  echo  out  of  the  menacing  silence  and  the  monotonous  sound 
of  the  simultaneous  tread  of  the  feet  on  the  ground. 

‘Well  done,  lads!’  said  Prince  Bagration. 

‘For  your  ex  .  .  .  slen,  slen,  slency!’  rang  out  along  the  ranks.  A 
surly-looking  soldier,  marching  on  the  left,  turned  his  eyes  on  Bagration 
as  he  shouted,  with  an  expression  that  seemed  to  say,  ‘We  know  that 
without  telling.’  Another,  opening  his  mouth  wide,  shouted  without  glanc¬ 
ing  round,  and  marched  on,  as  though  afraid  of  letting  his  attention  stray. 
The  order  was  given  to  halt  and  take  off  their  knapsacks. 

Bagration  rode  round  the  ranks  of  men  who  had  marched  by  him,  and 
then  dismounted  from  his  horse.  He  gave  the  reins  to  a  Cossack,  took 
off  his  cloak  and  handed  it  to  him,  stretched  his  legs  and  set  his  cap 
straight  on  his  head.  The  French  column  with  the  officers  in  front  came 
into  sight  under  the  hill. 

‘With  God’s  help!’  cried  Bagration  in  a  resolute,  sonorous  voice.  He 
turned  for  one  instant  to  the  front  line,  and  swinging  his  arms  a  little, 
with  the  awkward,  lumbering  gait  of  a  man  always  on  horseback,  he 
walked  forward  over  the  uneven  ground.  Prince  Andrey  felt  that  some 
unseen  force  was  drawing  him  forward,  and  he  had  a  sensation  of  great 
happiness.1 

The  French  were  near.  Already  Prince  Andrey,  walking  beside  Bagra¬ 
tion,  could  distinguish  clearly  the  sashes,  the  red  epaulettes,  even  the 
faces  of  the  French.  (He  saw  distinctly  one  bandy-legged  old  French 
officer,  wearing  Hessian  boots,  who  was  getting  up  the  hill  with  difficulty, 
taking  hold  of  the  bushes.)  Prince  Bagration  gave  no  new  command,  and 
still  marched  in  front  of  the  ranks  in  the  same  silence.  Suddenly  there  was 
the  snap  of  a  shot  among  the  French,  another  and  a  third  .  .  .  and 
smoke  rose  and  firing  rang  out  in  all  the  broken-up  ranks  of  the  enemy. 
Several  of  our  men  fell,  among  them  the  round-faced  officer,  who  had 
been  marching  so  carefully  and  complacently.  But  at  the  very  instant 
of  the  first  shot,  Bagration  looked  round  and  shouted,  ‘Hurrah! ’ ,‘Hura 
.  .  .  a  .  .  .  a  .  .  .  ah!  ’  rang  out  along  our  lines  in  a  prolonged  roar,  and 
out-stripping  Prince  Bagration  and  one  another,  in  no  order,  but  in  an 
eager  and  joyous  crowd,  our  men  ran  downhill  after  the  routed  French. 

1  This  was  the  attack  of  which  Thiers  says:  ‘The  Russians  behaved  valiantly  and. 
which  is  rare  in  warfare,  two  bodies  of  infantry  marched  resolutely  upon  each  other, 
neither  giving  way  before  the  other  came  up.’  And  Napoleon  on  St.  Helena  said: 
‘Some  Russian  battalions  showed  intrepidity.’ 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


1 68 


XIX 

The  attack  of  the  Sixth  Chasseurs  covered  the  retreat  of  the  right  flank. 
In  the  centre  Tushin’s  forgotten  battery  had  succeeded  in  setting  fire 
to  Schongraben  and  delaying  the  advance  of  the  French.  The  French 
stayed  to  put  out  the  fire,  which  was  fanned  by  the  wind,  and  this  gave 
time  for  the  Russians  to  retreat.  The  retreat  of  the  centre  beyond  the 
ravine  was  hurried  and  noisy;  but  the  different  companies  kept  apart. 
But  the  left  flank,  which  consisted  of  the  Azovsky  and  Podolsky  infantry 
and  the  Pavlograd  hussars,  was  simultaneously  attacked  in  front  and 
surrounded  by  the  cream  of  the  French  army  under  Lannes,  and  was 
thrown  into  disorder.  Bagration  had  sent  Zherkov  to  the  general  in  com¬ 
mand  of  the  left  flank  with  orders  to  retreat  immediately. 

Zherkov,  keeping  his  hand  still  at  his  cap,  had  briskly  started  his  horse 
and  galloped  off.  But  no  sooner  had  he  ridden  out  of  Bagration’s  sight 
than  his  courage  failed  him.  He  was  overtaken  by  a  panic  he  could  not 
contend  against,  and  he  could  not  bring  himself  to  go  where  there  was 
danger. 

After  galloping  some  distance  towards  the  troops  of  the  left  flank,  he 
rode  not  forward  where  he  heard  firing,  but  off  to  look  for  the  general 
and  the  officers  in  a  direction  where  they  could  not  by  any  possibility  be; 
and  so  it  was  that  he  did  not  deliver  the  message. 

The  command  of  the  left  flank  belonged  by  right  of  seniority  to  the 
general  of  the  regiment  in  which  Dolohov  was  serving — the  regiment 
which  Kutuzov  had  inspected  before  Braunau.  But  the  command  of  the 
extreme  left  flank  had  been  entrusted  to  the  colonel  of  the  Pavlograd 
hussars,  in  which  Rostov  was  serving.  Hence  arose  a  misunderstanding. 
Both  commanding  officers  were  intensely  exasperated  with  one  another, 
and  at  a  time  when  fighting  had  been  going  on  a  long  while  on  the  right 
flank,  and  the  French  had  already  begun  their  advance  on  the  left,  these 
two  officers  were  engaged  in  negotiations,  the  sole  aim  of  which  was  the 
mortification  of  one  another.  The  regiments — cavalry  and  infantry  alike 
— were  by  no  means  in  readiness  for  the  engagement.  No  one  from  the 
common  soldier  to  the  general  expected  a  battle;  and  they  were  all  calmly 
engaged  in  peaceful  occupations — feeding  their  horses  in  the  cavalry, 
gathering  wood  in  the  infantry. 

‘He  is  my  senior  in  rank,  however,’  said  the  German  colonel  of  the 
hussars,  growing  very  red  and  addressing  an  adjutant,  who  had  ridden  up. 
‘So  let  him  do  as  he  likes.  I  can’t  sacrifice  my  hussars.  Bugler!  Sound 
the  retreat!’ 

But  things  were  becoming  urgent.  The  fire  of  cannon  and  musketry 
thundered  in  unison  on  the  right  and  in  the  centre,  and  the  French  tunics 
of  Lannes’s  sharpshooters  had  already  passed  over  the  milldam,  and 
were  forming  on  this  side  of  it  hardly  out  of  musket-shot  range. 

The  infantry  general  walked  up  to  his  horse  with  his  quivering  strut, 
and  mounting  it  and  drawing  himself  up  very  erect  and  tall,  he  rode  up 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


i6q 

to  the  Pavlograd  colonel.  The  two  officers  met  with  affable  bows  and 
concealed  fury  in  their  hearts. 

‘Again,  colonel/  the  general  said,  ‘I  cannot  leave  half  my  men  in  the 
wood.  I  beg  you,  I  beg  you,’  he  repeated,  ‘to  occupy  the  position,  and  pre¬ 
pare  for  an  attack.’ 

‘And  I  beg  you  not  to  meddle  in  what’s  not  your  business/  answered 
the  colonel,  getting  hot. ‘If  you  were  a  cavalry  officer  .  .  .’ 

‘I  am  not  a  cavalry  officer,  colonel,  but  I  am  a  Russian  general,  and  if 
you  are  unaware  of  the  fact  .  .  .’ 

‘I  am  fully  aware  of  it,  your  excellency/  the  colonel  screamed  suddenly, 
setting  his  horse  in  motion  and  becoming  purple  in  the  face.  ‘If  you  care 
to  come  to  the  front,  you  will  see  that  this  position  cannot  be  held.  I  don’t 
want  to  massacre  my  regiment  for  your  satisfaction.’ 

‘You  forget  yourself,  colonel.  I  am  not  considering  my  own  satisfaction, 
and  I  do  not  allow  such  a  thing  to  be  said.’ 

Taking  the  colonel’s  proposition  as  a  challenge  to  his  courage,  the  gen¬ 
eral  squared  his  chest  and  rode  scowling  beside  him  to  the  front  line,  as 
though  their  whole  difference  would  inevitably  be  settled  there  under  the 
enemy’s  fire.  They  reached  the  line,  several  bullets  flew  by  them,  and  they 
stood  still  without  a  word.  To  look  at  the  front  line  was  a  useless  proceed¬ 
ing,  since  from  the  spot  where  they  had  been  standing  before,  it  was  clear 
that  the  cavalry  could  not  act,  owing  to  the  bushes  and  the  steep  and 
broken  character  of  the  ground,  and  that  the  French  were  outflanking  the 
left  wing.  The  general  and  the  colonel  glared  sternly  and  significantly  at 
one  another,  like  two  cocks  preparing  for  a  fight,  seeking  in  vain  for  a 
symptom  of  cowardice.  Both  stood  the  test  without  flinching.  Since  there 
was  nothing  to  be  said,  and  neither  was  willing  to  give  the  other  grounds 
for  asserting  that  he  was  the  first  to  withdraw  from  under  fire,  they  might 
have  remained  a  long  while  standing  there,  mutually  testing  each  other’s 
pluck,  if  there  had  not  at  that  moment  been  heard  in  the  copse,  almost 
behind  them,  the  snap  of  musketry  and  a  confused  shout  of  voices.  The 
French  were  attacking  the  soldiers  gathering  wood  in  the  copse.  The 
hussars  could  not  now  retreat,  nor  could  the  infantry.  They  were  cut  off 
from  falling  back  on  the  left  by  the  French  line.  Nowr,  unfavourable  as 
the  ground  wras,  they  must  attack  to  fight  a  way  through  for  themselves. 

The  hussars  of  the  squadron  in  which  Rostov  was  an  ensign  had  hardly 
time  to  mount  their  horses  when  they  were  confronted  by  the  enemy. 
Again,  as  on  the  Enns  bridge,  there  was  no  one  between  the  squadron  and 
the  enemy,  and  between  them  lay  that  terrible  border-line  of  uncertainty 
and  dread,  like  the  line  dividing  the  living  from  the  dead.  All  the  soldiers 
were  conscious  of  that  line,  and  the  question  whether  they  would  cross  it 
or  not,  and  how  they  would  cross  it,  filled  them  with  excitement. 

The  colonel  rode  up  to  the  front,  made  some  angry  reply  to  the  questions 
of  the  officers,  and,  like  a  man  desperately  insisting  on  his  rights,  gave 
some  command.  No  one  said  anything  distinctly,  but  through  the  whole 
squadron  there  ran  a  vague  rumour  of  attack.  The  command  to  form  in 
order  rang  out,  then  there  was  the  clank  of  sabres  being  drawrn  out  of 


!>o  WARANDPEACE 

their  sheaths.  But  still  no  one  moved.  The  troops  of  the  left  flank,  both  the 
infantry  and  the  hussars,  felt  that  their  commanders  themselves  did  not 
know  what  to  do,  and  the  uncertainty  of  the  commanders  infected  the 
soldiers. 

‘Make  haste,  if  only  they’d  make  haste,’  thought  Rostov,  feeling  that 
at  last  the  moment  had  come  to  taste  the  joys  of  the  attack,  of  which  he 
had  heard  so  much  from  his  comrades. 

‘With  God’s  help,  lads,’  rang  out  Denisov’s  voice,  ‘forward,  quick, 
gallop!  ’ 

The  horses’  haunches  began  moving  in  the  front  line.  Rook  pulled  at 
the  reins  and  set  off  of  himself. 

On  the  right  Rostov  saw  the  foremost  lines  of  his  own  hussars,  and  still 
further  ahead  he  could  see  a  dark  streak,  which  he  could  not  distinguish 
clearly,  but  assumed  to  be  the  enemy.  Shots  could  be  heard,  but  at  a 
distance. 

‘Quicker!  ’  rang  out  the  word  of  command,  and  Rostov  felt  the  droop¬ 
ing  of  Rook’s  hindquarters  as  he  broke  into  a  gallop.  He  felt  the  joy  of 
the  gallop  coming,  and  was  more  and  more  lighthearted.  He  noticed  a 
solitary  tree  ahead  of  him.  The  tree  was  at  first  in  front  of  him,  in  the 
middle  of  that  border-land  that  had  seemed  so  terrible.  But  now  they  had 
crossed  it  and  nothing  terrible  had  happened,  but  he  felt  more  lively  and 
excited  every  moment.  ‘Ah,  won’t  I  slash  at  him!  ’  thought  Rostov,  grasp¬ 
ing  the  hilt  of  his  sabre  tightly.  ‘Hur  ...r...a...a!’  roared 
voices. 

‘Now,  let  him  come  on,  whoever  it  may  be,’  thought  R.ostov,  driving 
the  spurs  into  Rook,  and  outstripping  the  rest,  he  let  him  go  at  full  gallop. 
Already  the  enemy  could  be  seen  in  front.  Suddenly  something  swept  over 
the  squadron  like  a  broad  broom.  Rostov  lifted  his  sabre,  making  ready 
to  deal  a  blow,  but  at  that  instant  the  soldier  Nikitenko  galloped  ahead 
and  left  his  side,  and  Rostov  felt  as  though  he  were  in  a  dream  being 
carried  forward  with  supernatural  swiftness  and  yet  remaining  at  the 
same  spot.  An  hussar,  Bandartchuk,  galloped  up  from  behind  close  upon 
him  and  looked  angrily  at  him.  Bandartchuk’s  horse  started  aside,  and  he 
galloped  by. 

‘What’s  the  matter?  I’m  not  moving?  I’ve  fallen,  I’m  killed  .  .  .’ 
Rostov  asked  and  answered  himself  all  in  one  instant.  He  was  alone  in 
the  middle  of  the  field.  Instead  of  the  moving  horses  and  the  hussars’ 
backs,  he  saw  around  him  the  motionless  earth  and  Stubblefield.  There 
was  warm  blood  under  him. 

‘No,  I’m  wounded,  and  my  horse  is  killed.’  Rook  tried  to  get  up  on  his 
forelegs,  but  he  sank  again,  crushing  his  rider's  leg  under  his  leg.  Blood 
was  flowing  from  the  horse’s  head.  The  horse  struggled,  but  could  not 
get  up.  Rostov  tried  to  get  up,  and  fell  down  too.  His  sabretache  had 
caught  in  the  saddle.  Where  our  men  were,  where  were  the  French,  he  did 
not  know.  All  around  him  there  was  no  one. 

Getting  his  leg  free,  he  stood  up.  ‘Which  side,  where  now  was  that  line 
that  had  so  sharply  divided  the  two  armies?’  he  asked  himself,  and  could 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


171 

not  answer.  ‘Hasn't  something  gone  wrong  with  me?  Do  such  things 
happen,  and  what  ought  one  to  do  in  such  cases?’  he  wondered  as  he  was 
getting  up.  But  at  that  instant  he  felt  as  though  something  superfluous 
was  hanging  on  his  benumbed  left  arm.  The  wrist  seemed  not  to  belong  to 
it.  He  looked  at  his  hand,  carefully  searching  for  blood  on  it.  ‘Come,  here 
are  some  men,’  he  thought  joyfully,  seeing  some  men  running  towards  him. 
‘They  will  help  me!  ’  In  front  of  these  men  ran  a  single  figure  in  a  strange 
shako  and  a  blue  coat,  with  a  swarthy  sunburnt  face  and  a  hooked  nose. 
Then  came  two  men,  and  many  more  were  running  up  behind.  One  of 
them  said  some  strange  words,  not  Russian.  Between  some  similar  figures 
in  similar  shakoes  behind  stood  a  Russian  hussar.  He  was  being  held  by 
the  arms ;  behind  him  they  were  holding  his  horse  too. 

‘It  must  be  one  of  ours  taken  prisoner.  .  .  .  Yes.  Surely  they  couldn’t 
take  me  too?  What  sort  of  men  are  they?’  Rostov  was  still  wondering, 
unable  to  believe  his  own  eyes.  ‘Can  they  be  the  French?’  He  gazed  at  the 
approaching  French,  and  although  only  a  few  seconds  before  he  had  been 
longing  to  get  at  these  Frenchmen  and  to  cut  them  down,  their  being  so 
near  seemed  to  him  now  so  awful  that  he  could  not  believe  his  eyes.  ‘Who 
are  they?  What  are  they  running  for?  Can  it  be  to  me?  Can  they  be  run¬ 
ning  to  me?  And  what  for?  To  kill  me?  Me,  whom  every  one’s  so  fond 
of?’  He  recalled  his  mother’s  love,  the  love  of  his  family  and  his  friends, 
and  the  enemy’s  intention  of  killing  him  seemed  impossible.  ‘But  they 
may  even  kill  me.’  For  more  than  ten  seconds  he  stood,  not  moving  from 
the  spot,  nor  grasping  his  position.  The  foremost  Frenchman  with  the 
hook  nose  was  getting  so  near  that  he  could  see  the  expression  of  his  face. 
And  the  excited,  alien  countenance  of  the  man,  who  was  running  so  lightly 
and  breathlessly  towards  him,  with  his  bayonet  lowered,  terrified  Rostov. 
He  snatched  up  his  pistol,  and  instead  of  firing  with  it,  flung  it  at  the 
Frenchman  and  ran  to  the  bushes  with  all  his  might.  Not  with  the  feeling 
of  doubt  and  conflict  with  which  he  had  moved  at  the  Enns  bridge,  did 
he  now  run,  but  with  the  feeling  of  a  hare  fleeing  from  the  dogs.  One  un¬ 
mixed  feeling  of  fear  for  his  young,  happy  life  took  possession  of  his 
whole  being.  Leaping  rapidly  over  the  hedges  with  the  same  impetuosity 
with  which  he  used  to  run  when  he  played  games,  he  flew  over  the  field, 
now  and  then  turning  his  pale,  good-natured,  youthful  face,  and  a  chill 
of  horror  ran  down  his  spine.  ‘No,  better  not  to  look,’  he  thought,  but  as 
he  got  near  to  the  bushes  he  looked  round  once  more.  The  French  had 
given  it  up,  and  just  at  the  moment  when  he  looked  round  the  foremost 
man  was  just  dropping  from  a  run  into  a  walk,  and  turning  round  to  shout 
something  loudly  to  a  comrade  behind.  Rostov  stopped.  ‘There’s  some 
mistake,’  he  thought;  ‘it  can’t  be  that  they  meant  to  kill  me.’  And  mean¬ 
while  his  left  arm  was  as  heavy  as  if  a  hundred  pound  weight  were  hang¬ 
ing  on  it.  He  could  run  no  further.  The  Frenchman  stopped  too  and  took 
aim.  Rostov  frowned  and  ducked.  One  bullet  and  then  another  flew  hiss¬ 
ing  by  him;  he  took  his  left  hand  in  his  right,  and  with  a  last  effort  ran 
as  far  as  the  bushes.  In  the  bushes  there  were  Russian  sharpshooters. 


172 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


XX 

The  infantry,  who  had  been  caught  unawares  in  the  copse,  had  run  away, 
and  the  different  companies  all  confused  together  had  retreated  in  dis¬ 
orderly  crowds.  One  soldier  in  a  panic  had  uttered  those  words — terrible 
in  war  and  meaningless:  ‘Cut  off !  ’  and  those  words  had  infected  the  whole 
mass  with  panic. 

‘Outflanked!  Cut  off!  Lost!  ’  they  shouted  as  they  ran. 

When  their  general  heard  the  firing  and  the  shouts  in  the  rear  he  had 
grasped  at  the  instant  that  something  awful  was  happening  to  his  regi¬ 
ment;  and  the  thought  that  he,  an  exemplary  officer,  who  had  served  so 
many  years  without  ever  having  been  guilty  of  the  slightest  shortcoming, 
might  be  held  responsible  by  his  superiors  for  negligence  or  lack  of  dis¬ 
cipline,  so  affected  him  that,  instantly  oblivious  of  the  insubordinate 
cavalry  colonel  and  his  dignity  as  a  general,  utterly  oblivious  even  of 
danger  and  of  the  instinct  of  self-preservation,  he  clutched  at  the  crupper 
of  his  saddle,  and  spurring  his  horse,  galloped  off  to  the  regiment  under  a 
perfect  hail  of  bullets  that  luckily  missed  him.  He  was  possessed  by  the 
one  desire  to  find  out  what  was  wrong,  and  to  help  and  correct  the  mis¬ 
take  whatever  it  might  be,  if  it  were  a  mistake  on  his  part,  so  that  after  I 
twenty-two  years  of  exemplary  service,  without  incurring  a  reprimand  for  | 
anything,  he  might  avoid  being  responsible  for  this  blunder. 

Galloping  successfully  between  the  French  forces,  he  reached  the  field 
behind  the  copse  across  which  our  men  were  running  downhill,  not  heed¬ 
ing  the  word  of  command.  That  moment  had  come  of  moral  vacillation  1 
which  decides  the  fate  of  battles.  Would  these  disorderly  crowds  of  soldiers 
hear  the  voice  of  their  commander,  or,  looking  back  at  him,  run  on  further? 
In  spite  of  the  despairing  yell  of  the  commander,  who  had  once  been  so 
awe-inspiring  to  his  soldiers,  in  spite  of  his  infuriated,  purple  face,  dis¬ 
torted  out  of  all  likeness  to  itself,  in  spite  of  his  brandished  sword,  the 
soldiers  still  ran  and  talked  together,  shooting  into  the  air  and  not  listening 
to  the  word  of  command.  The  moral  balance  which  decides  the  fate  of 
battle  was  unmistakably  falling  on  the  side  of  panic. 

The  general  was  choked  with  screaming  and  gunpowder-smoke,  and 
he  stood  still  in  despair.  All  seemed  lost;  but  at  that  moment  the  French, 
who  had  been  advancing  against  our  men,  suddenly,  for  no  apparent 
reason,  ran  back,  vanished  from  the  edge  of  the  copse,  and  Russian 
sharpshooters  appeared  in  the  copse.  This  was  Timohin’s  division,  the 
only  one  that  had  retained  its  good  order  in  the  copse,  and  hiding  in 
ambush  in  the  ditch  behind  the  copse,  had  suddenly  attacked  the 
French.  Timohin  had  rushed  with  such  a  desperate  yell  upon  the  French, 
and  with  such  desperate  and  drunken  energy  had  he  dashed  at  the  enemy  [ 
with  only  a  sword  in  his  hand,  that  the  French  flung  down  their  weapons 
and  fled  without  pausing  to  recover  themselves.  Dolohov,  running  beside  f 
Timohin,  killed  one  French  soldier  at  close  quarters,  and  was  the  first  to  ; 
seize  by  the  collar  an  officer  who  surrendered.  The  fleeing  Russians  came  :• 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


173 

back;  the  battalions  were  brought  together;  and  the  French,  who  had 
been  on  the  point  of  splitting  the  forces  of  the  left  flank  into  two  parts, 
were  for  the  moment  held  in  check.  The  reserves  had  time  to  join  the  main 
forces,  and  the  runaways  were  stopped.  The  general  stood  with  Major 
Ekonomov  at  the  bridge,  watching  the  retreating  companies  go  by,  when^. 
a  soldier  ran  up  to  him,  caught  hold  of  his  stirrup  and  almost  clung  on 
to  it.  The  soldier  was  wearing  a  coat  of  blue  fine  cloth,  he  had  no  knap¬ 
sack  nor  shako,  his  head  was  bound  up,  and  across  his  shoulders  was  slung 
a  French  cartridge  case.  In  his  hand  he  held  an  officer’s  sword.  The 
soldier  was  pale,  his  blue  eyes  looked  impudently  into  the  general’s  face, 
but  his  mouth  was  smiling.  Although  the  general  was  engaged  in  giving 
instructions  to  Major  Ekonomov,  he  could  not  help  noticing  this  soldier. 

‘Your  excellency,  here  are  two  trophies,’  said  Dolohov,  pointing  to 
the  French  sword  and  cartridge  case.  ‘An  officer  was  taken  prisoner  by 
me.  I  stopped  the  company.’  Dolohov  breathed  hard  from  weariness;  he 
spoke  in  jerks.  ‘The  whole  company  can  bear  me  witness.  I  beg  you  to 
remember  me,  your  excellency!’ 

‘Very  good,  very  good,’  said  the  general,  and  he  turned  to  Major 
Ekonomov.  But  Dolohov  did  not  leave  him;  he  undid  the  bandage,  and 
showed  the  blood  congealed  on  his  head. 

‘A  bayonet  wound;  I  kept  my  place  in  the  front.  Remember  me,  your 
excellency.’ 

Tushin’s  battery  had  been  forgotten,  and  it  was  only  at  the  very 
end  of  the  action  that  Prince  Bagration,  still  hearing  the  cannonade  in 
the  centre,  sent  the  staff-officer  on  duty  and  then  Prince  Audrey  to  com¬ 
mand  the  battery  to  retire  as  quickly  as  possible.  The  force  which  had 
been  stationed  near  Tushin’s  cannons  to  protect  them  had  by  somebody’s 
orders  retreated  in  the  middle  of  the  battle.  But  the  battery  still  kept 
up  its  fire,  and  was  not  taken  by  the  French  simply  because  the  enemy 
could  not  conceive  of  the  reckless  daring  of  firing  from  four  cannons  that 
were  quite  unprotected.  The  French  supposed,  on  the  contrary,  judging 
from  the  erergetic  action  of  the  battery,  that  the  chief  forces  of  the 
Russians  were  concentrated  here  in  the  centre,  and  twice  attempted  to 
attack  that  point,  and  both  times  were  driven  back  by  the  grapeshot 
fired  on  them  from  the  four  cannons  which  stood  in  solitude  on  the 
heights.  Shortly  after  Prince  Bagration’s  departure,  Tushin  had  suc¬ 
ceeded  in  setting  fire  to  Schongraben. 

‘Look,  what  a  fuss  they’re  in!  It’s  flaming!  What  a  smoke!  Smartly 
done!  First-rate!  The  smoke!  the  smoke!’  cried  the  gunners,  their  spirits 
reviving. 

All  the  guns  were  aimed  without  instructions  in  the  direction  of  the 
conflagration.  The  soldiers,  as  though  they  were  urging  each  other  on, 
shouted  at  every  volley:  ‘Bravo!  That’s  something  like  now!  Go  it!  .  .  . 
First-rate!’  The  fire,  fanned  by  the  wind,  soon  spread.  The  French 
columns,  who  had  marched  out  beyond  the  village,  went  back,  but  as 
though  in  revenge  for  this  mischance,  the  enemy  stationed  ten  cannons 


174  WAR  AND  PEACE 

a  little  to  the  right  of  the  village,  and  began  firing  from  them  on  Tushin. 

In  their  childlike  glee  at  the  conflagration  of  the  village,  and  the 
excitement  of  their  successful  firing  on  the  French,  our  artillerymen  only 
noticed  this  battery  when  two  cannon-balls  and  after  them  four  more 
fell  among  their  cannons,  and  one  knocked  over  two  horses  and  another 
tore  cff  the  foot  of  a  gunner.  Their  spirits,  however,  once  raised,  did  not 
flag;  their  excitement  simply  found  another  direction.  The  horses  were 
replaced  by  others  from  the  ammunition  carriage;  the  wounded  were 
removed,  and  the  four  cannons  were  turned  facing  the  ten  of  the  enemy’s 
battery.  The  other  officer,  Tushin’s  comrade,  was  killed  at  the  beginning 
of  the  action,  and  after  an  hour's  time,  of  the  forty  gunners  of  the  battery, 
seventeen  were  disabled,  but  they  were  still  as  merry  and  as  eager  as 
ever.  Twice  they  noticed  the  French  appearing  below  close  to  them,  and 
they  sent  volleys  of  grapeshot  at  them. 

The  little  man  with  his  weak,  clumsy  movements,  was  continually 
asking  his  orderly  for  just  one  more  pipe  for  that  stroke,  as  he  said,  and 
scattering  sparks  from  it,  he  kept  running  out  in  front  and  looking  from 
under  his  little  hand  at  the  French. 

‘Smash  away,  lads!’  he  was  continually  saying,  and  he  clutched  at  the 
cannon  wheels  himself  and  unscrewed  the  screws.  In  the  smoke,  deafened 
by  the  incessant  booming  of  the  cannons  that  made  him  shudder  every 
time  one  was  fired,  Tushin  ran.  from  one  cannon  to  the  other,  his  short 
pipe  never  out  of  his  mouth.  At  one  moment  he  was  taking  aim,  then 
reckoning  the  charges,  then  arranging  for  the  changing  and  unharnessing 
of  the  killed  and  wounded  horses,  and  all  the  time  shouting  in  his  weak, 
shrill,  hesitating  voice.  His  face  grew  more  and  more  eager.  Only  when 
men  where  killed  and  wounded  he  knitted  his  brows,  and  turning  away 
from  the  dead  man,  shouted  angrily  to  the  men,  slow,  as  they  always 
are,  to  pick  up  a  wounded  man  or  a  dead  body.  The  soldiers,  for  the  most 
part  fine,  handsome  fellows  (a  couple  of  heads  taller  than  their  officer 
and  twice  as  broad  in  the  chest,  as  they  mostly  are  in  the  artillery),  all 
looked  to  their  commanding  officer  like  children  in  a  difficult  position, 
and  the  expression  they  found  on  his  face  was  invariably  reflected  at 
once  on  their  own. 

Owing  to  the  fearful  uproar  and  noise  and  the  necessity  of  attention 
and  activity,  Tushin  experienced  not  the  slightest  unpleasant  sensation 
of  fear;  and  the  idea  that  he  might  be  killed  or  badly  wounded  never 
entered  his  head.  On  the  contrary,  he  felt  more  and  more  lively.  It 
seemed  to  him  that  the  moment  in  which  he  had  first  seen  the  enemy 
and  had  fired  the  first  shot  was  long,  long  ago,  yesterday  perhaps,  and 
that  the  spot  of  earth  on  which  he  stood  was  a  place  long  familiar  to 
him,  in  which  he  was  quite  at  home.  Although  he  thought  of  everything, 
considered  everything,  did  everything  the  very  best  officer  could  have 
done  in  his  position,  he  was  in  a  state  of  mind  akin  to  the  delirium  of 
fever  or  the  intoxication  of  a  drunken  man. 

The  deafening  sound  of  his  own  guns  on  all  sides,  the  hiss  and  thud 
of  the  enemy’s  shells,  the  sight  of  the  perspiring,  flushed  gunners  hurrying 


W  A  R  A  N  D  P  E  A  C  E  175 

about  the  cannons,  the  sight  of  the  blood  of  men  and  horses,  and  of  the 
puffs  of  smoke  from  the  enemy  on  the  opposite  side  (always  followed 
by  a  cannon-ball  that  flew  across  and  hit  the  earth,  a  man,  a  horse,  or  a 
cannon) — all  these  images  made  up  for  him  a  fantastic  world  of  his  own, 
in  which  he  found  enjoyment  at  the  moment.  The  enemy’s  cannons  in  his 
fancy  were  not  cannons,  but  pipes  from  which  an  invisible  smoker  blew 
puffs  of  smoke  at  intervals. 

‘There  he’s  puffing  away  again,’  Tushin  murmured  to  himself  as  a 
cloud  of  smoke  rolled  downhill,  and  was  borne  off  by  the  wind  in  a 
wreath  to  the  left.  ‘Now,  your  ball — throw  it  back.’ 

‘What  is  it,  your  honour?’  asked  a  gunner  who  stood  near  him,  and 
heard  him  muttering  something. 

‘Nothing,  a  grenade  .  .  .’  he  answered.  ‘Now  for  it,  our  Matvyevna,’ 
he  said  to.  himself.  Matvyevna  was  the  name  his  fancy  gave  to  the  big 
cannon,  cast  in  an  old-fashioned  mould,  that  stood  at  the  end.  The  French 
seemed  to  be  ants  swarming  about  their  cannons.  The  handsome,  drunken 
soldier,  number  one  gunner  of  the  second  cannon,  was  in  his  dream¬ 
world  ‘uncle’;  Tushin  looked  at  him  more  often  than  at  any  of  the 
rest,  and  took  delight  in  every  gesture  of  the  man.  The  sound — dying 
away,  then  quickening  again — of  the  musketry  fire  below  the  hill  seemed 
to  him  like  the  heaving  of  some  creature’s  breathing.  He  listened  to  the 
ebb  and  flow  of  these  sounds. 

‘Ah,  she’s  taking  another  breath  again,’  he  was  saying  to  himself. 
He  himself  figured  in  his  imagination  as  a  mighty  man  of  immense 
stature,  who  was  flinging  cannon  balls  at  the  French  with  both  hands. 

‘Come,  Matvyevna,  old  lady,  stick  by  us!’  he  was  saying,  moving 
back  from  the  cannon,  when  a  strange,  unfamiliar  voice  called  over  his 
head. ‘Captain  Tushin!  Captain!’ 

Tushin  looked  round  in  dismay.  It  was  the  same  staff-officer  who  had 
turned  him  out  of  the  booth  at  Grunte.  He  was  shouting  to  him  in  a 
breathless  voice: 

‘I  say,  are  you  mad?  You've  been  commanded  twice  to  retreat,  and 
you  .  .  .’ 

‘Now,  what  are  they  pitching  into  me  for?’  .  .  .  Tushin  wondered, 
looking  in  alarm  at  the  superior  officer. 

‘I  .  .  .  don't  .  .  .’  he  began,  putting  two  fingers  to  the  peak  of  his 
cap.  ‘I  .  .  .’ 

But  the  staff-officer  did  not  say  all  he  had  meant  to.  A  cannon  ball 
flying  near  him  made  him  duck  down  on  his  horse.  He  paused,  and  was 
just  going  to  say  something  more,  when  another  ball  stopped  him.  He 
turned  his  horse's  head  and  galloped  away. 

‘Retreat!  All  to  retreat!  ’  he  shouted  from  a  distance. 

The  soldiers  laughed.  A  minute  later  an  adjutant  arrived  with  the 
same  message.  This  was  Prince  Andrey.  The  first  thing  he  saw,  on  reach¬ 
ing  the  place  where  Tushin’s  cannons  were  stationed,  was  an  unharnessed 
horse  with  a  broken  leg,  which  was  neighing  beside  the  harnessed  horses. 
The  blood  was  flowing  in  a  perfect  stream  from  its  leg.  Among  the  plat- 


176  WAR  AND  PEACE 

forms  lay  several  dead  men.  One  cannon  ball  after  another  flew  over 
him  as  he  rode  up,  and  he  felt  a  nervous  shudder  running  down  his 
spine.  But  the  very  idea  that  he  was  afraid  was  enough  to  rouse  him 
again.  ‘I  can’t  be  frightened,’  he  thought,  and  he  deliberately  dismounted 
from  his  horse  between  the  cannons.  He  gave  his  message,  but  he  did 
not  leave  the  battery.  He  decided  to  stay  and  assist  in  removing  the 
cannons  from  the  position  and  getting  them  away.  Stepping  over  the 
corpses,  under  the  fearful  fire  from  the  French,  he  helped  Tushin  in  get¬ 
ting  the  cannons  ready. 

‘The  officer  that  came  just  now  ran  off  quicker  than  he  came,’  said  a 
gunner  to  Prince  Andrey,  ‘not  like  your  honour.’ 

Prince  Andrey  had  no  conversation  with  Tushin.  They  were  both  so 
busy  that  they  hardly  seemed  to  see  each  other.  When  they  had  got  the 
two  out  of  the  four  cannons  that  were  uninjured  on  to  the  platforms  and 
were  moving  downhill  (one  cannon  that  had  been  smashed  and  a  howitzer 
were  left  behind),  Prince  Andrey  went  up  to  Tushin. 

‘Well,  good-bye  till  we  meet  again,’  said  Prince  Andrey,  holding  out 
his  hand  to  Tushin. 

‘Good-bye,  my  dear  fellow,’  said  Tushin,  ‘dear  soul!  good-bye,  my 
dear  fellow,’  he  said  with  tears,  which  for  some  unknown  reason  started 
suddenly  into  his  eyes. 


XXI 

The  wind  had  sunk,  black  storm-clouds  hung  low  over  the  battlefield, 
melting  on  the  horizon  into  the  clouds  of  smoke  from  the  powder.  Dark¬ 
ness  had  come,  and  the  glow  of  conflagrations  showed  all  the  more  dis¬ 
tinctly  in  two  places.  The  cannonade  had  grown  feebler,  but  the  snapping 
of  musketry-fire  in  the  rear  and  on  the  right  was  heard  nearer  and  more 
often.  As  soon  as  Tushin  with  his  cannons,  continually  driving  round 
the  wounded  and  coming  upon  them,  had  got  out  of  fire  and  were  descend¬ 
ing  the  ravine,  he  was  met  by  the  staff,  among  whom  was  the  staff- 
officer  and  Zherkov,  who  had  twice  been  sent  to  Tushin’s  battery,  but 
had  not  once  reached  it.  They  all  vied  with  one  another  in  giving  him 
orders,  telling  him  how  and  where  to  go,  finding  fault  and  making  criti¬ 
cisms.  Tushin  gave  no  orders,  and  in  silence,  afraid  to  speak  because 
at  every  word  he  felt,  he  could  not  have  said  why,  ready  to  burst  into 
tears,  he  rode  behind  on  his  artillery  nag.  Though  orders  were  given  to 
abandon  the  wounded,  many  of  them  dragged  themselves  after  the  troops 
and  begged  for  a  seat  on  the  cannons.  The  jaunty  infantry-officer — the 
one  who  had  run  out  of  Tushin’s  shanty  just  before  the  battle — was  laid 
on  Matvyevna’s  carriage  with  a  bullet  in  his  stomach.  At  the  bottom  of 
the  hill  a  pale  ensign  of  hussars,  holding  one  arm  in  the  other  hand, 
came  up  to  Tushin  and  begged  for  a  seat. 

‘Captain,  for  God’s  sake.  I’ve  hurt  my  arm,’  he  said  timidly.  ‘For 
God’s  sake.  I  can’t  walk.  For  God’s  sake!’  It  was  evident  that  this  was 
not  the  first  time  the  ensign  had  asked  for  a  lift,  and  that  he  had  been 


WARANDPEACE  177 

everywhere  refused.  He  asked  in  a  hesitating  and  piteous  voice.  ‘Tell 
them  to  let  me  get  on,  for  God’s  sake!’ 

‘Let  him  get  on,  let  him  get  on,’  said  Tushin.  ‘Put  a  coat  under  him, 
you,  uncle.’  He  turned  to  his  favourite  soldier.  ‘But  where’s  the  wounded 
officer?’ 

‘We  took  him  off;  he  was  dead,’  answered  some  one. 

‘Help  him  on.  Sit  down,  my  dear  fellow,  sit  down.  Lay  the  coat  there, 
Antonov.’ 

The  ensign  was  Rostov.  He  was  holding  one  hand  in  the  other.  He 
was  pale,  and  his  lower  jaw  was  trembling  as  though  in  a  fever.  They  put 
him  on  Matvyevna,  the  cannon  from  which  they  had  just  removed  the 
dead  officer.  There  was  blood  on  the  coat  that  was  laid  under  him,  and 
Rostov’s  riding-breeches  and  arm  were  smeared  with  it. 

‘What,  are  you  wounded,  my  dear?’  said  Tushin,  going  up  to  the 
cannon  on  which  Rostov  was  sitting. 

‘No;  it’s  a  sprain.’ 

‘How  is  it  there’s  blood  on  the  frame?’  asked  Tushin. 

‘That  was  the  officer,  your  honour,  stained  it,’  answered  an  artillery¬ 
man,  wiping  the  blood  off  with  the  sleeve  of  his  coat,  and  as  it  were 
apologising  for  the  dirty  state  of  the  cannon. 

With  difficulty,  aided  by  the  infantry,  they  dragged  the  cannon  uphill, 
and  halted  on  reaching  the  village  of  Guntersdorf.  It  was  by  now  so 
dark  that  one  could  not  distinguish  the  soldiers’  uniforms  ten  paces  away, 
and  the  firing  had  begun  to  subside.  All  of  a  sudden  there  came  the 
sound  of  firing  and  shouts  again  close  by  on  the  right  side.  The  flash 
of  the  shots  could  be  seen  in  the  darkness.  This^was  the  last  attack 
of  the  French.  It  was  met  by  the  soldiers  in  ambush  in  the  houses  of 
the  village.  All  rushed  out  of  the  village  again,  but  Tushin’s  cannons 
could  not  move,  and  the  artillerymen,  Tushin,  and  the  ensign  looked 
at  one  another  in  anticipation  of  their  fate.  The  firing  on  both  sides  began 
to  subside,  and  some  soldiers  in  lively  conversation  streamed  out  of  a 
side  street. 

‘Not  hurt,  Petrov?’  inquired  one. 

‘We  gave  it  them  hot,  lads.  They  won’t  meddle  with  us  now,’  another 
I  was  saying. 

‘One  couldn’t  see  a  thing.  Didn’t  they  give  it  to  their  own  men!  No 
seeing  for  the  darkness,  mates.  Isn’t  there  something  to  drink?’ 

The  French  had  been  repulsed  for  the  last  time.  And  again,  in  the 
complete  darkness,  Tushin’s  cannons  moved  forward,  surrounded  by 
the  infantry,  who  kept  up  a  hum  of  talk. 

In  the  darkness  they  flowed  on  like  an  unseen,  gloomy  river  always 
in  the  same  direction,  with  a  buzz  of  whisper  and  talk  and  the  thud 
of  hoofs  and  rumble  of  wheels.  Above  all  other  sounds,  in  the  confused 
uproar,  rose  the  moans  and  cries  of  the  w'ounded,  more  distinct  than 
anything  in  the  darkness  of  the  night.  Their  moans  seemed  to  fill  all  the 
darkness  surrounding  the  troops.  Their  moans  and  the  darkness  seemed 
to  melt  into  one.  A  little  later  a  thrill  of  emotion  passed  over  the  moving 


I7S  WARANDPEACE 

crowd.  Some  one  followed  by  a  suite  had  ridden  by  on  a  white  horse, 
and  had  said  something  as  he  passed. 

‘What  did  he  say?  Where  we  are  going  now?  To  halt,  eh?  Thanked 
us,  what?’  eager  questions  were  heard  on  all  sides,  and  the  whole  moving 
mass  began  to  press  back  on  itself  (the  foremost,  it  seemed,  had  halted), 
and  a  rumour  passed  through  that  the  order  had  been  given  to  halt.  All 
halted  in  the  muddy  road,  just  where  they  were. 

Fires  were  lighted  and  the  talk  became  more  audible.  Captain  Tushin, 
after  giving  instructions  to  his  battery,  sent  some  of  his  soldiers  to 
look  for  an  ambulance  or  a  doctor  for  the  ensign,  and  sat  down  by  the 
fire  his  soldiers  had  lighted  by  the  roadside.  Rostov  too  dragged  himself 
to  the  fire.  His  whole  body  was  trembling  with  fever  from  the  pain,  the 
cold,  and  the  damp.  He  was  dreadfully  sleepy,  but  he  could  not  go  to 
sleep  for  the  agonising  pain  in  his  arm,  which  ached  and  would  not  be 
easy  in  any  position.  He  closed  his  eyes,  then  opened  them  to  stare  at 
the  fire,  which  seemed  to  him  dazzling  red,  and  then  at  the  stooping, 
feeble  figure  of  Tushin,  squatting  in  Turkish  fashion  near  him.  The  big, 
kindly,  and  shrewd  eyes  of  Tushin  were  fixed  upon  him  with  sympathy 
and  commiseration.  He  saw  that  Tushin  wished  with  all  his  soul  to  help 
him,  but  could  do  nothing  for  him. 

On  all  sides  they  heard  the  footsteps  and  the  chatter  of  the  infantry 
going  and  coming  and  settling  themselves  round  them.  The  sounds  of 
voices,  of  steps,  and  of  horses’  hoofs  tramping  in  the  mud,  the  crackling 
firewood  far  and  near,  all  melted  into  one  fluctuating  roar  of  sound. 

It  was  not  now  as  before  an  unseen  river  flowing  in  the  darkness,  but 
a  gloomy  sea  subsiding  and  still  agitated  after  a  storm.  Rostov  gazed 
vacantly  and  listened  to  wdiat  was  passing  before  him  and  around  him. 
An  infantry  soldier  came  up  to  the  fire,  squatted  on  his  heels,  held  his 
hands  to  the  fire,  and  turned  his  face. 

‘You  don’t  mind,  your  honour?’  he  said,  looking  inquiringly  at  Tushin. 
‘Here  I’ve  got  lost  from  my  company,  your  honour;  I  don’t  know  myself 
where  I  am.  It’s  dreadful!’ 

With  the  soldier  an  infantry  officer  approached  the  fire  with  a  ban¬ 
daged  face.  He  asked  Tushin  to  have  the  cannon  moved  a  very  little,  so 
as  to  let  a  store  waggon  pass  by.  After  the  officer  two  soldiers  ran  up 
to  the  fire.  They  were  swearing  desperately  and  fighting,  trying  to  pull 
a  boot  from  one  another. 

‘No  fear !  you  picked  it  up !  that’s  smart !  ’  one  shouted  in  a  husky  voice. 

Then  a  thin,  pale  soldier  approached,  his  neck  bandaged  with  a  blood¬ 
stained  rag.  With  a  voice  of  exasperation  he  asked  the  artillerymen  for 
water. 

‘Why,  is  one  to  die  like  a  dog?’  he  said. 

Tushin  told  them  to  give  him  water.  Next  a  good-humoured  soldier 
ran  up,  to  beg  for  some  red-hot  embers  for  the  infantry. 

‘Some  of  your  fire  for  the  infantry!  Glad  to  halt,  lads.  Thanks  for  the 
loan  of  the  firing;  we'll  pay  it  back  with  interest,’  he  said,  carrying  some 
glowing  firebrands  away  into  the  darkness. 


WARANDPEACE  179 

Next  four  soldiers  passed  by,  carrying  something  heavy  in  an  overcoat. 
One  of  them  stumbled. 

‘Ay,  the  devils,  they’ve  left  firewood  in  the  road,’  grumbled  one. 

‘He’s  dead;  why  carry  him?’  said  one  of  them. 

‘Come  on,  you!’  And  they  vanished  into  the  darkness  with  their 
burden. 

‘Does  it  ache,  eh?’  Tushin  asked  Rostov  in  a  whisper. 

‘Yes,  it  does  ache.’ 

‘Your  honour’s  sent  for  to  the  general.  Here  in  a  cottage  he  is,’  said 
a  gunner,  coming  up  to  Tushin. 

‘In  a  minute,  my  dear.’  Tushin  got  up  and  walked  away  from  the  fire, 
buttoning  up  his  coat  and  setting  himself  straight. 

In  a  cottage  that  had  been  prepared  for  him  not  far  from  the  artillery¬ 
men’s  fire,  Prince  Bagration  was  sitting  at  dinner,  talking  with  several 
commanding  officers,  who  had  gathered  about  him.  The  little  old  colonel 
with  the  half-shut  eyes  was  there,  greedily  gnawing  at  a  mutton-bone, 
and  the  general  of  twenty-two  years’  irreproachable  service,  flushed  with 
a  glass  of  vodka  and  his  dinner,  and  the  staff-officer  with  the  signet  ring, 
and  Zherkov,  stealing  uneasy  glances  at  every  one,  and  Prince  Andrey, 
pale  with  set  lips  and  feverishly  glittering  eyes. 

In  the  corner  of  the  cottage  room  stood  a  French  flag,  that  had  been 
captured,  and  the  auditor  with  the  naive  countenance  was  feeling  the 
stuff  of  which  the  flag  was  made,  and  shaking  his  head  with  a  puzzled 
air,  possibly  because  looking  at  the  flag  really  interested  him,  or  possibly 
because  he  did  not  enjoy  the  sight  of  the  dinner,  as  he  was  hungry  and  no 
place  had  been  laid  for  him.  In  the  next  cottage  there  was  the  French 
colonel,  who  had  been  taken  prisoner  by  the  dragoons.  Our  officers  were 
flocking  in  to  look  at  him.  Prince  Bagration  thanked  the  several  com¬ 
manding  officers,  and  inquired  into  details  of  the  battle  and  of  the  losses. 
The  general,  whose  regiment  had  been  inspected  at  Braunau,  submitted 
to  the  prince  that  as  soon  as  the  engagement  began,  he  had  fallen  back 
from  the  copse,  mustered  the  men  who  were  cutting  wood,  and  letting 
them  pass  by  him,  had  made  a  bayonet  charge  with  two  battalions  and 
repulsed  the  French. 

‘As  soon  as  I  saw,  your  excellency,  that  the  first  battalion  was  thrown 
into  confusion,  I  stood  in  the  road  and  thought,  “I’ll  let  them  get  through 
and  then  open  fire  on  them”;  and  that’s  what  I  did.’ 

The  general  had  so  longed  to  do  this,  he  had  so  regretted  not  having 
succeeded  in  doing  it,  that  it  seemed  to  him  now  that  this  was  just  what 
had  happened.  Indeed  might,  it  not  actually  have  been  so?  Who  could 
make  out  in  such  confusion  what  did  and  what  did  not  happen? 

‘And  by  the  way  I  ought  to  note,  your  excellency,’  he  continued, 
recalling  Dolohov’s  conversation  with  Kutuzov  and  his  own  late  inter¬ 
view  with  the  degraded  officer,  ‘that  the  private  Dolohov,  degraded  to 
the  ranks,  took  a  French  officer  prisoner  before  my  eyes  and  particularly 
distinguished  himself.’ 

‘I  saw  here,  your  excellency,  the  attack  of  the  Pavlograd  hussars,’ 


iSo 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

Zherkov  put  in,  looking  uneasily  about  him.  He  had  not  seen  the  hussars 
at  all  that  day,  but  had  only  heard  about  them  from  an  infantry  officer. 
'They  broke  up  two  squares,  your  excellency.’ 

When  Zherkov  began  to  speak,  several  officers  smiled,  as  they  always 
did,  expecting  a  joke  from  him.  but  as  they  perceived  that  what  he  was 
saying  all  redounded  to  the  glory  of  our  arms  and  of  the  day,  they  as¬ 
sumed  a  serious  expression,  although  many  were  very  well  aware  that 
what  Zherkov  was  saying  was  a  lie  utterly  without  foundation.  Prince 
Bagration  turned  to  the  old  colonel. 

‘I  thank  you  all,  gentlemen;  all  branches  of  the  service  behaved 
heroically — infantry,  cavalry,  and  artillery.  How  did  two  cannons  come 
to  be  abandoned  in  the  centre?’  he  inquired,  looking  about  for  some  one. 
(Prince  Bagration  did  not  ask  about  the  cannons  of  the  left  flank;  he 
knew  that  all  of  them  had  been  abandoned  at  the  very  beginning  of  the 
action.)  ‘I  think  it  was  you  I  sent,’  he  added,  addressing  the  staff -officer. 

‘One  had  been  disabled,’  answered  the  staff-officer,  ‘but  the  other,  I 
can’t  explain;  I  was  there  all  the  while  myself,  giving  instructions,  and 
I  had  scarcely  left  there.  ...  It  was  pretty  hot,  it’s  true,’  he  added 
modestly. 

Some  one  said  that  Captain  Tushin  was  close  by  here  in  the  village, 
and  that  he  had  already  been  sent  for. 

‘Oh,  but  you  went  there,’  said  Prince  Bagration,  addressing  Prince 
Andrey. 

‘To  be  sure,  we  rode  there  almost  together,’  said  the  staff-officer,  smiling 
affably  to  Bolkonsky. 

‘I  had  not  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you,’  said  Prince  Andrey,  coldly  and 
abruptly.  Every  one  was  silent. 

Tushin  appeared  in  the  doorway,  timidly  edging  in  behind  the  generals’ 
backs.  Making  his  way  round  the  generals  in  the  crowded  hut,  embar¬ 
rassed  as  he  always  was  before  his  superior  officers,  Tushin  did  not  see 
the  flag-staff  and  tumbled  over  it.  Several  of  the  officers  laughed. 

‘How  was  it  a  cannon  was  abandoned?’  asked  Bagration,  frowning,  not 
so  much  at  the  captain  as  at  the  laughing  officers,  among  whom  Zherkov’s 
laugh  was  the  loudest.  Only  now  in  the  presence  of  the  angry-looking 
commander,  Tushin  conceived  in  all  its  awfulness  the  crime  and  disgrace 
of  his  being  still  alive  when  he  had  lost  two  cannons.  He  had  been  so 
excited  that  till  that  instant  he  had  not  had  time  to  think  of  that.  The 
officers’  laughter  had  bewildered  him  still  more.  He  stood  before  Bagra¬ 
tion,  his  lower  jaw  quivering,  and  could  scarcely  articulate: 

‘I  don’t  know  .  .  .  your  excellency  ...  I  hadn’t  the  men,  your 
excellency.’ 

‘You  could  have  got  them  from  the  battalions  that  were  covering  your 
position!’  That  there  were  no  battalions  there  was  what  Tushin  did  not 
say,  though  it  was  the  fact.  He  was  afraid  of  getting  another  officer  into 
trouble  by  saying  that,  and  without  uttering  a  word  he  gazed  straight 
into  Bagration’s  face,  as  a  confused  schoolboy  gazes  at  the  face  of  an 
examiner. 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1S1 

The  silence  was  rather  a  lengthy  one.  Prince  Bagration,  though  he 
had  no  wish  to  be  severe,  apparently  found  nothing  to  say;  the  others 
did  not  venture  to  intervene.  Prince  Andrey  was  looking  from  under  his 
brows  at  Tushin  and  his  fingers  moved  nervously.  • 

‘Your  excellency,3  Prince  Andrey  broke  the  silence  with  his  abrupt 
voice,  ‘you  sent  me  to  Captain  Tushin’s  battery.  I  went  there  and  found 
two-thirds  of  the  men  and  horses  killed,  two  cannons  disabled  and  no 
forces  near  to  defend  them.’ 

Prince  Bagration  and  Tushin  looked  now  with  equal  intensity  at 
Bolkonsky,  as  he  went  on  speaking  with  suppressed  emotion. 

‘And  if  your  excellency  will  permit  me  to  express  my  opinion/  he 
went  on,  ‘we  owe  the  success  of  the  day  more  to  the  action  of  that  battery 
and  the  heroic  steadiness  of  Captain  Tushin  and  his  men  than  to  any¬ 
thing  else/  said  Prince  Andrey,  and  he  got  up  at  once  and  walked  away 
from  the  table,  without  waiting  for  a  reply. 

Prince  Bagration  looked  at  Tushin  and,  apparently  loath  to  express  his 
disbelief  in  Bolkonsky’s  off-handed  judgment,  yet  unable  to  put  com¬ 
plete  faith  in  it,  he  bent  his  head  and  said  to  Tushin  that  he  could  go. 
Prince  Andrey  walked  out  after  him. 

‘Thanks,  my  dear  fellow,  you  got  me  out  of  a  scrape/  Tushin  said 
to  him. 

Prince  Andrey  looked  at  Tushin,  and  walked  away  without  uttering 
a  word.  Prince  Andrey  felt  bitter  and  melancholy.  It  was  all  so  strange, 
so  unlike  what  he  had  been  hoping  for. 

‘Who  are  they?  Why  are  they  here?  What  do  they  want?  And  when 
will  it  all  end?’  thought  Rostov,  looking  at  the  shadowy  figures  that  kept 
Hitting  before  his  eyes.  The  pain  in  his  arm  became  even  more  agonising. 
He  was  heavy  with  sleep,  crimson  circles  danced  before  his  eyes,  and 
the  impression  of  these  voices  and  these  faces  and  the  sense  of  his  loneli¬ 
ness  all  blended  with  the  misery  of  the  pain.  It  was  they,  these  soldiers, 
wounded  and  unhurt  alike,  it  was  they  crushing  and  weighing  upon  him, 
and  twisting  his  veins  and  burning  the  llesh  in  his  sprained  arm  and 
shoulder.  To  get  rid  of  them  he  closed  his  eyes. 

He  dozed  off  for  a  minute,  but  in  that  brief  interval  he  dreamed  of 
innumerable  things.  He  saw  his  mother  and  her  large,  white  hand;  he 
saw  Sonya’s  thin  shoulders,  Natasha’s  eyes  and  her  laugh,  and  Denisov 
with  his  voice  and  his  whiskers,  and  Telyanin,  and  all  the  affair  with 
Telyanin  and  Bogdanitch.  All  that  affair  was  inextricably  mixed  up  with 
this  soldier  with  the  harsh  voice,  and  that  affair  and  this  soldier  here 
were  so  agonisingly,  so  ruthlessly  pulling,  crushing,  and  twisting  his 
arm  always  in  the  same  direction.  He  was  trying  to  get  away  from  them, 
but  they  would  not  let  go  of  his  shoulder  for  a  second.  It  would  not  ache, 
it  would  be  all  right  if  they  wouldn’t  drag  at  it;  but  there  was  no  getting 
rid  of  them. 

He  opened  his  eyes  and  looked  upwards.  The  black  pall  of  darkness 
hung  only  a  few  feet  above  the  light  of  the  fire.  In  the  light  fluttered 


io2  WAR  AND  PEACE 

tiny  flakes  of  falling  snow.  Tushin  had  not  returned,  the  doctor  had  not 
come.  He  was  alone,  only  a  soldier  was  sitting  now  naked  on  the  other 
side  of  the  fire,  warming  his  thin,  yellow  body. 

‘Nobody  cares  for  me!’  thought  Rostov.  ‘No  one  to  help  me,  no  one 
to  feel  sorry  for  me.  And  I  too  was  once  at  home,  and  strong,  and  happy 
and  loved,’  he  sighed,  and  with  the  sigh  unconsciously  he  moaned. 

‘In  pain,  eh?’  asked  the  soldier,  shaking  his  shirt  out  before  the  fire, 
and  without  waiting  for  an  answer,  he  added  huskily:  ‘Ah,  what  a  lot 
of  fellows  done  for  to-day— awful! ’ 

Rostov  did  not  hear  the  soldier.  He  gazed  at  the  snowflakes  whirling 
over  the  fire  and  thought  of  the  Russian  winter  with  his  warm,  brightly 
lighted  home,  his  cosy  fur  cloak,  his  swift  sledge,  his  good  health,  and  all 
the  love  and  tenderness  of  his  family.  ‘And  what  did  I  come  here  for!’ 
he  wondered. 

On  the  next  day,  the  French  did  not  renew  the  attack  and  the  remnant 
of  Bagration’s  detachment  joined  Kutuzov’s  army. 


PART  III 


I 

Prince  Vassily  used  not  to  think  over  his  plans.  Still  less  did  he  think  of 
doing  harm  to  others  for  the  sake  of  his  own  interest.  He  was  simply  a 
man  of  the  world,  who  had  been  successful  in  the  world,  and  had  formed 
a  habit  of  being  so.  Various  plans  and  calculations  were  continually 
forming  in  his  mind,  arising  from  circumstances  and  the  persons  he  met, 
but  he  never  deliberately  considered  them,  though  they  constituted  the 
whole  interest  of  his  life.  Of  such  plans  and  calculations  he  had  not  one 
or  two,  but  dozens  in  train  at  once,  some  of  them  only  beginning  to 
occur  to  him,  others  attaining  their  aim,  others  again  coming  to  nothing. 
He  never  said  to  himself,  for  instance:  ‘That  man  is  now  in  powTer,  I 
must  secure  his  friendship  and  confidence,  and  through  him  obtain  a 
grant  from  the  Single-Assistance  Fund’;  nor,  ‘Now  Pierre  is  a  wealthy 
man,  I  must  entice  him  to  marry  my  daughter  and  borrow  the  forty 
thousand  I  need.’  But  the  man  in  power  met  him,  and  at  the  instant  his 
instinct  told  him  that  that  man  might  be  of  use,  and  Prince  Vassily  made 
friends  with  him,  and  at  the  first  opportunity  by  instinct,  without 
previous  consideration,  flattered  him,  became  intimate  with  him,  and 
told  him  of  what  he  wanted. 

Pierre  was  ready  at  hand  in  Moscow,  and  Prince  Vassily  secured  an 
appointment  as  gentleman  of  the  bedchamber  for  him,  a  position  at  that 
time  reckoned  equal  in  status  to  that  of  a  councillor  of  state,  and  insisted 
on  the  young  man’s  travelling  with  him  to  Petersburg,  and  staying  at  his 
house.  Without  apparent  design,  but  yet  with  unhesitating  conviction 
that  it  was  the  right  thing,  Prince  Vassily  did  everything  to  ensure 
Pierre’s  marrying  his  daughter.  If  Prince  Vassily  had  definitely  reflected 
upon  his  plans  beforehand,  he  could  not  have  been  so  natural  in  his 
behaviour  and  so  straightforward  and  familiar  in  his  relations  with  every 
one,  of  higher  and  of  lower  rank  than  himself.  Something  drew  him 
infallibly  towards  men  richer  or  more  powerful  than  himself,  and  he  was 
endowed  with  a  rare  instinct  for  hitting  on  precisely  the  moment  when 
he  should  and  could  make  use  of  such  persons. 

Pierre,  on  unexpectedly  becoming  rich  and  Count  Bezuhov,  after  his 
lonely  and  careless  manner  of  life,  felt  so  surrounded,  so  occupied,  that 
he  never  succeeded  in  being  by  himself  except  in  his  bed.  He  had  to  sign 
papers,  to  present  himself  at  legal  institutions,  of  the  significance  of 
which  he  had  no  definite  idea,  to  make  some  inquiry  of  his  chief  steward, 
I  to  visit  his  estate  near  Moscow,  and  to  receive  a  great  number  of  persons, 
who  previously  had  not  cared  to  be  aware  of  his  existence,  but  now  would 

183 


1 84  WAR  AND  PEACE 

have  been  hurt  and  offended  if  he  had  not  chosen  to  see  them.  All  these 
various  people,  business  men,  relations,  acquaintances,  were  all  equally 
friendly  and  well  disposed  towards  the  young  heir.  They  were  all  ob¬ 
viously  and  unhesitatingly  convinced  of  Pierre’s  noble  qualities.  He  was 
continually  hearing  phrases,  such  as,  ‘With  your  exceptionally  kindly 
disposition’;  or,  ‘Considering  your  excellent  heart’;  or,  ‘You  are  so 
pure-minded  yourself,  count  .  .  .’  or,  ‘If  he  were  as  clever  as  you,’  and 
so  on,  so  that  he  was  beginning  genuinely  to  believe  in  his  own  excep¬ 
tional  goodness  and  his  own  exceptional  intelligence,  the  more  so,  as 
at  the  bottom  of  his  heart  it  had  always  seemed  to  him  that  he  really 
was  very  good-natured  and  very  intelligent.  Even  people,  who  had  before 
been  spiteful  and  openly  hostile  to  him,  became  tender  and  affectionate. 
The  hitherto  ill-tempered,  eldest  princess,  with  the  long  waist  and  the 
hair  plastered  down  like  a  doll,  had  gone  into  Pierre’s  room  after  the 
funeral.  Dropping  her  eyes  and  repeatedly  turning  crimson,  she  said 
that  she  very  much  regretted  the  misunderstanding  that  had  arisen 
between  them,  and  that  now  she  felt  she  had  no  right  to  ask  him  for 
anything  except  permission,  after  the  blow  that  had  befallen  her,  to 
remain  for  a  few  weeks  longer  in  the  house  which  she  was  so  fond  of,  and 
in  which  she  had  made  such  sacrifices.  She  could  not  control  herself,  and 
wept  at  these  words.  Touched  at  seeing  the  statue-like  princess  so 
changed,  Pierre  took  her  by  the  hand  and  begged  her  pardon,  though 
he  could  not  have  said  what  for.  From  that  day  the  princess  began 
knitting  a  striped  scarf  for  Pierre,  and  was  completely  changed  to¬ 
wards  him. 

‘Do  this  for  my  sake,  my  dear  boy;  she  had  to  put  up  with  a  great  deal 
from  the  deceased,  any  way,’  Prince  Vassily  said  to  him,  giving  him 
some  deed  to  sign  for  the  princess’s  benefit.  Prince  Vassily  reflected  that 
this  note  of  hand  for  thirty  thousand  was  a  sop  worth  throwing  to  the 
poor  princess,  that  it  might  not  occur  to  her  to  gossip  about  Prince 
Vassily’s  part  in  the  action  taken  with  the  inlaid  portfolio.  Pierre  signed 
the  note,  and  from  that  time  the  princess  became  even  more  amiable. 
The  younger  sisters  became  as  affectionate  too,  especially  the  youngest 
one,  the  pretty  one  with  the  mole,  who  often  disconcerted  Pierre  with 
her  smiles  and  her  confusion  at  the  sight  of  him. 

To  Pierre  it  seemed  so  natural  that  every  one  should  be  fond  of  him, 
it  would  have  seemed  to  him  so  unnatural  if  any  one  had  not  liked  him, 
that  he  could  not  help  believing  in  the  sincerity  of  the  people  surrounding 
him.  Besides,  he  had  no  time  to  doubt  their  sincerity  or  insincerity.  He 
never  had  a  moment  of  leisure,  and  felt  in  a  continual  state  of  mild  and 
agreeable  intoxication.  He  felt  as  though  he  were  the  centre  of  some  im¬ 
portant  public  function,  felt  that  something  was  continually  being 
expected  of  him;  that  if  he  did  not  do  this  or  that,  he  would  wound  many 
people  and  disappoint  them,  but  that  if  he  did  this  and  that,  all  would  be 
well,  and  he  did  what  was  expected  of  him,  but  still  that  happy  result 
loomed  in  the  future. 

In  these  early  days  Prince  Vassily,  more  than  all  the  rest,  took  control 


WARANDPEACE  185 

of  Pierre’s  affairs,  and  of  Pierre  himself.  On  the  death  of  Count  Bezuhov 
he  did  not  let  Pierre  slip  out  of  his  hands.  Prince  Vassily  had  the  air  of  a 
man  weighed  down  by  affairs,  weary,  worried,  but  from  sympathetic 
feeling,  unable  in  the  last  resort  to  abandon  this  helpless  lad,  the  son, 
after  all,  of  his  friend,  and  the  heir  to  such  an  immense  fortune,  to  leave 
him  to  his  fate  to  become  a  prey  to  plotting  knaves.  During  the  few  days 
he  had  stayed  on  in  Moscow  after  Count  Bezuhov’s  death,  he  had  invited 
Pierre  to  him,  or  had  himself  gone  to  see  Pierre,  and  had  dictated  to  him 
what  he  was  to  do  in  a  tone  of  weariness  and  certainty  which  seemed  to 
be  always  saying:  'You  know  that  I  am  overwhelmed  with  business  and 
that  it  is  out  of  pure  charity  that  I  concern  myself  with  you,  and  moreover 
you  know  very  well  that  what  I  propose  to  you  is  the  only  feasible  thing.’ 

‘Well,  my  dear  boy,  to-morrow  we  are  off  at  last,’  he  said  one  day, 
closing  his  eyes,  drumming  his  fingers  on  his  elbow,  and  speaking  as 
though  the  matter  had  long  ago  been  settled  between  them,  and  could 
not  be  settled  in  any  other  way. 

‘To-morrow  we  set  off;  I’ll  give  you  a  place  in  my  coach.  I’m  very  glad. 
Here  all  our  important  business  is  settled.  And  I  ought  to  have  been  back 
long  ago.  Here,  I  have  received  this  from  the  chancellor.  I  petitioned  him 
in  your  favour,  and  you  are  put  on  the  diplomatic  corps,  and  created  a 
gentleman  of  the  bedchamber.  Now  a  diplomatic  career  lies  open  to  you.’ 

Notwithstanding  the  effect  produced  on  him  by  the  tone  of  weariness 
and  certainty  with  which  these  words  were  uttered,  Pierre,  who  had  so 
long  been  pondering  over  his  future  career,  tried  to  protest.  But  Prince 
Vassily  broke  in  on  his  protest  in  droning,  bass  tones,  that  precluded  all 
possibility  of  interrupting  the  flow  of  his  words;  it  was  the  resource  he 
fell  back  upon  when  extreme  measures  of  persuasion  were  needed. 

‘But,  my  dear  boy,  I  have  done  it  for  my  own  sake,  for  my  conscience’ 
sake,  and  there  is  no  need  to  thank  me.  No  one  has  ever  complained  yet 
of  being  too  much  loved;  and  then  you  are  free,  you  can  give  it  all  up 
to-morrow.  You’ll  see  for  yourself  in  Petersburg.  And  it  is  high  time  you 
were  getting  away  from  these  terrible  associations.’  Prince  Vassily  sighed. 
‘So  that’s  all  settled,  my  dear  fellow.  And  let  my  valet  go  in  your  coach. 
Ah,  yes,  I  was  almost  forgetting,’  Prince  Vassily  added.  ‘You  know,  my 
dear  boy,  I  had  a  little  account  to  settle  with  your  father,  so  as  I  have 
received  something  from  the  Ryazan  estate,  I’ll  keep  that;  you  don’t 
want  it.  We’ll  go  into  accounts  later.’ 

What  Prince  Vassily  called  ‘something  from  the  Ryazan  estate’  was 
several  thousands  of  roubles  paid  in  lieu  of  service  by  the  peasants,  and 
this  sum  he  kept  for  himself. 

In  Petersburg,  Pierre  was  surrounded  by  the  same  atmosphere  of 
affection  and  tenderness  as  in  Moscow.  He  could  not  decline  the  post,  or 
rather  the  title  (for  he  did  nothing)  that  Prince  Vassily  had  obtained 
!  for  him,  and  acquaintances,  invitations,  and  social  duties  were  so  numer¬ 
ous  that  Pierre  was  even  more  than  in  Moscow  conscious  of  the  feeling  of 
stupefaction,  hurry  and  continued  expectation  of  some  future  good 
which  was  always  coming  and  was  never  realised. 


iS6 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

Of  his  old  circle  of  bachelor  acquaintances  there  were  not  many  left  in 
Petersburg.  The  Guards  were  on  active  service,  Dolohov  had  been  de¬ 
graded  to  the  ranks;  Anatole  had  gone  into  the  army  and  was  somewhere 
in  the  provinces;  Prince  Andrey  was  abroad;  and  so  Pierre  had  not  the 
opportunity  of  spending  his  nights  in  the  way  he  had  so  loved  spending 
them  before,  nor  could  he  open  his  heart  in  intimate  talk  with  the  friend 
who  was  older  than  himself  and  a  man  he  respected.  All  his  time  was 
spent  at  dinners  and  balls,  or  at  Prince  Vassily’s  in  the  society  of  the  h 
princess,  his  wife,  and  the  beauty,  his  daughter  Ellen. 

Like  every  one  else,  Anna  Pavlovna  Scherer  showed  Pierre  the  chang< 
that  had  taken  place  in  the  attitude  of  society  towards  him. 

In  former  days,  Pierre  had  always  felt  in  Anna  Pavlovna’s  presence 
that  what  he  was  saying  was  unsuitable,  tactless,  not  the  right  thing; 
that  the  phrases,  which  seemed  to  him  clever  as  he  formed  them  in  his 
mind,  became  somehow  stupid  as  soon  as  he  uttered  them  aloud,  and 
that,  on  the  contrary,  Ippolit’s  most  pointless  remarks  had  the  effect  of 
being  clever  and  charming.  Now  everything  he  said  was  always  ‘delight¬ 
ful.’  Even  if  Anna  Pavlovna  did  not  say  so,  he  saw  she  was  longing  to 
say  so,  and  only  refraining  from  doing  so  from  regard  for  his  modesty. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  winter,  in  the  year  1805,  Pierre  received  one 
of  Anna  Pavlovna’s  customary  pink  notes  of  invitation,  in  which  the 
w'ords  occurred:  ‘You  will  find  the  fair  Helene  at  my  house,  whom  one 
never  gets  tired  of  seeing.’ 

On  reading  that  passage,  Pierre  felt  for  the  first  time  that  there  was 
being  formed  between  himself  and  Ellen  some  sort  of  tie,  recognised  by 
other  people,  and  this  idea  at  once  alarmed  him,  as  though  an  obligation  1 
were  being  laid  upon  him  which  he  could  not  fulfil,  and  pleased  him  as 
an  amusing  supposition. 

Anna  Pavlovna’s  evening  party  was  like  her  first  one,  only  the  novel 
attraction  which  she  had  provided  for  her  guests  was  not  on  this  occasion 
Mortemart,  but  a  diplomat,  who  had  just  arrived  from  Berlin,  bringing 
the  latest  details  of  the  Emperor  Alexander’s  stay  at  Potsdam,  and  of 
the  inviolable  alliance  the  twyo  exalted  friends  had  sworn  together,  to 
maintain  the  true  cause  against  the  enemy  of  the  human  race.  Pierre 
was  welcomed  by  Anna  Pavlovna  with  a  shade  of  melancholy,  bearing  ! 
unmistakable  reference  to  the  recent  loss  sustained  by  the  young  man  in  1 
the  death  of  Count  Bezuhov  (every  one  felt  bound  to  be  continually  1 
assuring  Pierre  that  he  was  greatly  afflicted  at  the  death  of  his  father, 1 
whom  he  had  hardly  known).  Her  melancholy  was  of  precisely  the  same 
kind  as  that  more  exalted  melancholy  she  always  displayed  at  any 
allusion  to  Her  Most  August  Majesty  the  Empress  Marva  Fyodorovna,  j 
Pierre  felt  flattered  by  it.  Anna  Pavlovna  had  arranged  the  groups  in  her 
drawing-room  with  her  usual  skill.  The  larger  group,  in  which  were  Prince  ' 
Vassily  and  some  generals,  had  the  benefit  of  the  diplomat.  Another  group  I 
gathered  about  the  tea-table.  Pierre  would  have  liked  to  join  the  first  1 
group,  but  Anna  Pavlovna,  who  was  in  the  nervous  excitement  of  a ' 1 
general  on  the  battlefield,  that  mental  condition  in  which  numbers  of  11 


WAR  AND  PEACE  187 

brilliant  new  ideas  occur  to  one  that  one  has  hardly  time  to  put  into 
execution— Anna  Pavlovna,  on  seeing  Pierre,  detained  him  with  a  finger 
on  his  coat  sleeve:  ‘Wait,  I  have  designs  on  you  for  this  evening.’ 

She  looked  round  at  Ellen  and  smiled  at  her. 

‘i\ly  dear  Helene,  you  must  show  charity  to  my  poor  aunt,  who  has  an 
adoration  for  you.  Go  and  keep  her  company  for  ten  minutes.  And  that 
you  may  not  find  it  too  tiresome,  here’s  our  dear  count,  who  certainly 
vj-jin’t  refuse  to  follow  you.’ 

The  beauty  moved  away  towards  the  old  aunt;  but  Anna  Pavlovna 
dll  detained  Pierre  at  her  side,  with  the  air  of  having  still  some  last 
.  d  essential  arrangement  to  make  with  him. 

•‘She  is  exquisite,  isn’t  she?’  she  said  to  Pierre,  indicating  the  majestic 
beauty  swimming  away  from  them.  ‘And  how  she  carries  herself!  For 
uch  a  young  girl,  what  tact,  what  a  finished  perfection  of  manner.  It 
t®mes  from  the  heart.  Happy  will  be  the  man  who  wins  her.  The  most 
unworldly  of  men  would  take  a  brilliant  place  in  society  as  her  husband. 
That’s  true,  isn’t  it?  I  only  wanted  to  know  your  opinion,’  and  Anna 
Pavlovna  let  Pierre  go. 

Pierre  was  perfectly  sincere  in  giving  an  affirmative  answer  to  her 
question  about  Ellen’s  perfection  of  manner.  If  ever  he  thought  of  Ellen, 
it  was  either  of  her  beauty  that  he  thought,  or  of  her  extraordinary 
capacity  for  serene,  dignified  silence  in  society. 

The  old  aunt  received  the  two  young  people  in  her  corner,  but  appeared 
anxious  to  conceal  her  adoration  of  Ellen,  and  rather  to  show  her  fear 
of  Anna  Pavlovna.  She  glanced  at  her  niece,  as  though  to  inquire  what 
she  was  to  do  with  them.  Anna  Pavlovna  again  laid  a  finger  on  Pierre’s 
sleeve  and  said:  ‘I  hope  you  will  never  say  in  future  that  people  are  bored 
at  my  house,’  and  glanced  at  Ellen.  Ellen  smiled  with  an  air,  which 
seemed  to  say  that  she  did  not  admit  the  possibility  of  any  one’s  seeing 
her  without  being  enchanted.  The  old  aunt  coughed,  swallowed  the 
phlegm,  and  said  in  French  that  she  was  very  glad  to  see  Ellen;  then  she 
addressed  Pierre  with  the  same  greeting  and  the  same  grimace.  In  the 
niddle  of  a  halting  and  tedious  conversation,  Ellen  looked  round  at 
3ierre  and  smiled  at  him  with  the  bright,  beautiful  smile  with  which 
-he  smiled  at  every  one.  Pierre  was  so  used  to  this  smile,  it  meant  so 
ittle  to  him,  that  he  did  not  even  notice  it.  The  aunt  was  speaking  at 
hat  moment  of  a  collection  of  snuff-boxes  belonging  to  Pierre’s  father, 
Count  Bezuhov,  and  she  showed  them  her  snuff  box.  Princess  Ellen 
sked  to  look  at  the  portrait  of  the  aunt’s  husband,  which  was  on  the 
jnuff-box. 

I  ‘It’s  probably  the  work  of  Vines,’  said  Pierre,  mentioning  a  celebrated 
liniature  painter.  He  bent  over  the  table  to  take  the  snuff-box,  listening 

II  the  while  to  the  conversation  going  on  in  the  larger  group.  He  got  up 
)  move  towards  it,  but  the  aunt  handed  him  the  snuff-box,  passing  it 
cross  Ellen,  behind  her  back.  Ellen  bent  forward  to  make  room,  and 
oked  round  smiling.  She  was,  as  always  in  the  evening,  wearing  a  dress 
Jt  in  the  fashion  of  the  day,  very  low  in  the  neck  both  in  front  and 


iSS 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

behind.  Her  bust,  which  had  always  to  Pierre  looked  like  marble,  was  so 
close  to  his  short-sighted  eyes  that  he  could  discern  all  the  living  charm 
of  her  neck  and  shoulders,  and  so  near  his  lips  that  he  need  scarcely  have 
stooped  to  kiss  it.  He  felt  the  warmth  of  her  body,  the  fragrance  of 
scent,  and  heard  the  creaking  of  her  corset  as  she  moved.  He  saw  not  her 
marble  beauty  making  up  one  whole  with  her  gown ;  he  saw  and  felt  all 
the  charm  of  her  body,  which  was  only  veiled  by  her  clothes.  And  having 
once  seen  this,  he  could  not  see  it  otherwise,  just  as  we  cannot  return  to 
an  illusion  that  has  been  explained. 

‘So  you  have  never  noticed  till  now  that  I  am  lovely?’  Ellen  seemed 
to  be  saying.  ‘You  haven’t  noticed  that  I  am  a  woman?  Yes,  I  am  a 
woman,  who  might  belong  to  any  one — to  you,  too,’  her  eyes  said.  And 
at  that  moment  Pierre  felt  that  Ellen  not  only  could,  but  would  become 
his  wife,  that  it  must  be  so. 

He  knew  it  at  that  moment  as  surely  as  he  would  have  known  it, 
standing  under  the  wedding  crown  beside  her.  Plow  would  it  be?  and 
when?  He  knew  not,  knew  not  even  if  it  would  be  a  good  thing  (he  had  a 
feeling,  indeed,  that  for  some  reason  it  would  not),  but  he  knew  it 
would  be  so. 

Pierre  dropped  his  eyes,  raised  them  again,  and  tried  once  more  to  see 
her  as  a  distant  beauty,  far  removed  from  him,  as  he  had  seen  her  every 
day  before.  But  he  could  not  do  this.  He  could  not,  just  as  a  man  who 
has  been  staring  in  a  fog  at  a  blade  of  tall  steppe  grass  and  taking  it  for  a 
tree  cannot  see  a  tree  in  it  again,  after  he  has  once  recognised  it  as  a 
blade  of  grass.  She  was  terribly  close  to  him.  Already  she  had  power  over 
him.  And  between  him  and  her  there  existed  no  barriers  of  any  kind,  but  I 
the  barrier  of  his  own  will. 

‘Very  good,  I  will  leave  you  in  your  little  corner.  I  see  you  are  very 
comfortable  there,’  said  Anna  Pavlovna’s  voice.  And  Pierre,  trying  panic- 
stricken  to  think  whether  he  had  done  anything  reprehensible,  looked 
about  him, .crimsoning.  It  seemed  to  him  as  though  every  one  knew,  as 
well  as  he  did,  what  was  passing  in  him.  A  little  later,  when  he  went  up 
to  the  bigger  group,  Anna  Pavlovna  said  to  him: 

‘I  am  told  you  are  making  improvements  in  your  Petersburg  house.’ 
(This  was  the  fact:  the  architect  had  told  him  it  was  necessary,  and 
Pierre,  without  knowing  with  what  object,  was  having  his  immense  house; 
in  Petersburg  redeco-rated.)  ‘That  is  all  very  well,  but  do  not  move  from 
Prince  Vassily’s.  It  is  a  good  thing  to  have  such  a  friend  as  the  prince,’ 
she  said,  smiling  to  Prince  Vassily.  ‘I  know  something  about  that.  Don’t 
I?  And  you  are  so  young.  You  need  advice.  You  mustn’t  be  angry  with 
me  for  making  use  of  an  old  woman’s  privileges.’  She  paused,  as  women  ' 
always  do  pause,  in  anticipation  of  something,  after  speaking  of  their: 
age.  ‘If  you  marry,  it’s  a  different  matter.’  And  she  united  them  in  one! 
glance.  Pierre  did  not  look  at  Ellen,  nor  she  at  him.  But  she  was  still  a| 
terribly  close  to  him. 

He  muttered  something  and  blushed. 

After  Pierre  had  gone  home,  it  was  a  long  while  before  he  could  get  tch 


WARANDPEACE  189 

sleep;  he  kept  pondering  on  what  was  happening  to  him.  What  was 
happening?  Nothing.  Simply  he  had  grasped  the  fact  that  a  woman, 
whom  he  had  known  as  a  child,  of  whom  he  had- said,  without  giving  her 
a  thought,  ‘Yes,  she’s  nice-looking,’  when  he  had  been  told  she  was  a 
beauty,  he  had  grasped  the  fact  that  that  woman  might  belong  to  him. 

‘But  she’s  stupid,  I  used  to  say  myself  that  she  was  stupid,’  he  thought. 
‘There  is  something  nasty  in  the  feeling  she  excites  in  me,  something 
not  legitimate.  I  have  been  told  that  her  brother,  Anatole,  was  in  love 
with  her,  and  she  in  love  with  him,  that  there  was  a  regular  scandal,  and 
that’s  why  Anatole  was  sent  away.  Her  brother  is  Ippolit.  .  .  .  Her 
father  is  Prince  Vassily.  .  .  .  That’s  bad,’  he  mused;  and  at  the  very 
moment  that  he  was  reflecting  thus  (the  reflections  were  not  followed  out 
to  the  end)  he  caught  himself  smiling,  and  became  conscious  that  another 
series  of  reflections  had  risen  to  the  surface  across  the  first,  that  he  was 
at  the  same  time  meditating  on  her  worthlessness,  and  dreaming  of  how 
she  would  be  his  wife,  how  she  might  love  him,  how  she  might  become 
quite  different,  and  how  all  he  had  thought  and  heard  about  her  might 
be  untrue.  And  again  he  saw  her,  not  as  the  daughter  of  Prince  Vassily, 
but  saw  her  whole  body,  only  veiled  by  her  grey  gowm.  ‘But,  no,  why 
didn’t  that  idea  ever  occur  to  me  before?’  And  again  he  told  himself  that 
it  was  impossible,  that  there  would  be  something  nasty,  unnatural,  as  it 
seemed  to  him,  and  dishonourable  in  this  marriage.  He  recalled  her  past 
words  and  looks,  and  the  words  and  looks  of  people,  who  had  seen  them 
together.  He  remembered  the  words  and  looks  of  Anna  Pavlovna,  when 
she  had  spoken  about  his  house,  he  recollected  thousands  of  such  hints 
from  Prince  Vassily  and  other  people,  and  he  was  overwhelmed  with 
terror  that  he  might  have  bound  himself  in  some  way  to  do  a  thing 
obviously  wrong,  and  not  what  he  ought  to  do.  But  at  the  very  time  that 
he  was  expressing  this  to  himself,  in  another  part  of  his  mind  her  image 
floated  to  the  surface  in  all  its  womanly  beauty. 


II 

In  the  November  of  1805  Prince  Vassily  was  obliged  to  go  on  a  tour 
>f  inspection  through  four  provinces.  He  had  secured  this  appointment 
or  himself,  in  order  to  be  able  at  the  same  time  to  visit  his  estates,  which 
yere  in  a  neglected  state.  He  intended  to  pick  up  his  son,  Anatole,  on  the* 
way  (where  his  regiment  was  stationed),  and  to  pay  a  visit  to  Prince 
Nikolay  Andreivitch  Bolkonsky,  with  a  view  to  marrying  his  son  to  the 
I'ich  old  man’s  daughter.  But  before  going  away  and  entering  on  these 
jew  affairs,  Prince  Vassily  wanted  to  settle  matters  with  Pierre,  who 
ad,  it  was  true,  of  late  spent  whole  days  at  home,  that  is,  at  Prince 
assily’s,  where  he  was  staying,  and  was  as  absurd,  as  agitated,  and  as 
tupid  in  Ellen’s  presence,  as  a  young  man  in  love  should  be,  but  still 
;iade  no  offer. 

‘This  is  all  very  fine,  but  the  thing  must  come  to  a  conclusion,’  Prince 


iqo  WAR  AND  PEACE 

Vassily  said  to  himself  one  morning,  with  a  melancholy  sigh,  recognising 
that  Pierre,  who  was  so  greatly  indebted  to  him  (But  there!  God  bless 
the  fellow! ),  was  not  behaving  quite  nicely  to  him  in  the  matter.  ‘Youth 
.  .  .  frivolity  .  .  .  well,  God  be  with  him,’  thought  Prince  Vassily, 
enjoying  the  sense  of  his  own  goodness  of  heart,  ‘but  the  thing  must  come 
to  a  conclusion.  The  day  after  to-morrow  is  Ellen’s  name-day,  I’ll  invite 
some  people,  and  if  he  doesn’t  understand  what  he’s  to  do,  then  it  will 
be  my  affair  to  see  to  it.  Yes,  my  affair.  I’m  her  father.’ 

Six  weeks  after  Anna  Pavlovna’s  party,  and  the  sleepless  and  agitated 
night  after  it,  in  which  Pierre  had  made  up  his  mind  that  a  marriage  with 
Ellen  would  be  a  calamity,  and  that  he  must  avoid  her  and  go  away;  six 
weeks  after  that  decision  Pierre  had  still  not  left  Prince  Vassily’s,  and 
felt  with  horror  that  every  day  he  was  more  and  more  connected  with 
her  in  people’s  minds,  that  he  could  not  go  back  to  his  former  view  of 
her,  that  he  could  not  tear  himself  away  from  her  even,  that  it  would  be 
an  awful  thing,  but  that  he  would  have  to  unite  his  life  to  hers.  Perhaps 
he  might  have  mastered  himself,  but  not  a  day  passed  without  a  party 
at  Prince  Vassily’s  (where  receptions  had  not  been  frequent),  and  Pierre 
was  bound  to  be  present  if  he  did  not  want  to  disturb  the  general  satis¬ 
faction  and  disappoint  every  one.  At  the  rare  moments  when  Prince 
Vassily  was  at  home,  he  took  Pierre’s  hand  if  he  passed  him,  carelessly 
offered  him  his  shaven,  wrinkled  cheek  for  a  kiss,  and  said,  ‘till  to¬ 
morrow,’  or  ‘be  in  to  dinner,  or  I  shan’t  see  you,’  or  ‘I  shall  stay  at  home 
on  your  account,’  or  some  such  remark.  But  although,  when  Prince 
Vassily  did  stay  at  home  for  Pierre  (as  he  said),  he  never  spoke  two 
words  to  him,  Pierre  did  not  feel  equal  to  disappointing  him.  Every  day 
he  said  the  same  thing  over  and  over  to  himself.  ‘I  must,  really  under¬ 
stand  her  and  make  up  my  mind,  what  she  is.  Was  I  mistaken  before,  or 
am  I  mistaken  now?  No,  she’s  not  stupid;  no,  she’s  a  good  girl,’  he  said 
to  himself  sometimes.  ‘She  never  makes  a  mistake,  nor  has  said  anything 
stupid.  She  says  very  little,  but  what  she  does  say  is  always  simple  and 
clear.  So  she’s  not  stupid.  She  has  never  been  abashed,  and  she  is  not 
abashed  now.  So  she  isn’t  a  bad  woman.’  It  often  happened  that  he  began 
to  make  reflections,  to  think  aloud  in  her  company,  and  every  time  she 
had  replied  either  by  a  brief,  but  appropriate  remark,  that  showed  she 
was  not  interested  in  the  matter,  or  by  a  mute  smile  and  glance,  which 
more  palpably  than  anything  proved  to  Pierre  her  superiority.  She  was 
right  in  regarding  all  reflections  as  nonsense  in  comparison  with  that 
smile. 

She  always  addressed  him  now  with  a  glad,  confiding  smile — a  smile 
having  reference  to  him  alone,  and  full  of  something  more  significant! 
than  the  society  smile  that  always  adorned  her  face.  Pierre  knew  that 
every  one  was  only  waiting  for  him  to  say  one  word,  to  cross  a  certain 
line,  and  he  knew  that  sooner  or  later  he  would  cross  it.  But  a  kind  of! 
uncomprehended  horror  seized  upon  him  at  the  mere  thought  of  this 
fearful  step.  A  thousand  times  in  the  course  of  those  six  weeks,  during 
which  he  felt  himself  being  drawn  on  further  and  further  toward  the1! 


WARANDPEACE  191 

abyss  that  horrified  him,  Pierre  had  said  to  himself:  ‘But  what  does  it 
mean?  I  must  act  with  decision!  Can  it  be  that  I  haven’t  any?’  He  tried 
to  come  to  a  decision,  but  felt  with  dismay  that  he  had  not  in  this  case 
the  strength  of  will  which  he  had  known  in  himself  and  really  did  possess. 
Pierre  belonged  to  that  class  of  persons  who  are  only  strong  when  they 
feel  themselves  perfectly  pure.  And  ever  since  the  day  when  he  had  been 
overcome  by  the  sensation  of  desire,  that  he  had  felt  stooping  over  the 
snuff-box  at  Anna  Pavlovna’s,  an  unconscious  sense  of  the  sinfulness  of 
that  impulse  paralysed  his  will. 

On  Ellen’s  name-day,  Prince  Vassily  was  giving  a  little  supper  party 
of  just  their  own  people,  as  his  wife  said,  that  is,  of  friends  and  relations. 
All  these  friends  and  relations  were  made  to  feel  that  the  day  was  to  be  a 
momentous  one  in  the  young  lady’s  life.  The  guests  were  seated  at  supper. 
Princess  Kuragin,  a  massive  woman  of  imposing  presence,  who  had  once 
been  beautiful,  sat  in  the  hostess’  place,  with  the  most  honoured  guests 
on  each  side  of  her — an  old  general  and  his  wife,  and  Anna  Pavlovna 
Scherer.  Towards  the  bottom  of  the  table  sat  the  less  elderly  and  less 
honoured  guests,  and  there  too  sat  as  members  of  the  family  Pierre  and 
Ellen,  side  by  side.  Prince  Vassily  did  not  take  supper.  He  moved  to  and 
fro  about  the  table,  in  excellent  spirits,  sitting  down  beside  one  guest 
after  another.  To  every  one  he  dropped  a  few  careless  and  agreeable 
words,  except  to  Pierre  and  Ellen,  whose  presence  he  seemed  not  to 
notice.  Prince  Vassily  enlivened  the  whole  company.  The  wax  candles 
burned  brightly,  there  was  a  glitter  of  silver  and  crystal  on  the  table, 
of  ladies’  ornaments  and  the  gold  and  silver  of  epaulettes.  The  servants 
threaded  their  way  in  and  out  round  the  table  in  their  red  coats.  There 
was  a  clatter  of  knives,  glasses,  and  plates,  and  the  sound  of  eager  talk 
from  several  separate  conversations  round  the  table.  The  old  kammer- 
herr  at  one  end  could  be  heard  asseverating  to  an  elderly  baroness  his 
ardent  love  for  her,  while  she  laughed.  At  the  other  end  an  anecdote  was 
being  told  of  the  ill-success  of  some  Marya  Viktorovna.  In  the  centre 
Prince  Vassily  concentrated  the  attention  on  himself.  With  a  playful 
;mile  on  his  lips,  he  was  telling  the  ladies  about  the  last  Wednesday’s 
session  of  the  privy  council,  at  which  Sergey  Kuzmitch  Vyazmitinov, 
ifhe  new  military  governor-general  of  Petersburg,  had  received  and  read 
ii  rescript — much  talked  of  at  the  time — from  the  Emperor  Alexander 
Pavlovitch.  The  Emperor,  writing  from  the  army  to  Sergey  Kuzmitch, 
lad  said  that  on  all  sides  he  was  receiving  proofs  of  the  devotion  of  his 
people,  and  that  the  testimony  from  Petersburg  was  particularly  gratify- 
ng  to  him,  that  he  was  proud  of  the  honour  of  being  at  the  head  of  such 
.  people,  and  would  do  his  best  to  be  worthy  of  it.  This  rescript  began 
yith  the  words:  ‘Sergey  Kuzmitch.  From  all  sides  reports  reach  me,’  etc. 

‘So  that  he  never  got  further  with  it  than  “Sergey  Kuzmitch,”  ’  one 
lidy  asked. 

‘No,  no,  not  a  syllable,’  Prince  Vassily  answered  laughing.  ‘  “Ser- 
ey  Kuzmitch  .  .  .  from  all  sides.”  “From  all  sides  .  .  .  Sergey  Kuz- 
litch.  .  .  Poor  Vyazmitinov  could  not  get  any  further.  Several  time; 


192  W  A  R  A  N  D  P  E  A  C  E 

he  started  upon  the  letter  again,  but  no  sooner  did  he  utter  “Sergey,” 
.  .  .  than  a  sniff  .  .  .  “Kuz  .  .  .  mi  .  .  .  itch” — tears  .  .  .  and  “from 
all  sides”  is  smothered  in  sobs,  and  he  can  get  no  further.  And  again  the 
handkerchief  and  again  “Sergey  Kuzmitch  from  all  sides”  and  tears, 
...  so  that  we  begged  some  one  else  to  read  it.  .  .  .’ 

‘  “Kuzmitch  .  .  .  from  all  sides”  .  .  .  and  tears.  .  .  .’  some  one  re¬ 
peated,  laughing. 

‘Don’t  be  naughty,’  said  Anna  Pavlovna,  from  thp  other  end  of  the 
table,  shaking  her  finger  at  him.  ‘He  is  such  a  worthy,  excellent  man, 
our  good  Vyazmitinov.’ 

Every  one  laughed  heartily.  At  the  upper  end  of  the  table,  the  place 
of  honour,  every  one  seemed  in  good  spirits,  under  the  influence  of 
various  enlivening  tendencies.  Only  Pierre  and  Ellen  sat  mutely  side  by 
side  almost  at  the  bottom  of  the  table.  The  faces  of  both  wore  a  restrained 
but  beaming  smile  that  had  no  connection  with  Sergey  Kuzmitch — the 
smile  of  bashfulness  at  their  own  feelings.  Gaily  as  the  others  laughed 
and  talked  and  jested,  appetising  as  were  the  Rhine  wine,  the  saute,  and 
the  ices  they  were  discussing,  carefully  as  they  avoided  glancing  at  the 
young  couple,  heedless  and  unobservant  as  they  seemed  of  them,  yet  it 
was  somehow  perceptible  from  the  glances  stolen  at  times  at  them,  that 
the  anecdote  about  Sergey  Kuzmitch,  and  the  laughter  and  the  dishes, 
were  all  affectation,  and  that  the  whole  attention  of  all  the  party  was 
really  concentrated  simply  on  that  pair — Pierre  and  Ellen.  Prince  Vassily 
mimicked  the  sniffs  of  Sergey  Kuzmitch,  and  at  the  same  time  avoided 
glancing  at  his  daughter,  and  at  the  very  time  that  he  was  laughing,  his 
expression  seemed  to  say:  ‘Yes,  yes,  it’s  all  going  well,  it  will  all  be 
settled  to-day.’  Anna  Pavlovna  shook  her  finger  at  him  for  laughing  at 
‘our  good  Vyazmitinov,’  but  in  her  eyes,  which  at  that  second  flashed  a 
glance  in  Pierre’s  direction,  Prince  Vassily  read  congratulation  on  his 
future  son-in-law  and  his  daughter’s  felicity.  Old  Princess  Kuragin, 
offering  wine  to  the  lady  next  her  with  a  pensive  sigh,  looking  angrily  at 
her  daughter,  seemed  in  that  sigh  to  be  saying:  ‘Yes,  there’s  nothing  left 
for  you  and  me  now,  my  dear,  but  to  drink  sweet  wine,  now  that  the 
time  has  come  for  the  young  people  to  be  so  indecently,  provokingly 
happy!  ’  ‘And  what  stupid  stuff  it  all  is  that  I’m  talking  about,  as  though 
it  interested  me,’  thought  the  diplomat,  glancing  at  the  happy  faces  of 
the  lovers.  ‘That’s  happiness!’ 

Into  the  midst  of  the  petty  trivialities,  the  conventional  interests, 
which  made  the  common  tie  uniting  that  company,  had  fallen  the  simple 
feeling  of  the  attraction  of  two  beautiful  and  healthy  young  creatures 
to  one  another.  And  this  human  feeling  dominated  everything  and 
triumphed  over  all  their  conventional  chatter.  The  jests  fell  flat,  the  news 
was  not  interesting,  the  liveliness  was  unmistakably  forced.  Not  the 
guests  only,  but  the  footmen  waiting  at  table  seemed  to  feel  the  same 
and  forget  their  duties,  glancing  at  the  lovely  Ellen  with  her  radiant  face 
and  the  broad,  red,  happy  and  uneasy  face  of  Pierre.  The  very  light  of 
the  candles  seemed  concentrated  on  those  two  happy  faces. 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


193 

Pierre  felt  that  he  was  the  centre  of  it  all,  and  this  position  both 
pleased  him  and  embarrassed  him.  He  was  like  a  man  absorbed  in  some 
engrossing  occupation.  He  had  no  clear  sight,  nor  hearing;  no  under¬ 
standing  of  anything.  Only  from  time  to  time  disconnected  ideas  and 
impressions  of  the  reality  flashed  unexpectedly  into  his  mind. 

‘So  it  is  all  over!’  he  thought.  ‘And  how  has  it  all  been  done?  So 
quickly!  Now  I  know  that  not  for  her  sake,  nor  for  my  sake  alone,  but 
for  every  one  it  must  inevitably  come  to  pass.  They  all  expect  it  so,  they 
are  all  so  convinced  that  it  will  be,  that  I  cannot,  I  cannot,  disappoint 
them.  But  how  will  it  be?  I  don’t  know,  but  it  will  be  infallibly,  it  will 
be!’  mused  Pierre,  glancing  at  the  dazzling  shoulders  that  were  so  close 
to  his  eyes. 

Then  he  suddenly  felt  a  vague  shame.  He  felt  awkward  at  being  the 
sole  object  of  the  general  attention,  at  being  a  happy  man  in  the  eyes  of 
others,  with  his  ugly  face  being  a  sort  of  Paris  in  possession  of  a  Helen. 
‘But,  no  doubt,  it’s  always  like  this,  and  must  be  so,’  he  consoled  him¬ 
self.  ‘And  yet  what  have  I  done  to  bring  it  about?  When  did  it  begin? 
I  came  here  from  Moscow  with  Prince  Vassily,  then  there  was  nothing. 
Afterwards  what  reason  was  there  for  not  staying  with  him?  Then  I 
played  cards  with  her  and  picked  up  her  reticule,  and  went  skating  with 
her.  When  did  it  begin,  when  did  it  all  come  about?’  And  here  he  was 
sitting  beside  her  as  her  betrothed,  hearing,  seeing,  feeling  her  closeness, 
her  breathing,  her  movements,  her  beauty.  Then  it  suddenly  seemed  to 
him  that  it  was  not  she,  but  he  who  was  himself  extraordinarily  beautiful, 
that  that  was  why  they  were  looking  at  him  so,  and  he,  happy  in  the 
general  admiration,  was  drawing  himself  up,  lifting  his  head  and  rejoicing 
in  his  happiness.  All  at  once  he  heard  a  voice,  a  familiar  voice,  addressing 
him  for  the  second  time. 

But  Pierre  was  so  absorbed  that  he  did  not  understand  what  was  said 
to  him. 

‘I’m  asking  you,  when  you  heard  last  from  Bolkonsky,’  Prince  Vassily 
repeated  a  third  time.  ‘How  absent-minded  you  are,  my  dear  boy.’  Prince 
Vassily  smiled,  and  Pierre  saw  that  every  one,  every  one  was  smiling 
at  him  and  at  Ellen. 

,  ‘Well,  what  of  it,  since  you  all  know,’  Pierre  was  saying  to  himself. 
What  of  it?  it’s  the  truth,’  and  he  smiled  himself  his  gentle,  childlike 
smile,  and  Ellen  smiled. 

‘When  did  you  get  a  letter?  From  Olmlitz?’  repeated  Prince  Vassily, 
vho  wanted  to  know  in  order  to  settle  some  disputed  question. 

‘How  can  people  talk  and  think  of  such  trifles?’  thought  Pierre. 

1  ‘Yes,  from  Olmiitz,’  he  answered  with  a  sigh. 

Pierre  took  his  lady  in  behind  the  rest  from  supper  to  the  drawing- 
00m.  The  guests  began  to  take  leave,  and  several  went  away  without 
aying  good-bye  to  Ellen.  As  though  unwilling  to  take  her  away  from  a 
erious  occupation,  several  went  up  to  her  for  an  instant  and  made  haste 
0  retire  again,  refusing  to  let  her  accompany  them  out.  The  diplomat 
ifent  out  of  the  drawing-room  in  dumb  dejection.  He  felt  vividly  all  the 


194  WAR  AND  PEACE 

vanity  of  his  diplomatic  career  by  comparison  with  Pierre’s  happiness. 
The  old  general  growled  angrily  at  his  wife  when  she  inquired  how  his 
leg  was.  ‘The  old  fool,’  he  thought.  ‘Look  at  Elena  Vassilyevna;  she’ll 
be  beautiful  at  fifty.’ 

‘I  believe  I  may  congratulate  you,’  Anna  Pavlovna  whispered  to  Prin¬ 
cess  Kuragin,  as  she  kissed  her  warmly.  ‘If  I  hadn’t  a  headache,  I  would 
stay  on.’  The  princess  made  no  answer;  she  was  tormented  by  envy  of  her 
daughter’s  happiness. 

While  the  guests  were  taking  leave,  Pierre  was  left  a  long  while  alone 
with  Ellen  in  the  little  drawing-room,  where  they  were  sitting.  Often 
before,  during  the  last  six  weeks  he  had  been  left  alone  with  Ellen,  but  he 
had  never  spoken  of  love  to  her.  Now  he  felt  that  this  was  inevitable,  but  ! 
he  could  not  make  up  his  mind  to  this  final  step.  Ele  felt  ashamed ;  it 
seemed  to  him  that  here  at  Ellen’s  side  he  was  filling  some  other  man’s  \ 
place.  ‘This  happiness  is  not  for  you,’  some  inner  voice  said  to  him.  ‘This 
happiness  is  for  those  who  have  not  in  them  what  you  have  within  you.’ 
But  he  had  to  say  something,  and  he  began  to  speak.  He  asked  her  | 
whether  she  had  enjoyed  the  evening.  With  her  habitual  directness  in 
replying,  she  answered  that  this  name-day  had  been  one  of  the  pleasantest 
she  had  ever  had. 

A  few  of  the  nearest  relations  were  still  lingering  on.  They  were 
sitting  in  the  big  drawing-room.  Prince  Vassily  walked  with  languid  steps 
towards  Pierre.  Pierre  rose  and  observed  that  it  was  getting  late.  Prince 
Vassily  levelled  a  look  of  stern  inquiry  upon  him,  as  though  what  he  had 
said  was  so  strange  that  one  could  not  believe  one’s  ears.  But  the 
expression  of  severity  immediately  passed  away,  and  Prince  Vassily1 
taking  Pierre’s  hand  drew  him  down  into  a  seat  and  smiled  affectionately. 

‘WTell,  Ellen?’  he  said  at  once,  addressing  his  daughter  in  that  careless 
tone  of  habitual  tenderness  which  comes  natural  to  parents  who  have1 
petted  their  children  from  infancy,  but  in  Prince  Vassily’s  case  was  only 
arrived  at  by  imitation  of  other  parents.  And  he  turned  to  Pierre  again: 
‘“Sergey  Kuzmitch  on  gll  sides,”’  he  repeated,  unbuttoning  the  topi' 
button  of  his  waistcoat. 

Pierre  smiled,  but  his  smile  betrayed  that  he  understood  that  it  was!: 
not  the  anecdote  of  Sergey  Kuzmitch  that  interested  Prince  Vassily  at , 
that  moment,  and  Prince  Vassily  knew  that  Pierre  knew  it.  Prince 1 
Vassily  all  at  once  muttered  something  and  went  away.  It  seemed  to 
Pierre  that  Prince  Vassily  was  positively  disconcerted.  The  sight  of  the1 
discomfiture  of  this  elderly  man  of  the  world  touched  Pierre;  he  looked  ‘ 
round  at  Ellen — and  she,  he  fancied,  was  disconcerted  too,  and  her  glance  I 
seemed  to  say:  ‘Well,  it’s  your  own  fault.’ 

‘I  must  inevitably  cross  the  barrier,  but  I  can’t,  I  can’t,’  thought; 
Pierre,  and  he  began  again  speaking  of  extraneous  subjects,  of  Sergej 
Kuzmitch,  inquiring  what  was  the  point  of  the  anecdote,  as  he  had  not 
caught  it  all.  Ellen,  with  a  smile,  replied  that  she  did  not  know  it  either 

When  Prince  Vassily  went  into  the  drawing-room,  the  princess  wap 
talking  in  subdued  tones  with  an  elderly  lady  about  Pierre. 


WARANDPEACE  195 

‘Of  course  it  is  a  very  brilliant  match,  but  happiness,  my  dear  .  . 

‘Marriages  are  made  in  heaven,’  responded  the  elderly  lady. 

Prince  Vassily  walked  to  the  furthest  corner  and  sat  down  on  a  sofa, 
as  though  he  had  not  heard  the  ladies.  He  dosed  his  eyes  and  seemed 
to  doze.  His  head  began  to  droop,  and  he  roused  himself. 

‘Aline,’  he  said  to  his  wife,  ‘go  and  see  what  they  are  doing.’ 

The  princess  went  up  to  the  door,  walked  by  it  with  a  countenance  full 
of  meaning  and  affected  nonchalance,  and  glanced  into  the  little  drawing¬ 
room.  Pierre  and  Ellen  were  sitting  and  talking  as  before. 

‘Just  the  same,’  she  said  in  answer  to  her  husband.  Prince  Vassily 
frowned,  twisting  his  mouth  on  one  side,  his  cheeks  twitched  with  the 
unpleasant,  brutal  expression  peculiar  to  him  at  such  moments.  He  shook 
himself,  got  up,  flung  his  head  back,  and  with  resolute  steps  passed  the 
ladies  and  crossed  over  to  the  little  drawing-room.  He  walked  quickly, 
joyfully  up  to  Pierre.  The  prince’s  face  was  so  extraordinarily  solemn 
that  Pierre  got  up  in  alarm  on  seeing  him. 

“Thank  God!’  he  said.  ‘My  wife  has  told  me  all  about  it.’  He  put  one 
arm  round  Pierre,  the  other  round  his  daughter.  ‘My  dear  boy!  Ellen!  I 
am  very,  very  glad.’  His  voice  quavered.  ‘I  loved  your  father  .  .  .  and 
she  will  make  you  a  good  wife  .  .  .  God’s  blessing  on  you!  .  .  .’  He 
embraced  his  daughter,  then  Pierre  again,  and  kissed  him  with  his  elderly 
lips.  Tears  were  actually  moist  on  his  cheeks.  ‘Aline,  come  here,’ 
he  called. 

The  princess  went  in  and  wept  too.  The  elderly  lady  also  put  her 
handkerchief  to  her  eye.  They  kissed  Pierre,  and  he  several  times  kissed 
the  hand  of  the  lovely  Ellen.  A  little  later  they  were  again  left  alone. 

‘All  this  had  to  be  so  and  could  not  have  been  otherwise,’  thought 
Pierre,  ‘so  that  it’s  no  use  to  inquire  whether  it  was  a  good  thing  or  not. 
It’s  a  good  thing  because  it’s  definite,  and  there’s  none  of  the  agonising 
suspense  there  was  before.’  Pierre  held  his  betrothed’s  hand  in  silence, 
and  gazed  at  the  heaving  and  falling  of  her  lovely  bosom. 

‘Ellen!’  he  said  aloud,  and  stopped.  ‘There’s  something  special  is  said 
on  these  occasions,’  he  thought;  but  he  could  not  recollect  precisely  what 
it  was  that  was  said  on  these  occasions.  He  glanced  into  her  face.  She 
bent  forward  closer  to  him.  Her  face  flushed  rosy  red. 

‘Ah,  take  off  those  .  .  .  those  .  .  .’  she  pointed  to  his  spectacles. 

Pierre  took  off  his  spectacles,  and  there  was  in  his  eyes  besides  the 
strange  look  people’s  eyes  always  have  when  they  remove  spectacles,  a 
look  of  dismay  and  inquiry.  He  would  have  bent  over  her  hand  and  have 
kissed  it.  But  with  an  almost  brutal  movement  of  her  head,  she  caught 
it  his  lips  and  pressed  them  to  her  own.  Pierre  was  struck  by  the  trans¬ 
formed,  the  unpleasantly  confused  expression  of  her  face. 

‘Now  it’s  too  late,  it’s  all  over,  and  besides  I  love  her,’  thought  Pierre. 

‘I  love  you!’  he  said,  remembering  what  had  to  be  said  on  these 
iccasions.  But  the  words  sounded  so  poor  that  he  felt  ashamed  of 
limself. 

Six  weeks  later  he  was  married,  and  the  lucky  possessor  of  a  lovely 


xg6  WAR  AND  PEACE 

wife  and  millions  of  money,  as  people  said;  he  took  up  his  abode  in  the 

great,  newly  decorated  Petersburg  mansion  of  the  Counts  Bezuhov. 

Ill 

In  the  December  of  1805,  the  old  Prince  Nikolay  Andreitch  Bolkonsky 
received  a  letter  from  Prince  Vassily,  announcing  that  he  intended  to 
visit  him  with  his  son.  (‘I  am  going  on  an  inspection  tour,  and  of  course 
a  hundred  versts  is  only  a  step  out  of  the  way  for  me  to  visit  you,  my 
deeply-honoured  benefactor,’  he  wrote.  ‘My  Anatole  is  accompanying  me 
on  his  way  to  the  army,  and  I  hope  you  will  permit  him  to  express  to 
you  in  person  the  profound  veneration  that,  following  his  father’s 
example,  he  entertairts  for  you.’) 

‘Well,  there’s  no  need  to  bring  Marie  out,  it  seems;  suitors  come  to  us 
of  themselves,’  the  little  princess  said  heedlessly  on  hearing  of  this. 
Prince  Nikolay  Andreitch  scowled  and  said  nothing. 

A  fortnight  after  receiving  the  letter,  Prince  Vassily’s  servants  arrived 
one  evening  in  advance  of  him,  and  the  following  day  he  came  himself 
with  his  son. 

Old  Bolkonsky  had  always  had  a  poor  opinion  of  Prince  Vassily’s 
character,  and  this  opinion  had  grown  stronger  of  late  since  Prince 
Vassily  had,  under  the  new  reigns  of  Paul  and  Alexander,  advanced  to 
high  rank  and  honours.  Now  from  the  letter  and  the  little  princess’s 
hints,  he  saw  what  the  object  of  the  visit  was,  and  his  poor  opinion  of 
Prince  Vassily  passed  into  a  feeling  of  ill-will  and  contempt  in  the  old 
prince’s  heart.  He  snorted  indignantly  whenever  he  spoke  of  him.  On  the 
day  of  Prince  Vassily’s  arrival,  the  old  prince  was  particularly  discon¬ 
tented  and  out  of  humour.  Whether  he  was  out  of  humour  because  Prince 
Vassily  was  coming,  or  whether  he  was  particularly  displeased  at  Prince 
Vassily’s  coming  because  he  was  out  of  humour,  no  one  can  say.  But  he 
was  out  of  humour,  and  early  in  the  morning  Tihon  had  dissuaded  the 
architect  from  going  to  the  prince  with  his  report. 

‘Listen  how  he’s  walking,’  said  Tihon,  calling  the  attention  of  the 
architect  to  the  sound  of  the  prince’s  footsteps.  ‘Stepping  flat  on  his 
heels  .  .  .  then  we  know  .  .  .’ 

At  nine  o’clock,  however,  the  old  prince  went  out  for  a  walk,  as  usual, 
wearing  his  short,  velvet,  fur-lined  cloak  with  a  sable  collar  and  a  sable 
cap.  There  had  been  a  fall  of  snow  on  the  previous  evening.  The  path 
along  which  Prince  Nikolay  Andreitch  walked  to  the  conservatory  hadj 
been  cleared;  there  were  marks  of  a  broom  in  the  swept  snow,  and  a  spade: 
had  been  left  sticking  in  the  crisp  bank  of  snow  that  bordered  the  path 
on  both  sides.  The  prince  walked  through  the  conservatories,  the  servants’ 
quarters,  and  the  out-buildings,  frowning  and  silent. 

‘Could  a  sledge  drive  up?’  he  asked  the  respectful  steward,  who  was: 
escorting  him  to  the  house,  with  a  countenance  and  manners  like  his  own; 


WARANDPEACE  197 

‘The  snow  is  deep,  your  excellency.  I  gave  orders  for  the  avenue  to 
be  swept  too.’ 

The  prince  nodded,  and  was  approaching  the  steps.  ‘Glory  to  Thee, 
O  Lord!’  thought  the  steward,  ‘the  storm  has  passed  over!’ 

‘It  would  have  been  hard  to  drive  up,  your  excellency,’  added  the 
steward.  ‘So  I  hear,  your  excellency,  there’s  a  minister  coming  to  visit 
your  excellency?’  The  prince  turned  to  the  steward  and  stared  with 
scowling  eyes  at  him. 

‘Eh?  A  minister?  What  minister?  Who  gave  you  orders?’  he  began  in 
his  shrill,  cruel  voice.  ‘For  the  princess  my  daughter,  you  do  not  clear 
the  way,  but  for  the  minister  you  do!  For  me  there  an  no  ministers!’ 

‘Your  excellency,  I  supposed  .  .  .’ 

‘You  supposed,’  shouted  the  prince,  articulating  v  ith  greater  and 
greater  haste  and  incoherence.  ‘You  supposed  .  .  .  Brigands!  black¬ 
guards!  ...  I’ll  teach  you  to  suppose,’  and  raising  Ins  stick  he  waved 
it  at  Alpatitch,  and  would  have  hit  him,  had  not  the  steward  instinctively 
shrunk  back  and  escaped  the  blow.  ‘You  supposed  .  .  .  Blackguards! 

.  .  .’  he  still  cried  hurriedly.  But  although  Alpatitch,  shocked  at  his  own 
insolence  in  dodging  the  blow,  went  closer  to  the  prince,  with  his  bald 
head  bent  humbly  before  him,  or  perhaps  just  because  of  this,  the  prince 
did  not  lift  the  stick  again,  and  still  shouting,  ‘Blackguards!  ...  fill 
up  the  road  .  .  .’  he  ran  to  his  room. 

Princess  Marya  and  Mademoiselle  Bourienne  stood,  waiting  for  the 
old  prince  before  dinner,  well  aware  that  he  was  out  of  temper.  Mademoi¬ 
selle  Bourienne’s  beaming  countenance  seemed  to  say,  ‘I  know  nothing 
about  it,  I  am  just  the  same  as  usual,’  while  Princess  Marya  stood  pale 
and  terrified  with  downcast  eyes.  What  made  it  harder  for  Princess 
Marya  was  that  she  knew  that  she  ought  to  act  like  Mademoiselle  Bou- 
rienne  at  such  times,  but  she  could  not  do  it.  She  felt,  ‘If  I  behave  as  if 
I  did  not  notice  it,  he’ll  think  I  have  no  sympathy  with  him.  If  I  behave 
as  if  I  were  depressed  and  out  of  humour  myself,  he’ll  say  (as  indeed 
often  happened)  that  I’m  sulky  .  .  .’  and  so  on. 

The  prince  glanced  at  his  daughter’s  scared  face  and  snorted. 

‘Stuff!’  or  perhaps  ‘stupid!’  he  muttered.  ‘And  the  other  is  not  here! 
they’ve  been  telling  tales  to  her  already,’  he  thought,  noticing  that  the 
little  princess  was  not  in  the  dining-room. 

‘Where’s  Princess  Liza?’  he  asked.  ‘In  hiding?’ 

‘She’s  not  quite  well,’  said  Mademoiselle  Bourienne  with  a  bright 
smile;  'she  is  not  coming  down.  In  her  condition  it  is  only  to  be  expected.’ 

‘H’m!  h’m!  kh!  kh ! ’  growled  the  prince,  and  he  sat  down  to  the  table. 
He  thought  his  plate  was  not  clean:  he  pointed  to  a  mark  on  it  and  threw 
it  away.  Tihon  caught  it  and  handed  it  to  a  footman.  The  little  princess 
was  quite  well,  but  she  was  in  such  overwhelming  terror  of  the  prince, 
that  on  hearing  he  was  in  a  bad  temper,  she  had  decided  not  to  come  in. 

‘I  am  afraid  for  my  baby,’  she  said  to  Mademoiselle  Bourienne;  ‘God 
knows  what  might  not  be  the  result  of  a  fright.’ 

The  little  princess,  in  fact,  lived  at  Bleak  Hills  in  a  state  of  continual 


ioS 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

terror  of  the  old  prince,  and  had  an  aversion  for  him,  of  which  she  was 
h<  -self  unconscious,  so  completely  did  terror  overbear  every  other  feeling. 
There  was  the  same  aversion  on  the  prince’s  side,  too;  but  in  his  case  it 
was  swallowed  up  in  contempt.  As  she  went  on  staying  at  Bleak  Hills, 
the  little  princess  became  particularly  fond  of  Mademoiselle  Bourienne; 
she  spent  her  days  with  her,  begged  her  to  sleep  in  her  room,  and  often 
talked  of  her  father-in-law,  and  criticised  him  to  her. 

‘We  have  company  coming,  prince/  said  Mademoiselle  Bourienne,  her 
rosy  fingers  unfolding  her  dinner-napkin.  ‘His  excellency  Prince  Kuragin 
with  his  son,  as  I  have  heard  say?’  she  said  in  a  tone  of  inquiry. 

‘H’m!  .  .  his  excellence  is  an  upstart.  I  got  him  his  place  in  the 
college/  the  old  prince  said  huffily.  ‘And  what  his  son’s  coming  for,  I 
can’t  make  out.  Princess  Lizaveta  Karlovna  and  Princess  Marya  can  tell 
us,  maybe;  I  don’t  know  what  he’s  bringing  this  son  here  for.  I  don’t 
want  him.’  And  he  looked  at  his  daughter,  who  turned  crimson. 

‘Unwell,  eh?  Scared  of  the  minister,  as  that  blockhead  Alpatitch  called 
him  to-day?’ 

‘Non,  mon  pere.’ 

Unsuccessful  as  Mademoiselle  Bourienne  had  been  in  the  subject  she 
had  started,  she  did  not  desist,  but  want  on  prattling  away  about  the 
conservatories,  the  beauty  of  a  flower  that  had  just  opened,  and  after 
the  soup  the  prince  subsided. 

After  dinner  he  went  to  see  his  daughter-in-law.  The  little  princess 
was  sitting  at  a  little  table  gossiping  with  Masha,  her  maid.  She  turned 
pale  on  seeing  her  father-in-law. 

The  little  princess  was  greatly  changed.  She  looked  ugly  rather  than 
pretty  now.  Her  cheeks  were  sunken,  her  lip  was  drawn  up,  and  her  eyes 
were  hollow. 

‘Yes,  a  sort  of  heaviness,’  she  said  in  answer  to  the  prince’s  inquiry 
how  she  felt. 

‘Isn’t  there  anything  you  need?’ 

‘Non,  merci,  mon  pere.’ 

‘Oh,  very  well  then,  very  well.’ 

He  went  out  and  into  the  waiting-room.  Alpatitch  was  standing  there 
with  downcast  head. 

‘Filled  up  the  road  again?’ 

‘Yes,  your  excellency;  for  God’s  sake,  forgive  me,  it  was  simply  a 
blunder.’ 

The  prince  cut  him  short  with  his  unnatural  laugh. 

‘Oh,  very  well,  very  well.’  He  held  out  his  hand,  which  Alpatitch 
kissed,  and  then  he  went  to  his  study. 

In  the  evening  Prince  Vassily  arrived.  He  was  met  on  the  way  by  the 
coachmen  and  footmen  of  the  Bolkonskys,  who  with  shouts  dragged  his 
carriages  and  sledge  to  the  lodge,  over  the  road,  which  had  been  pur¬ 
posely  obstructed  with  snow  again. 

Prince  Vassily  and  Anatole  were  conducted  to  separate  apartments. 

Taking  off  his  tunic,  Anatole  sat  with  his  elbows  on  the  table,  on  a. 


ig9 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

corner  of  which  he  fixed  his  handsome,  large  eyes  with  a  smiling,  uncon¬ 
cerned  stare.  All  his  life  he  had  looked  upon  as  an  uninterrupted  enter¬ 
tainment,  which  some  one  or  other  was,  he  felt,  somehow  bound  to  pro¬ 
vide  for  him.  In  just  the  same  spirit  he  had  looked  at  his  visit  to  the  cross 
old  gentleman  and  his  rich  and  hideous  daughter.  It  might  all,  according 
to  his  anticipations,  turn  out  very  jolly  and  amusing.  ‘And  why  not  get 
married,  if  she  has  such  a  lot  of  money?  That  never  comes  amiss,’  thought 
Anatole. 

He  shaved  and  scented  himself  with  the  care  and  elegance  that  had 
become  habitual  with  him,  and  with  his  characteristic  expression  of 
all-conquering  good-humour,  he  walked  into  his  father’s  room,  holding 
his  head  high.  Two  valets  were  busily  engaged  in  dressing  Prince  Vassily; 
he  was  looking  about  him  eagerly,  and  nodded  gaily  to  his  son,  as  he 
entered  with  an  air  that  said,  ‘Yes,  that’s  just  how  I  wanted  to  see 
you  looking.’ 

‘Come,  joking  apart,  father,  is  she  so  hideous?  Eh?’  he  asked  in  French, 
as  though  reverting  to  a  subject  more  than  once  discussed  on  the  journey. 

‘Nonsense!  The  great  thing  for  you  is  to  try  and  be  respectful  and 
sensible  with  the  old  prince.’ 

‘If  he  gets  nasty,  I’m  off,’  said  Anatole.  ‘I  can’t  stand  those  old  gentle¬ 
men.  Eh?’ 

‘Remember  that  for  you  everything  depends  on  it.’ 

Meanwhile,  in  the  feminine  part  of  the  household  not  only  the  arrival 
of  the  minister  and  his  son  was  already  known,  but  the  appearance  of 
both  had  been  minutely  described.  Princess  Marya  was  sitting  alone  in 
her  room  doing  her  utmost  to  control  her  inner  emotion. 

‘Why  did  they  write,  why  did  Liza  tell  me  about  it?  Why,  it  cannot  be!  ’ 
she  thought,  looking  at  herself  in  the  glass.  ‘How  am  I  to  go  into  the 
drawing-room?  Even  if  I  like  him,  I  could  never  be  myself  with  him 
now.’  The  mere  thought  of  her  father’s  eyes  reduced  her  to  terror.  The 
little  princess  and  Mademoiselle  Bourienne  had  already  obtained  all 
necessary  information  from  the  maid,  Masha;  they  had  learned  what  a 
handsome  fellow  the  minister’s  son  was,  with  rosy  cheeks  and  black 
eyebrows;  how  his  papa  had  dragged  his  legs  upstairs  with  difficulty, 
while  he,  like  a  young  eagle,  had  flown  up  after  him  three  steps  at  a  time. 
On  receiving  these  items  of  information,  the  little  princess  and  Made¬ 
moiselle  Bourienne,  whose  eager  voices  were  audible  in  the  corridor,  went 
into  Princess  Marya’s  room. 

‘They  are  come,  Marie,  do  you  know?’  said  the  little  princess,  waddling 
in  and  sinking  heavily  into  an  armchair.  She  was  not  wearing  the  gown 
in  which  she  had  been  sitting  in  the  morning,  but  had  put  on  one  of  her 
best  dresses.  Her  hair  had  been  carefully  arranged,  and  her  face  was  full 
of  an  eager  excitement,  which  did  not,  however,  conceal  its  wasted  and 
pallid  look.  In  the  smart  clothes  which  she  had  been  used  to  wear  in 
Petersburg  in  society,  the  loss  of  her  good  looks  was  even  more  noticeable. 
Mademoiselle  Bourienne,  too,  had  put  some  hardly  perceptible  finishing 


200  WAR  AND  PEACE 

touches  to  her  costume,  which  made  her  fresh,  pretty  face  even  more 

attractive. 

‘What,  and  you  are  staying  just  as  you  are,  dear  princess.  They  will 
come  in  a  minute  to  tell  us  the  gentlemen  are  in  the  drawing-room,’  she 
began.  ‘We  shall  have  to  go  down,  and  you  are  doing  nothing  at  all  to 
your  dress.’ 

The  little  princess  got  up  from  her  chair,  rang  for  the  maid,  and  hur¬ 
riedly  and  eagerly  began  to  arrange  what  Princess  Marya  was  to  wear, 
and  to  put  her  ideas  into  practice.  Princess  Marya’s  sense  of  personal 
dignity  was  wounded  by  her  own  agitation  at  the  arrival  of  her  suitor, 
and  still  more  was  she  mortified  that  her  two  companions  should  not  even 
conceive  that  she  ought  not  to  be  so  agitated.  To  have  told  them  how 
ashamed  she  was  of  herself  and  of  them  would  have  been  to  betray  her 
own  excitement.  Besides,  to  refuse  to  be  dressed  up,  as  they  suggested, 
would  have  been  exposing  herself  to  reiterated  raillery  and  insistence. 
She  flushed;  her  beautiful  eyes  grew  dim;  her  face  was  suffused  with 
patches  of  crimson;  and  with  the  unbeautiful,  victimised  expression 
which  was  the  one  most  often  seen  on  her  face,  she  abandoned  herself 
to  Mademoiselle  Bourienne  and  Liza.  Both  women  exerted  themselves 
with  pcrject  sincerity  to  make  her  look  well.  She  was  so  plain  that  the 
idea  of  rivalry  with  her  could  never  have  entered  their  heads.  Conse¬ 
quently  it  was  with  perfect  sincerity,  in  the  naive  and  unhesitating  con¬ 
viction  women  have  that  dress  can  make  a  face  handsome,  that  they  set 
to  work  to  attire  her. 

‘No,  really,  ma  bonne  amie,  that  dress  isn’t  pretty,’  said  Liza,  looking 
sideways  at  Princess  Marya  from  a  distance;  ‘tell  her  to  put  on  you  your 
maroon  velvet  there.  Yes,  really!  Why,  you  know,  it  may  be  the  turning- 
point  in  your  whole  life.  That  one’s  too  light,  it’s  not  right,  no,  it’s  not!’ 

It  was  not  the  dress  that  was  wrong,  but  the  face  and  the  whole  figure 
of  the  princess,  but  that  was  not  felt  by  Mademoiselle  Bourienne  and 
the  little  princess.  They  still  fancied  that  if  they  were  to  put  a  blue 
ribbon  in  her  hair,  and  do  it  up  high,  and  to  put  the  blue  sash  lower  on 
the  maroon  dress  and  so  on,  then  all  would  be  well.  They  forgot  that  the 
frightened  face  and  figure  of  Princess  Marya  could  not  be  changed,  and 
therefore,  however  presentable  they  might  make  the  setting  and  decora¬ 
tion  of  the  face,  the  face  itself  would  still  look  piteous  and  ugly.  After 
two  or  three  changes,  to  which  Princess  Marya  submitted  passively, 
when  her  hair  had  been  done  on  the  top  of  her  head  (which  completely 
changed  and  utterly  disfigured  her),  and  the  blue  sash  and  best  maroon 
velvet  dress  had  been  put  on,  the  little  princess  walked  twice  round,  and 
with  her  little  hand  stroked  out  a  fold  here  and  pulled  down  the  sash 
there,  and  gazed  at  her  with  her  head  first  on  one  side  and  then  on  the 
other. 

‘No,  it  won’t  do,’  she  said  resolutely,  throwing  up  her  hands.  ‘No, 
Marie,  decidedly  that  does  not  suit  you.  I  like  you  better  in  your  little 
grey  everyday  frock.  No,  please  do  that  for  me.  Katya,’  she  said  to  the 
maid,  ‘bring  the  princess  her  grey  dress,  and  look,  Mademoiselle  Bou- 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


2or 


rienne,  how  I’ll  arrange  it,’  she  said,  smiling  with  a  foretaste  of  artistic 
pleasure.  But  when  Katya  brought  the  dress,  Princess  Marya  was  still 
sitting  motionless  before  the  looking-glass,  looking  at  her  own  face,  and  in 
the  looking-glass  she  saw  that  there  were  tears  in  her  eyes  and  her  mouth 
was  quivering,  on  the  point  of  breaking  into  sobs. 

‘Come,  dear  princess,’  said  Mademoiselle  Bourienne,  ‘one  more  little 
effort.’ 

The  little  princess,  taking  the  dress  from  the  hands  of  the  maid,  went 
up  to  Princess  Marya. 

‘Now,  we’ll  try  something  simple  and  charming,’  she  said.  Her  voice 
and  Mademoiselle  Bourienne’s  and  the  giggle  of  Katya  blended  into  a 
sort  of  gay  babble  like  the  twitter  of  birds. 

‘No,  leave  me  alone,’  said  the  princess;  and  there  was  such  seriousness 
and  such  suffering  in  her  voice  that  the  twitter  of  the  birds  ceased  at 
once.  They  looked  at  the  great,  beautiful  eyes,  full  of  tears  and  of 
thought,  looking  at  them  imploringly  and  they  saw  that  to  insist  was 
useless  and  even  cruel. 

‘At  least  alter  your  hair,’  said  the  little  princess.  ‘I  told  you,’  she  said 
reproachfully  to  Mademoiselle  Bourienne,  ‘there  were  faces  which  that 
way  of  doing  the  hair  does  not  suit  a  bit.  Not  a  bit,  not  a  bit,  please 
alter  it.’ 

‘Leave  me  alone,  leave  me  alone,  all  that  is  nothing  to  me,’  answered  a 
voice  scarcely  able  to  struggle  with  tears. 

Mademoiselle  Bourienne  and  the  little  princess  could  not  but  admit 
to  themselves  that  Princess  Marya  was  very  plain  in  this  guise,  far  worse 
than  usual,  but  it  was  too  late.  She  looked  at  them  with  an  expression 
they  knew  well,  an  expression  of  deep  thought  and  sadness.  That  ex¬ 
pression  did  not  inspire  fear.  (That  was  a  feeling  she  could  never  have 
inspired  in  any  one.)  But  they  knew  that  when  that  expression  came 
into  her  face,  she  was  mute  and  inflexible  in  her  resolutions. 

‘You  will  alter  it,  won’t  you?’  said  Liza,  and  when  Princess  Marya 
made  no  reply,  Liza  went  out  of  the  room. 

Princess  Marya  was  left  alone.  She  did  not  act  upon  Liza's  wishes,  she 
did  not  re-arrange  her  hair,  she  did  not  even  glance  into  the  looking- 
glass.  Letting  her  eyes  and  her  hands  drop  helplessly,  she  sat  mentally 
dreaming.  She  pictured  her  husband,  a  man,  a  strong,  masterful,  and 
inconceivably  attractive  creature,  who  would  bear  her  away  all  at  once 
into  an  utterly  different,  happy  world  of  his  own.  A  child,  her  own,  like 
the  baby  she  had  seen  at  her  old  nurse’s  daughter’s,  she  fancied  at  her 
own  breast.  The  husband  standing,  gazing  tenderly  at  her  and  the  child. 
‘But  no,  it  can  never  be,  I  am  too  ugly,’  she  thought. 

‘Kindly  come  to  tea.  The  prince  will  be  going  in  immediately,’  said  the 
maid’s  voice  at  the  door.  She  started  and  was  horrified  at  what  she  had 
been  thinking.  And  before  going  downstairs  she  went  into  the  oratory, 
and  fixing  her  eyes  on  the  black  outline  of  the  great  image  of  the  Saviour, 
she  stood  for  several  minutes  before  it  with  clasped  hands.  Princess 
Marya’s  soul  was  full  of  an  agonising  doubt.  Could  the  joy  of  love,  of 


202 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

earthly  love  for  a  man,  be  for  her?  In  her  reveries  of  marriage,  Princess 
Marya  dreamed  of  happiness  in  a  home  and  children  of  her  own,  but  her 
chief,  her  strongest  and  most  secret  dream  was  of  earthly  love.  The 
feeling  became  the  stronger  the  more  she  tried  to  conceal  it  from  others, 
and  even  from  herself.  ‘My  God,’  she  said,  ‘how  am  I  to  subdue  in  my 
heart  these  temptings  of  the  devil?  How  am  I  to  renounce  for  ever  all 
evil  thoughts,  so  as  in  peace  to  fulfil  Thy  will?’  And  scarcely  had  she  put 
this  question  than  God’s  answer  came  to  her  in  her  own  heart.  ‘Desire 
nothing  for  thyself,  be  not  covetous,  anxious,  envious.  The  future  of  men 
and  thy  destiny  too  must  be  unknown  for  thee ;  but  live  that  thou  mayest 
be  ready  for  all.  If  it  shall  be  God’s  will  to  prove  thee  in  the  duties  of 
marriage,  be  ready  to  obey  His  will.’  With  this  soothing  thought  (though 
still  she  hoped  for  the  fulfilment  of  that  forbidden  earthly  dream) 
Princess  Marya  crossed  herself,  sighing,  and  went  downstairs,  without 
thinking  of  her  dress  nor  how  her  hair  was  done,  of  how  she  would  go  in 
nor  what  she  would  say.  What  could  all  that  signify  beside  the  guidance 
of  Him,  without  Whose  will  not  one  hair  falls  from  the  head  of  man? 


IV 

When  Princess  Marya  went  into  the  room,  Prince  Vassily  and  his  son 
were  already  in  the  drawing-room,  talking  to  the  little  princess  and  Ma¬ 
demoiselle  Bourienne.  When  she  walked  in  with  her  heavy  step,  treading 
on  her  heels,  the  gentlemen  and  Mademoiselle  Bourienne  rose,  and  the 
little  princess,  with  a  gesture  indicating  her  to  the  gentlemen,  said:  ‘Here 
is  Marie!’  Princess  Marya  saw  them  all  and  saw  them  in  detail.  She  saw 
the  face  of  Prince  Vassily,  growing  serious  for  an  instant  at  the  sight  of 
her,  and  then  hastily  smiling,  and  the  face  of  the  little  princess,  scanning 
the  faces  of  the  guests  with  curiosity  to  detect  the  impression  Marie  was 
making  on  them.  She  saw  Mademoiselle  Bourienne,  too,  with  her  ribbon 
and  her  pretty  face,  turned  towards  him  with  a  look  of  more  eagerness 
than  she  had  ever  seen  on  it.  But  him  she  could  not  see,  she  could  only 
see  something  large,  bright-coloured,  and  handsome  moving  towards  her, 
as  she  entered  the  room.  Prince  Vassily  approached  her  first;  and  she 
kissed  his  bald  head,  as  he  bent  over  to  kiss  her  hand,  and  in  reply  to 
his  words  said,  that  on  the  contrary,  she  remembered  him  very  well. 
Then  Anatole  went  up  to  her.  She  still  could  not  see  him.  She  cnly  felt  a 
soft  hand  taking  her  hand  firmly,  and  she  touched  with  her  lips  a  white 
forehead,  over  which  there  was  beautiful  fair  hair,  smelling  of  pomade. 
When  she  glanced  at  him,  she  was  impressed  by  his  beauty.  Anatole  was 
standing  with  the  thumb  of  his  right  hand  at  a  button  of  his  uniform,  his 
chest  squared  and  his  spine  arched;  swinging  one  foot,  with  his  head  a 
little  on  one  side,  he  was  gazing  in  silence  with  a  beaming  face  on  the 
princess,  obviously  not  thinking  of  her  at  all.  Anatole  was  not  quick¬ 
witted,  he  was  not  ready,  not  eloquent  in  conversation,  but  he  had  that 
faculty,  so  invaluable  for  social  purposes,  of  composure  and  imper- 


WARANDPEACE  203 

turbable  assurance.  If  a  man  of  no  self-confidence  is  dumb  at  first  mak¬ 
ing  acquaintance,  and  betrays  a  consciousness  of  the  impropriety  of  this 
dumbness  and  an  anxiety  to  find  something  to  say,  the  effect  will  be  bad. 
But  Anatole  was  dumb  and  swung  his  leg,  as  he  watched  the  princess’s 
hair  with  a  radiant  face.  It  was  clear  that  he  could  be  silent  with  the 
same  serenity  for  a  very  long  while.  ‘If  anybody  feels  silence  awkward, 
let  him  talk,  but  I  don’t  care  about  it,’  his  demeanour  seemed  to  say. 
Moreover,  in  his  manner  to  women,  Anatole  had  that  air,  which  does 
more  than  anything  else  to  excite  curiosity,  awe,  and  even  love  in  women, 
the  air  of  supercilious  consciousness  of  his  own  superiority.  His  manner 
seemed  to  say  to  them:  ‘I  know  you,  I  know,  but  why  trouble  my  head 
about  you?  You’d  be  pleased  enough,  of  course!’  Possibly  he  did  ndt 
think  this  on  meeting  women  (it  is  probable,  indeed,  that  he  did  not,  for 
he  thought  very  little  at  any  time),  but  that  was  the  effect  of  his  air  and 
his  manner.  Princess  Marya  felt  it,  and  as  though  to  show  him  she  did 
not  even  venture  to  think  of  inviting  his  attention,  she  turned  to  his 
father.  The  conversation  was  general  and  animated,  thanks  to  the  voice 
and  the  little  downy  lip,  that  flew  up  and  down  over  the  white  teeth  of 
the  little  princess.  She  met  Prince  Vassily  in  that  playful  tone  so  often 
adopted  by  chatty  and  lively  persons,  the  point  of  which  consists  in  the 
assumption  that  there  exists  a  sort  of  long-established  series  of  jokes 
and  amusing,  partly  private,  humorous  reminiscences  between  the  persons 
so  addressed  and  oneself,  even  when  no  such  reminiscences  are  really 
shared,  as  indeed  was  the  case  with  Prince  Vassily  and  the  little  princess. 
Prince  Vassily  readily  fell  in  with  this  tone;  the  little  princess  embel¬ 
lished  their  supposed  common  reminiscences  with  all  sorts  of  droll  inci¬ 
dents  that  had  never  occurred,  and  drew  Anatole  too  into  them,  though 
she  had  scarcely  known  him.  Mademoiselle  Bourienne  too  succeeded  in 
taking  a  part  in  them,  and  even  Princess  Marya  felt  with  pleasure  that 
she  was  being  made  to  share  in  their  gaiety. 

‘Well,  anyway,  we  shall  take  advantage  of  you  to  the  utmost  now  we 
have  got  you,  dear  prince,’  said  the  little  princess,  in  French,  of  course,  to 
Prince  Vassily.  ‘Here  it  is  not  as  it  used  to  be  at  our  evenings  at  Annette’s., 
where  you  always  ran  away.  Do  you  remember  our  dear  Annette?’ 

‘Ah  yes,  but  then  you  mustn’t  talk  to  me  about  politics,  like  Annette! ' 

‘And  our  little  tea-table?’ 

‘Oh  yes!  ’ 

‘Why  is  it  you  never  used  to  be  at  Annette’s?’  the  little  princess  asked 
of  Anatole.  ‘Ah,  I  know,  I  know,’  she  said,  winking;  ‘your  brother,  Ippolit, 
has  told  me  tales  of  your  doings.  Oh!’  She  shook  her  finger  at  him.  ‘I 
know  about  your  exploits  in  Paris  too!’ 

‘But  he,  Ippolit,  didn’t  tell  you,  did  he?’  said  Prince  Vassily  (address¬ 
ing  his  son  and  taking  the  little  princess  by  the  arm,  as  though  she  would 
have  run  away  and  he  were  just  in  time  to  catch  her) ;  ‘he  didn’t  tell 
you  how  he,  Ippolit  himself,  was  breaking  his  heart  over  our  sweet 
princess,  and  how  she  turned  him  out  of  doors.’ 

‘Oh!  she  is  the  pearl  of  women,  princess,’  he  said,  addressing  Princess 


204  WAR  AND  PEACE 

Marya.  Mademoiselle  Bourienne  on  her  side,  at  the  mention  of  Paris, 
did  not  let  her  chance  slip  for  taking  a  share  in  the  common  stock  of 
recollections. 

She  ventured  to  inquire  if  it  were  long  since  Anatole  was  in  Paris, 
and  how  he  had  liked  that  city.  Anatole  very  readily  answered  the 
Frenchwoman,  and  smiling  and  staring  at  her,  he  talked  to  her  about 
her  native  country.  At  first  sight  of  the  pretty  Mademoiselle,  Anatole 
had  decided  that  even  here  at  Bleak  Hills  he  should  not  be  dull.  ‘Not 
half  bad-looking,’  he  thought,  scrutinising  her,  ‘she’s  not  half  bad-looking, 
that  companion!  I  hope  she’ll  bring  her  along  when  we’re  married,’  he 
mused;  ‘she  is  a  nice  little  thing.’ 

The  old  prince  was  dressing  deliberately  in  his  room,  scowling  and 
ruminating  on  what  he  was  to  do.  The  arrival  of  these  visitors  angered 
him.  ‘What’s  Prince  Vassily  to  me,  he  and  his  son?  Prince  Vassily  is  a 
braggart,  an  empty-headed  fool,  and  a  nice  fellow  the  son  is,  I  expect,’ 
he  growled  to  himself.  What  angered  him  was  that  this  visit  revived  in 
his  mind  the  unsettled  question,  continually  thrust  aside,  the  question 
in  regard  to  which  the  old  prince  always  deceived  himself.  That  question 
was  whether  he  would  ever  bring  himself  to  part  with  his  daughter  and 
give  her  to  a  husband.  The  prince  could  never  bring  himself  to  put  this 
question  directly  to  himself,  knowing  beforehand  that  if  he  did  he  would 
have  to  answer  it  justly,  but  against  justice  in  this  case  was  ranged  more 
than  feeling,  the  very  possibility  of  life.  Life  without  Princess  Marya  was 
unthinkable  to  the  old  prince,  little  as  in  appearance  he  prized  her.  ‘And 
what  is  she  to  be  married  for?’  he  thought;  ‘to  be  unhappy,  beyond  a 
doubt.  Look  at  Liza  with  Andrey  (and  a  better  husband,  I  should  fancy, 
it  would  be  difficult  to  find  nowadays),  but  she’s  not  satisfied  with  her 
lot.  And  who  would  marry  her  for  love?  She’s  plain  and  ungraceful. 
She’d  be  married  for  her  connections,  her  wealth.  And  don’t  old  maids 
get  on  well  enough?  They  are  happier  really!  ’  So  Prince  Nikolay  Andrei- 
vitch  mused,  as  he  dressed,  yet  the  question  constantly  deferred  demanded 
an  immediate  decision.  Prince  Vassily  had  brought  his  son  obviously 
with  the  intention  of  making  an  offer,  and  probably  that  day  or  the 
next  he  would  ask  for  a  direct  answer.  The  name,  the  position  in  the 
world,  was  suitable.  ‘Well,  I’m  not  against  it,’  the  prince  kept  saying  to 
himself,  ‘only  let  him  be  worthy  of  her.  That’s  what  we  shall  see.  That’s 
what  we  shall  see,’  he  said  aloud,  ‘that’s  what  we  shall  see,’  and  with 
his  usual  alert  step  he  walked  into  the  drawing-room,  taking  in  the  whole 
company  in  a  rapid  glance.  He  noticed  the  change  in  the  dress  of  the 
little  princess  and  Mademoiselle  Bourienne’s  ribbon,  and  the  hideous 
way  in  which  Princess  Marya’s  hair  was  done,  and  the  smiles  of  the 
Frenchwoman  and  Anatole,  and  the  isolation  of  his  daughter  in  the 
general  talk.  ‘She’s  decked  herself  out  like  a  fool!’  he  thought,  glancing 
vindictively  at  his  daughter.  ‘No  shame  in  her;  while  he  doesn’t  care 
to  speak  to  her !  ’ 

He  went  up  to  Prince  Vassily. 

‘Well,  how  d’ye  do,  how  d’ye  do,  glad  to  see  you.’ 


WARANDPEACE  205 

‘For  a  friend  that  one  loves  seven  versts  is  close  by,’  said  Prince  Vassily, 
quoting  the  Russian  proverb,  and  speaking  in  his  usual  rapid,  self- 
confident,  and  familiar  tone.  ‘This  is  my  second,  I  beg  you  to  love  him 
and  welcome  him,  as  they  say.’ 

Prince  Nikolay  Andreivitch  scrutinised  Anatole. 

‘A  fine  fellow,  a  fine  fellow!’  he  said.  ‘Well,  come  and  give  me  a  kiss,’ 
and  he  offered  him  his  cheek.  Anatole  kissed  the  old  man,  and  looked 
at  him  with  curiosity  and  perfect  composure,  waiting  for  some  instance 
of  the  eccentricity  his  father  had  told  him  to  expect. 

The  old  prince  sat  down  in  his  customary  place  in  the  corner  of  the 
sofa,  moved  up  an  armchair  for  Prince  Vassily,  pointed  to  it,  and  began 
questioning  him  about  political  affairs  and  news.  He  seemed  to  be  listen¬ 
ing  with  attention  to  what  Prince  Vassily  was  saying,  but  glanced  con¬ 
tinually  at  Princess  Marya. 

‘So  they’re  writing  from  Potsdam  already?’  He  repeated  Prince  Vas¬ 
sily’s  last  words,  and  suddenly  getting  up,  he  went  up  to  his  daughter. 

‘So  it  was  for  visitors  you  dressed  yourself  up  like  this,  eh?’  he 
said.  ‘Nice  of  you,  very  nice.  You  do  your  hair  up  in  some  new  fashion 
before  visitors,  and  before  visitors,  I  tell  you,  never  dare  in  future  to 
change  your  dress  without  my  leave.’ 

‘It  was  my  fault  .  .  .’  stammered  the  little  princess,  flushing. 

‘You  are  quite  at  liberty,’  said  the  old  prince,  with  a  scrape  before  his 
daughter-in-law,  ‘but  she  has  no  need  to  disfigure  herself — she’s  ugly 
enough  without  that.’  And  he  sat  down  again  in  his  place,  taking  no 
further  notice  of  his  daughter,  whom  he  had  reduced  to  tears. 

‘On  the  contrary,  that  coiffure  is  extremely  becoming  to  the  princess,’ 
said  Prince  Vassily. 

‘Well,  my  young  prince,  what’s  your  name?’  said  the  old  prince,  turn¬ 
ing  to  Anatole.  ‘Come  here,  let  us  talk  to  you  a  little  and  make  your 
acquaintance.’ 

‘Now  the  fun’s  beginning,’  thought  Anatole,  and  with  a  smile  he  sat 
down  by  the  old  prince. 

‘That’s  it;  they  tell  me,  my  dear  boy,  you  have  been  educated  abroad. 
Not  taught  to  read  and  write  by  the  deacon,  like  your  father  and  me. 
Tell  me,  are  you  serving  now  in  the  Horse  Guards?’  asked  the  old  man, 
looking  closely  and  intently  at  Anatole. 

‘No,  I  have  transferred  into  the  line,’  answered  Anatole,  with  difficulty 
restraining  his  laughter. 

‘Ah!  a  good  thing.  So  you  want  to  serve  your  Tsar  and  your  country, 
do  you?  These  are  times  of  war.  Such  a  fine  young  fellow  ought  to  be 
on  service,  he  ought  to  be  on  service.  Ordered  to  the  front,  eh?’ 

‘No,  prince,  our  regiment  has  gone  to  the  front.  But  I’m  attached. 
What  is  it  I’m  attached  to,  papa?’  Anatole  turned  to  his  father  with  a 
laugh. 

‘He  is  a  credit  to  the  service,  a  credit.  What  is  it  I’m  attached  to! 
Ha-ha-ha!’  laughed  the  old  prince,  and  Anatole  laughed  still  louder. 


206 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

Suddenly  the  old  prince  frowned.  ‘Well,  you  can  go,’  he  said  to  Anatole. 
With  a  smile  Anatole  returned  to  the  ladies. 

‘So  you  had  him  educated  abroad,  Prince  Vassily?  Eh?’  said  the 
old  prince  to  Prince  Vassily. 

‘I  did  what  I  could,  and  I  assure  you  the  education  there  is  far  better 
than  ours.’ 

‘Yes,  nowadays  everything’s  different,  everything’s  new-fashioned.  A 
fine  fellow!  a  fine  fellow!  Well,  come  to  my  room.’  He  took  Prince  Vas¬ 
sily’s  arm  and  led  him  away  to  his  study. 

Left  alone  with  the  old  prince,  Prince  Vassily  promptly  made  known 
to  him  his  wishes  and  his  hopes. 

‘Why,  do  you  imagine,’  said  the  old  prince  wrathfully,  ‘that  I  keep 
her,  that  I  can’t  part  with  her?  What  an  idea!’  he  protested  angrily.  ‘I 
am  ready  for  it  to-morrow!  Only,  I  tell  you,  I  want  to  know  my  future 
son-in-law  better.  You  know  my  principles:  everything  open!  To-morrow 
I  will  ask  her  in  your  presence;  if  she  wishes  it,  let  him  stay  on.  Let  him 
stay  on,  and  I’ll  see.’  The  prince  snorted.  ‘Let  her  marry,  it’s  nothing  to 
me,’  he  screamed  in  the  piercing  voice  in  which  he  had  screamed  at 
saying  good-bye  to  his  son. 

‘I  will  be  frank  with  you,’  said  Prince'  Vassily  in  the  tone  of  a  crafty 
man,  who  is  convinced  of  the  uselessness  of  being  crafty  with  so  penetrat¬ 
ing  a  companion.  ‘You  see  right  through  people,  I  know.  Anatole  is  not 
a  genius,  but  a  straightforward,  good-hearted  lad,  good  as  a  son  or  a 
kinsman.’ 

‘Well,  well,  very  good,  we  shall  see.’ 

As  is  always  the  case  with  women  who  have  for  a  long  while  been 
living  a  secluded  life  apart  from  masculine  society,  on  the  appearance  of 
Anatole  on  the  scene,  all  the  three  women  in  Prince  Nikolay  Andreivitch’s 
house  felt  alike  that  their  life  had  not  been  real  life  till  then.  Their  powers 
of  thought,  of  feeling,  of  observation,  were  instantly  redoubled.  It  seemed 
as  though  their  life  had  till  then  been  passed  in  darkness,  and  was  all  at 
once  lighted  up  by  a  new  brightness  that  was  full  of  significance. 

Princess  Marya  did  not  remember  her  face  and  her  coiffure.  The 
handsome,  open  face  of  the  man  who  might,  perhaps,  become  her  husband, 
absorbed  her  whole  attention.  She  thought  him  kind,  brave,  resolute, 
manly,  and  magnanimous.  She  was  convinced  of  all  that.  Thousands  of 
dreams  of  her  future  married  life  were  continually  floating  into  her 
imagination.  She  drove  them  away  and  tried  to  disguise  them. 

‘But  am  I  not  too  cold  with  him?’  thought  Princess  Marya.  ‘I  try  to 
check  myself,  because  at  the  bottom  of  my  heart  I  feel  myself  too  close 
to  him.  But  of  course  he  doesn’t  know  all  I  think  of  him,  and  may  imagine 
I  don’t  like  him.’ 

And  she  tried  and  knew  not  how  to  be  cordial  to  him. 

‘The  poor  girl  is  devilish  ugly,’  Anatole  was  thinking  about  her. 

Mademoiselle  Bourienne,  who  had  also  been  thrown  by  Anatole’s 
arrival  into  a  high  state  of  excitement,  was  absorbed  in  reflections  of  a 
different  order.  Naturally,  a  beautiful  young  girl  with  no  defined  position 


WARANDPEACE  207 

in  society,  without  friends  or  relations,  without  even  a  country  of  her 
own,  did  not  look  forward  to  devoting  her  life  to  waiting  on  Prince 
Nikolay  Andreivitch,  to  reading  him  books  and  being  a  friend  to  Princess 
Marya.  Mademoiselle  Bourienne  had  long  been  looking  forward  to  the 
Russian  prince,  who  would  have  the  discrimination  to  discern  her  su¬ 
periority  to  the  ugly,  badly  dressed,  ungainly  Russian  princesses — who 
would  fall  in  love  with  her  and  bear  her  away.  And  now  this  Russian 
prince  at  last  had  come.  Mademoiselle  Bourienne  knew  a  story  she  had 
heard  from  her  aunt,  and  had  finished  to  her  own  taste,  which  she  loved 
to  go  over  in  her  own  imagination.  It  was  the  story  of  how  a  girl  had 
been  seduced,  and  her  poor  mother  ( sa  pauvre  mere)  had  appeared  to 
her  and  reproached  her  for  yielding  to  a  man’s  allurements  without  mar¬ 
riage.  Mademoiselle  was  often  touched  to  tears,  as  in  imagination  she 
told  ‘him,’  her  seducer,  this  tale.  Now  this  ‘he,’  a  real  Russian  prince,  had 
appeared.  He  would  elope  with  her,  then  ‘my  poor  mother'  would  come 
on  the  scene,  and  he  would  marry  her.  This  was  how  all  her  future  history 
shaped  itself  in  Mademoiselle  Bourienne’s  brain  at  the  very  moment  when 
she  was  talking  to  him  of  Paris.  Mademoiselle  Bourienne  was  not  guided 
by  calculations  (she  did  not  even  consider  for  one  instant  what  she  would 
do),  but  it  had  all  been  ready  within  her  long  before,  and  now  it  all 
centred  about  Anatole  as  soon  as  he  appeared,  and  she  wished  and  tried 
to  attract  him  as  much  as  possible. 

The  little  princess,  like  an  old  warhorse  hearing  the  blast  of  the  trumpet, 
was  prepared  to  gallop  off  into  a  flirtation  as  her  habit  was,  unconsciously 
forgetting  her  position,  with  no  ulterior  motive,  no  struggle,  nothing  but 
simple-hearted,  frivolous  gaiety  in  her  heart. 

Although  in  feminine  society  Anatole  habitually  took  up  the  attitude 
of  a  man  weary  of  the  attentions  of  women,  his  vanity  was  agreeably 
flattered  by  the  spectacle  of  the  effect  he  produced  on  these  three  women. 
Moreover,  he  was  beginning  to  feel  towards  the  pretty  and  provocative 
Mademoiselle  Bourienne  that  violent,  animal  feeling,  which  was  apt  to 
come  upon  him  with  extreme  rapidity,  and  to  impel  him  to  the  coarsest 
and  most  reckless  actions. 

After  tea  the  party  moved  into  the  divan-room,  and  Princess  Marya 
was  asked  to  play  on  the  clavichord.  Anatole  leaned  on  his  elbow  facing 
her,  and  near  Mademoiselle  Bourienne,  and  his  eyes  were  fixed  on 
Princess  Marya,  full  of  laughter  and  glee.  Princess  Marya  felt  his  eyes 
upon  her  with  troubled  and  joyful  agitation.  Her  favourite  sonata  bore  her 
away  to  a  world  of  soul-felt  poetry,  and  the  feeling  of  his  eyes  upon  her 
added  still  more  poetry  to  that  world.  The  look  in  Anatole’s  eyes,  though 
they  were  indeed  fixed  upon  her,  had  reference  not  to  Ler,  but  to  the 
movements  of  Mademoiselle’s  little  foot,  which  he  was  at  that  very  time 
touching  with  his  own  under  the  piano.  Mademoiselle  Bourienne  too  was 
gazing  at  Princess  Marya,  and  in  her  fine  eyes,  too,  there  was  an  expression 
of  frightened  joy  and  hope  that  was  new  to  the  princess. 

‘How  she  loves  me!’  thought  Princess  Marya.  ‘How  happy  I  am  now 
and  how  happy  I  may  be  with  such  a  friend  and  such  a  husband!  Can  he 


20S 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

possibly  be  my  husband?’  she  thought,  not  daring  to  glance  at  his  face, 
but  still  feeling  his  eyes  fastened  upon  her. 

When  the  party  broke  up  after  supper,  Anatole  kissed  Princess  Marya’s 
hand.  She  was  herself  at  a  loss  to  know  how  she  had  the  hardihood,  but 
she  looked  straight  with  her  short-sighted  eyes  at  the  handsome  face 
as  it  came  close  to  her.  After  the  princess,  he  bent  over  the  hand  of 
Mademoiselle  Bourienne  (it  was  a  breach  of  etiquette,  but  he  did  every¬ 
thing  with  the  same  ease  and  simplicity)  and  Mademoiselle  Bourienne 
crimsoned  and  glanced  in  dismay  at  the  princess. 

‘Quelle  delicatessel’  thought  Princess  Marya.  ‘Can  Amelie’  (Made¬ 
moiselle’s  name)  ‘suppose  I  could  be  jealous  of  her,  and  fail  to  appreciate 
her  tenderness  and  devotion  to  me?’  She  went  up  to  Mademoiselle  Bou¬ 
rienne  and  kissed  her  warmly.  Anatole  went  to  the  little  princess. 

‘No,  no,  no!  When  your  father  writes  me  word  that  you  are  behaving 
well,  I  will  give  you  my  hand  to  kiss.’  And  shaking  her  little  finger  at 
him,  she  went  smiling  out  of  the  room. 


V 

They  all  went  to  their  rooms,  and  except  Anatole,  who  fell  asleep  the 
instant  he  got  into  bed,  no  one  could  get  to  sleep  for  a  long  while  that 
night.  ‘Can  he  possibly  be — my  husband,  that  stranger,  that  handsome, 
kind  man;  yes,  he  is  certainly  kind,’  thought  Princess  Marya,  and  a 
feeling  of  terror,  such  as  she  scarcely  ever  felt,  came  upon  her.  She  was 
afraid  to  look  round;  it  seemed  to  her  that  there  was  some  one  there — 
the  devil,  and  he  was  that  man  with  his  white  forehead,  black  eyebrows, 
and  red  lips. 

She  rang  for  her  maid  and  asked  her  to  sleep  in  her  room. 

Mademoiselle  Bourienne  walked  up  and  down  the  winter  garden  for 
a  long  while  that  evening,  in  vain  expectation  of  some  one ;  at  one  moment 
she  was  smiling  at  that  some  one,  the  next,  moved  to  tears  by  an  imaginary 
reference  to  ma  pauvrc  mere  reproaching  her  for  her  fall. 

The  little  princess  kept  grumbling  to  her  maid  that  her  bed  had  not 
been  properly  made.  She  could  not  lie  on  her  side  nor  on  her  face.  She 
felt  uncomfortable  and  ill  at  ease  in  every  position.  Her  burden  oppressed 
her,  oppressed  her  more  than  ever  that  night,  because  Anatole’s  presence 
had  carried  her  vividly  back  to  another  time  when  it  was  not  so,  and  she 
had  been  light  and  gay.  She  sat  in  a  low  chair  in  her  night-cap  and 
dressing-jacket.  Katya,  sleepy  and  dishevelled,  for  the  third  time  beat 
and  turned  the  heavy  feather  bed,  murmuring  something. 

‘I  told  you  it  was  all  in  lumps  and  hollows,’  the  little  princess  repeated; 
‘I  should  be  glad  enough  to  go  to  sleep,  so  it’s  not  my  fault.’ 

And  her  voice  quivered  like  a  child’s  when  it  is  going  to  cry. 

The  old  prince  too  could  not  sleep.  Tihon,  half  asleep,  heard  him 
pacing  angrily  up  and  down  and  blowing  his  nose.  The  old  prince  felt 
as  though  he  had  been  insulted  through  his  daughter.  The  insult  was 


WARANDPEACE  209 

the  more  bitter  because  it  concerned  not  himself,  but  another,  his  daugh¬ 
ter,  whom  he  loved  more  than  himself.  He  said  to  himself  that  he  would 
think  the  whole  matter  over  thoroughly  and  decide  what  was  right  and 
what  must  be  done,  but  instead  of  doing  so,  he  only  worked  up  his  irrita¬ 
tion  more  and  more. 

‘The  first  stray  comer  that  appears!  and  father  and  all  forgotten, 
and  she  runs  upstairs,  and  does  up  her  hair,  and  rigs  herself  out,  and 
doesn’t  know  what  she’s  doing!  She’s  glad  to  abandon  her  father!  And 
she  knew  I  should  notice  it.  Fr  .  .  .  fr  .  .  .  fr  .  .  .  And  don’t  I  see 
the  fool  has  no  eyes  but  for  Bourienne  (must  get  rid  of  her).  And  how 
can  she  have  so  little  pride,  as  not  to  see  it?  If  not  for  her  own  sake,  if 
she  has  no  pride,  at  least  for  mine.  I  must  show  her  that  the  blockhead 
doesn’t  give  her  a  thought,  and  only  looks  at  Bourienne.  She  has  no 
pride,  but  I’ll  make  her  see  it  .  .  .’ 

By  telling  his  daughter  that  she  was  making  a  mistake,  that  Anatole 
was  getting  up  a  flirtation  with  Mademoiselle  Bourienne,  the  old  prince 
knew  that  he  would  wound  her  self-respect,  and  so  his  object  (not  to  be 
parted  from  his  daughter)  would  be  gained,  and  so  at  this  reflection  he 
grew  calmer.  He  called  Tihon  and  began  undressing. 

‘The  devil  brought  them  here!’  he  thought,  as  Tihon  slipped  his  night¬ 
shirt  over  his  dried-up  old  body  and  his  chest  covered  with  grey  hair. 

‘I  didn’t  invite  them.  They  come  and  upset  my  life.  And  there’s  not 
much  of  it  left.  Damn  them!’  he  muttered,  while  his  head  was  hidden 
in  the  nightshirt.  Tihon  was  used  to  the  prince’s  habit  of  expressing  his 
thoughts  aloud,  and  so  it  was  with  an  unmoved  countenance  that  he  met 
the  wrathful  and  inquiring  face  that  emerged  from  the  nightshirt. 

‘Gone  to  bed?’  inquired  the  prince. 

Tihon,  like  all  good  valets,  indeed,  knew  by  instinct  the  direction 
of  his  master’s  thoughts.  He  guessed  that  it  was  Prince  Vassily  and  his 
son  who  were  meant. 

‘Their  honours  have  gone  to  bed  and  put  out  their  lights,  your  ex¬ 
cellency.’ 

‘They  had  no  reason,  no  reason  .  .  .’  the  prince  articulated  rapidly, 
and  slipping  his  feet  into  his  slippers  and  his  arms  into  his  dressing-gown, 
he  went  to  the  couch  on  which  he  always  slept. 

Although  nothing  had  been  said  between  Anatole  and  Mademoiselle 
Bourienne,  they  understood  each  other  perfectly  so  far  as  the  first  part 
of  the  romance  was  concerned,  the  part  previous  to  the  pauvre  mere 
episode.  They  felt  that  they  had  a  great  deal  to  say  to  each  other  in 
private,  and  so  from  early  morning  they  sought  an  opportunity  of  meet¬ 
ing  alone.  While  the  princess  was  away,  spending  her  hour  as  usual 
with  her  father,  Mademoiselle  Bourienne  was  meeting  Anatole  in  the 
winter  garden. 

That  day  it  was  with  even  more  than  her  usual  trepidation  that  Princess 
Marya  went  to  the  door  of  the  study.  It  seemed  to  her  not  only  that  every 
one  was  aware  that  her  fate  would  be  that  day  decided,  but  that  all  were 
aware  of  what  she  was  feeling  about  it.  She  read  it  in  Tihon’s  face  and 


210 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

in  the  face  of  Prince  Vassily’s  valet,  who  met  her  in  the  corridor  with 
hot  water,  and  made  her  a  low  bow. 

The  old  prince’s  manner  to  his  daughter  that  morning  was  extremely 
affectionate,  though  strained.  That  strained  expression  Princess  Marya 
knew  well.  It  was  the  expression  she  saw  in  his  face  at  the  moments 
when  his  withered  hands  were  clenched  with  vexation  at  Princess  Marya ’s 
not  understanding  some  arithmetical  problem,  and  he  would  get  up  and 
walk  away  from  her,  repeating  the  same  words  over  several  times  in  a  low 
voice. 

Pie  came  to  the  point  at  once  and  began  talking.  ‘A  proposal  has  been 
made  to  me  on  your  behalf,’  he  said,  with  an  unnatural  smile.  ‘I  dare 
say,  you  have  guessed,’  he  went  on  ‘that  Prince  Vassily  has  not  come 
here  and  brought  his  protege’  (for  some  unknown  reason  the  old  prince 
elected  to  refer  to  Anatole  in  this  way)  ‘for  the  sake  of  my  charms.  Yes¬ 
terday,  they  made  me  a  proposal  on  your  behalf.  And  as  you  know  my 
principles,  I  refer  the  matter  to  you.’ 

‘How  am  I  to  understand  you,  mon  pere?’  said  the  princess,  turning 
pale  and  red. 

‘How  understand  me!’  cried  her  father  angrily.  ‘Prince  Vassily  finds 
you  to  his  taste  as  a  daughter-in-law,  and  makes  you  a  proposal  for  his 
protege.  That’s  how  to  understand  it.  How  understand  it!  ...  Why, 
I  ask  you.’ 

‘I  don’t  know  how  you,  mon  pere  .  .  .’  the  princess  articulated  in  a 
whisper. 

‘I?  I?  what  have  I  to  do  with  it?  leave  me  out  of  the  question.  I  am 
not  going  to  be  married.  What  do  you  say?  that’s  what  it  s  desirable  to 
learn.’ 

The  princess  saw  that  her  father  looked  with  ill-will  on  the  project, 
but  at  that  instant  the  thought  had  occurred  to  her  that  now  or  never 
the  fate  of  her  life  would  be  decided.  She  dropped  her  eyes  so  as  to 
avoid  the  gaze  under  which  she  felt  incapable  of  thought,  and  capable 
of  nothing  but  her  habitual  obedience:  ‘My  only  desire  is  to  carry  out 
your  wishes,’  she  said;  ‘if  I  had  to  express  my  own  desire  .  .  .’ 

She  had  not  time  to  finish.  The  prince  cut  her  short.  ‘Very  good,  then!  ’ 
he  shouted.  ‘He  shall  take  you  with  your  dowry,  and  hook  on  Mademoiselle 
Bourienne  into  the  bargain.  She'll  be  his  wife,  while  you  .  .  .’  The  prince 
stopped.  He  noticed  the  effect  of  these  words  on  his  daughter.  She  had 
bowed  her  head  and  was  beginning  to  cry. 

‘Come,  come,  I  was  joking,  I  was  joking,’  he  said.  ‘Remember  one 
thing,  princess;  I  stick  to  my  principles,  that  a  girl  has  a  full  right  to 
choose.  And  I  give  you  complete  freedom.  Remember  one  thing;  the 
happiness  of  your  life  depends  on  your  decision.  No  need  to  talk  about  me.’ 

‘But  I  don’t  know  .  .  .  father.’ 

‘No  need  for  talking!  He’s  told  to,  and  he’s  ready  to  marry  any  one, 
but  you  are  free  to  choose.  ...  Go  to  your  own  room,  think  it  over,  and 
come  to  me  in  an  hour’s  time  and  tell  me  in  his  presence:  yes  or  no.  I 


2  1 1 


WAR  AND  PEACE 
know  you  will  pray  over  it.  Well,  pray  if  you  like.  Only  you’d  do  better 
to  think.  You  can  go.’ 

‘Yes  or  no,  yes  or  no,  yes  or  no!’  he  shouted  again  as  the  princess 
went  out  of  the  room,  reeling  in  a  sort  of  fog.  Her  fate  was  decided, 
and  decided  for  happiness.  But  what  her  father  had  said  about  Made¬ 
moiselle  Bourienne,  that  hint  was  horrible.  It  was  not  true,  of  course, 
but  still  it  was  horrible;  she  could  not  help  thinking  of  it.  She 
walked  straight  forward  through  the  winter  garden,  seeing  and  hearing 
nothing,  when  all  of  a  sudden  she  was  roused  by  the  familiar  voice 
of  Mademoiselle  Bourienne.  She  lifted  her  eyes,  and  only  two  paces 
before  her  she  saw  Anatole  with  his  arms  round  the  Frenchwoman, 
whispering  something  to  her.  With  a  terrible  expression  on  his  handsome 
face,  Anatole  looked  round  at  Princess  Marya,  and  did  not  for  the  first 
second  let  go  the  waist  of  Mademoiselle  Bourienne,  who  had  not  seen  her. 

‘Who’s  there?  What  do  you  want?  Wait  a  little!’  was  what  Anatole’s 
face  expressed.  Princess  Marya  gazed  blankly  at  them.  She  could  not 
believe  her  eyes.  At  last  Mademoiselle  Bourienne  shrieked  and  ran  away. 
With  a  gay  smile  Anatole  bowed  to  Princess  Marya,  as  though  inviting 
her  to  share  his  amusement  at  this  strange  incident,  and  with  a  shrug 
of  his  shoulders  he  went  to  the  door  that  led  to  his  apartment. 

An  hour  later  Tihon  came  to  summon  Princess  Marya  to  the  old  prince, 
and  added  that  Prince  Vassily  was  with  him.  When  Tihon  came  to  her, 
iYincess  Marya  was  sitting  on  the  sofa  in  her  own  room  holding  in  her 
arms  the  weeping  Mademoiselle  Bourienne.  Princess  Marya  was  softly 
stroking  her  head.  Her  beautiful  eyes  had  regained  all  their  luminous 
peace,  and  were  gazing  with  tender  love  and  commiseration  at  the  pretty 
little  face  of  Mademoiselle  Bourienne. 

‘Oh,  princess,  I  am  ruined  for  ever  in  your  heart,’  Mademoiselle 
Bourienne  was  saying. 

‘Why?  I  love  you  more  than  ever,’  said  Princess  Marya,  ‘and  I  will 
try  to  do  everything  in  my  power  for  your  happiness.’ 

‘But  you  despise  me,  you  who  are  so  pure,  you  will  never  understand 
this  frenzy  of  passion.  Ah,  it  is  only  my  poor  mother  .  .  .’ 

‘I  understand  everything,’  said  Princess  Marya,  smiling  mournfully. 
‘Calm  yourself,  my  dear.  I  am  going  to  my  father,’  she  said,  and  she 
went  out. 

When  the  princess  went  in,  Prince  Vassily  was  sitting  with  one  leg 
crossed  high  over  the  other,  and  a  snuff-box  in  his  hand.  There  was  a  smile 
of  emotion  on  his  face,  and  he  looked  as  though  moved  to  such  an 
extreme  point  that  he  could  but  regret  and  smile  at  his  own  sensibility. 
He  took  a  hasty  pinch  of  snuff. 

‘Ah,  my  dear,  my  dear!’  he  said,  getting  up  and  taking  her  by  both 
hands.  He  heaved  a  sigh,  and  went  on:  ‘My  son’s  fate  is  in  your  hands. 
Decide,  my  good  dear,  sweet  Marie,  whom  I  have  always  loved  like  a 
daughter.’  He  drew  back.  There  was  a  real  tear  in  his  eye. 

‘Fr  .  .  .  ffr  .  .  .’  snorted  the  old  prince.  ‘The  prince  in  his  protege’s 
.  .  .  his  son’s  name  makes  you  a  proposal.  Are  you  willing  or  not  to 


212 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

be  the  wife  of  Prince  Anatole  Kuragin?  You  say:  yes  or  no,’  he  shouted, 
'and  then  I  reserve  for  myself  the  right  to  express  my  opinion.  Yes,  my 
opinion,  and  nothing  but  my  opinion,’  added  the  old  prince,  to  Prince 
Vassily  in  response  to  his  supplicating  expression,  ‘Yes  or  no!’ 

‘My  wish,  mon  pcre,  is  never  to  leave  you;  never  to  divide  my  life 
from  yours.  I  do  not  wish  to  marry,’  she  said  resolutely,  glancing  with 
her  beautiful  eyes  at  Prince  Vassily  and  at  her  father. 

‘Nonsense,  fiddlesticks!  Nonsense,  nonsense!’  shouted  the  old  prince, 
frowning.  He  took  his  daughter’s  hand,  drew  her  towards  him  and  did 
not  kiss  her,  but  bending  over,  touched  her  forehead  with  his,  and  wrung 
the  hand  he  held  so  violently  that  she  winced  and  uttered  a  cry.  Prince 
Vassily  got  up. 

‘My  dear,  let  me  tell  you  that  this  is  a  moment  I  shall  never  forget, 
never;  but,  dear,  will  you  not  give  us  a  little  hope  of  touching  so  kind  and 
generous  a  heart.  Say  that  perhaps.  .  .  .  The  future  is  so  wide.  .  .  . 
Say:  perhaps.’ 

‘Prince,  what  I  have  said  is  ail  that  is  in  my  heart.  I  thank  you  for  the 
honor  you  do  me,  but  I  shall  never  be  your  son's  wife.’ 

‘Well,  then  it’s  all  over,  my  dear  fellow.  Very  glad  to  have  seen  you, 
very  glad  to  have  seen  you.  Go  to  your  room,  princess;  go  along  now,’  said 
the  old  prince.  ‘Very,  very  glad  to  have  seen  you,’  he  repeated,  embracing 
Prince  Vassily. 

‘My  vocation  is  a  different  one,’  Princess  Marya  was  thinking  to  her¬ 
self;  ‘my  vocation  is  to  be  happy  in  the  happiness  of  others,  in  the 
happiness  of  love  and  self-sacrifice.  And  at  any  cost  I  will  make  poor 
Amelie  happy.  She  loves  him  so  passionately.  She  is  so  passionately 
penitent.  I  will  do  everything  to  bring  about  their  marriage.  If  he  is  not 
rich  I  will  give  her  means,  I  will  beg  my  father,  I  will  beg  Andrey.  I  shall 
be  so  happy  when  she  is  his  wife.  She  is  so  unhappy,  a  stranger,  solitary 
and  helpless!  And,  my  God,  how  passionately  she  must  love  him  to  be 
able  to  forget  herself  so.  Perhaps  I  might  have  done  the  same!  .  .  .’ 
thought  Princess  Marya. 

VI 

It  was  a  long  while  since  the  Rostovs  had  had  news  of  their  Nikolushka. 
But  in  the  middle  of  the  winter  a  letter  was  handed  to  Count  Rostov,  on 
the  envelope  of  which  he  recognised  his  son’s  handwriting.  On  receiv¬ 
ing  the  letter  the  count,  in  alarm  and  in  haste,  ran  on  tiptoe  to  his  room, 
trying  to  escape  notice,  shut  himself  in  and  read  the  letter.  Anna 
Mihalovna  had  learned  (as  she  always  did  learn  all  that  passed  in  the 
house)  that  he  had  received  a  letter,  and  treading  softly,  she  went  in  to  the 
count  and  found  him  with  the  letter  in  his  hand,  sobbing  and  laughing 
at  once.  Anna  Mihalovna,  though  her  fortunes  had  been  looking  up,  was 
still  an  inmate  of  the  Rostov  household. 

‘My  dear  friend?’  Anna  Mihalovna  brought  out  in  a  voice  of  melancholy 
inquiry,  equally  ready  for  sympathy  in  any  direction.  The  count  sobbed 
more  violently. 


213 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Nikolushka  .  .  .  letter  .  .  .  wounded  ...  he  would  .  .  .  my  dear  .  .  . 
wounded  .  .  .  my  darling  boy  .  .  .  the  little  countess  .  .  .  promoted  .  .  . 
thank  God  .  .  .  how  are  we  to  tell  the  little  countess?’ 

Anna  Mihalovna  sat  down  by  his  side,  with  her  own  handkerchief 
wiped  the  tears  from  his  eyes  and  from  the  letter,  then  dried  her  own 
tears,  read  the  letter,  soothed  the  count,  and  decided  that  before  dinner 
and  before  tea  she  would  prepare  the  countess;  and  after  tea,  with  God’s 
help,  tell  her  all.  During  dinner  Anna  Mihalovna  talked  of  the  rumours 
from  the  war,  of  dear  Nikolay,  inquired  twice  when  his  last  letter  had 
been  received,  though  she  knew  perfectly  well,  and  observed  that  they 
might  well  be  getting  a  letter  from  him  to-day.  Every  time  that  the 
countess  began  to  be  uneasy  under  these  hints  and  looked  in  trepidation 
from  the  count  to  Anna  Mihalovna,  the  latter  turned  the  conversation 
in  the  most  unnoticeable  way  to  insignificant  subjects.  Natasha,  who 
was  of  all  the  family  the  one  most  gifted  with  the  faculty  of  catching  the 
shades  of  intonations,  of  glances,  and  expressions,  had  been  on  the  alert 
from  the  beginning  of  dinner,  and  was  certain  that  there  was  some  secret 
between  her  father  and  Anna  Mihalovna,  and  that  it  had  something  to 
do  with  her  brother,  and  that  Anna  Mihalovna  was  paving  the  way  for 
it.  Natasha  knew  how  easily  upset  her  mother  was  by  any  references  to 
news  from  Nikolushka,  and  in  spite  of  all  her  recklessness  she  did  not 
venture  at  dinner  to  ask  a  question.  But  she  was  too  much  excited  to  eat 
any  dinner  and  kept  wriggling  about  on  her  chair,  regardless  of  the 
protests  of  her  governess.  After  dinner  she  rushed  headlong  to  overtake 
Anna  Mihalovna,  and  in  the  divan-room  dashed  at  her  and  flung  herself 
on  her  neck:  ‘Auntie,  darling,  do  tell  me  what  it  is.’ 

‘Nothing,  my  dear.’ 

‘No,  darling,  sweet,  precious  peach,  I  won’t  leave  off;  I  know  you 
know  something.’ 

Anna  Mihalovna  shook  her  head.  ‘You  are  sharp,  my  child!’  she  said. 

‘A  letter  from  Nikolinka?  I’m  sure  of  it!’  cried  Natasha,  reading  an 
affirmative  answer  on  the  face  of  Anna  Mihalovna. 

‘But,  for  God’s  sake,  be  more  careful;  you  know  what  a  shock  it  may 
be  to  your  mamma.’ 

‘I  will  be,  I  will,  but  tell  me  about  it.  You  won’t?  Well,  then,  I’ll 
run  and  tell  her  this  minute.’ 

Anna  Mihalovna  gave  Natasha  a  brief  account  of  what  was  in  the 
letter,  on  condition  that  she  would  not  tell  a  soul. 

‘On  my  word  of  honour,’  said  Natasha,  crossing  herself,  ‘I  won’t  tell 
any  one,’  and  she  ran  at  once  to  Sonya.  ‘Nikolinka  .  .  .  wounded  .  .  . 
a  letter  .  .  she  proclaimed  in  gleeful  triumph. 

‘Nikolinka!’  was  all  Sonya  could  articulate,  instantly  turning  white. 
Natasha  seeing  the  effect  of  the  news  of  her  brother’s  wound  on  Sonya, 
for  the  first  time  felt  the  painful  aspect  of  the  news. 

She  rushed  at  Sonya,  hugged  her,  and  began  to  cry.  ‘A  little  wounded, 
but  promoted  to  be  an  officer;  he’s  all  right  now,  he  writes  himself,’  she 
said  through  her  tears. 


214  WAR  AND  PEACE 

'One  can  see  all  you  women  are  regular  cry-babies/  said  Petya,  strid¬ 
ing  with  resolute  steps  up  and  down  the  room;  ‘I’m  very  glad,  really 
very  glad,  that  my  brother  has  distinguished  himself  so.  You  all  start 
blubbering!  you  don’t  understand  anything  about  it.’  Natasha  smiled 
through  her  tears. 

‘You  haven’t  read  the  letter?’  asked  Sonya. 

‘No;  but  she  told  me  it  was  all  over,  and  that  he’s  an  officer  now  .  . 

‘Thank  God,’  said  Sonya,  crossing  herself.  ‘But  perhaps  she  was  deceiv¬ 
ing  you.  Let  us  go  to  mamma.’ 

Petya  had  been  strutting  up  and  down  in  silence. 

‘If  I  were  in  Nikolinka’s  place,  I’d  have  killed  a  lot  more  of  those 
Frenchmen,’  he  said,  ‘they’re  such  beasts!  I’d  have  killed  them  till 
there  was  a  regular  heap  of  them/  Petya  went  on. 

‘Hold  your  tongue,  Petya,  what  a  silly  you  are!  .  .  .’ 

‘I’m  not  a  silly;  people  are  silly  who  cry  for  trifles/  said  Petya. 

‘Do  you  remember  him?’  Natasha  asked  suddenly,  after  a  moment’s 
silence.  Sonya  smiled. 

‘Do  I  remember  Nikolinka?’ 

‘No,  Sonya,  but  do  you  remember  him  so  as  to  remember  him  thor¬ 
oughly,  to  remember  him  quite/  said  Natasha  with  a  strenuous  gesture, 
as  though  she  were  trying  to  put  into  her  words  the  most  earnest  mean¬ 
ing.  ‘And  I  do  remember  Nikolinka,  I  remember  him/  she  said.  ‘But  I 
don’t  remember  Boris.  I  don’t  remember  him  a  bit  .  .  .’ 

‘What?  You  don’t  remember  Boris?’  Sonya  queried  with  surprise. 

‘I  don’t  mean  I  don’t  remember  him.  I  know  what  he’s  like,  but  not 
as  I  remember  Nikolinka.  I  shut  my  eyes  and  I  can  see  him,  but  not 
Boris’  (she  shut  her  eyes),  ‘no,  nothing!’ 

‘Ah,  Natasha!’  said  Sonya,  looking  solemnly  and  earnestly  at  her 
friend,  as  though  she  considered  her  unworthy  to  hear  what  she  meant 
to  say,  and  was  saying  it  to  some  one  else  with  whom  joking  was  out  of 
the  question.  ‘I  have  come  to  love  your  brother  once  for  all,  and  whatever 
were  to  happen  to  him  and  to  me,  I  could  never  cease  to  love  him  all 
my  life.’ 

With  inquisitive,  wondering  eyes,  Natasha  gazed  at  Sonya,  and  she 
did  not  speak.  She  felt  that  what  Sonya  was  saying  was  the  truth,  that 
there  was  love  such  as  Sonya  was  speaking  of.  But  Natasha  had  never 
known  anything  like  it.  She  believed  that  it  might,  be  so,  but  she  did  not 
understand  it. 

‘Shall  you  write  to  him?’  she  asked.  Sonya  sank  into  thought.  How 
she  should  write  to  Nikolay,  and  whether  she  ought  to  write  to  him,  was 
a  question  that  worried  her.  Now  that  he  was  an  officer,  and  a  wounded 
hero,  would  it  be  nice  on  her  part  to  remind  him  of  herself,  and  as  it 
were  of  the  obligations  he  had  taken  on  himself  in  regard  to  her.  ‘I  don’t 
know.  I  suppose  if  he  writes  to  me  I  shall  write/  she  said,  blushing. 

‘And  you  won’t  be  ashamed  to  write  to  him?’ 

Sonya  smiled, 

‘No.’ 


WARANDPEACE  215 

‘And  I  should  be  ashamed  to  write  to  Boris,  and  Tm  not  going  to 
write.’ 

‘But  why  should  you  be  ashamed?’ 

‘Oh,  I  don’t  know.  I  feel  awkward,  ashamed.’ 

‘I  know  why  she’d  be  ashamed,’  said  Petya,  offended  at  Natasha’s 
previous  remark,  ‘because  she  fell  in  love  with  that  fat  fellow  in  spec¬ 
tacles’  ( this  was  how  Petya  used  to  describe  his  namesake,  the  new  Count 
Bezuhov) ;  ‘and  now  she’s  in  love  with  that  singing  fellow’  (Petya  meant 
Natasha’s  Italian  singing-master),  ‘that’s  why  she’s  ashamed.’ 

‘Petya,  you’re  a  stupid,’  said  Natasha. 

‘No  stupider  than  you,  ma’am,’  said  nine-year-old  Petya,  exactly  as 
though  he  had  been  an  elderly  brigadier. 

The  countess  had  been  prepared  by  Anna  Mihalovna’s  hints  during 
dinner.  On  returning  to  her  room  she  had  sat  down  in  a  low  chair  with 
her  eyes  fixed  on  the  miniature  of  her  son,  painted  on  the  lid  of  her 
snuff-box,  and  the  tears  started  into  her  eyes.  Anna  Mihalovna,  with 
the  letter,  approached  the  countess’s  room  on  tiptoe,  and  stood  still 
at  the  door. 

‘Don’t  come  in,’  she  said  to  the  old  count,  who  was  following  her; 
‘later,’  and  she  closed  the  door  after  her.  The  count  put  his  ear  to  the 
keyhole,  and  listened. 

At  first  he  heard  the  sound  of  indifferent  talk,  then  Anna  Mihalovna’s 
voice  alone,  uttering  a  long  speech,  then  a  shriek,  then  silence,  then  both 
voices  talking  at  once  with  joyful  intonations,  then  there  were  steps,  and 
Anna  Mihalovna  opened  the  door.  Her  face  wore  the  look  of  pride  of  an 
operator  who  has  performed  a  difficult  amputation,  and  invites  the  public 
in  to  appreciate  his  skill. 

‘It  is  done,’  she  said  to  the  count  triumphantly,  motioning  him  to  the 
countess,  who  was  holding  in  one  hand  the  snuff-box  with  the  portrait, 
in  the  other  the  letter,  and  pressing  her  lips  first  to  one  and  then  to  the 
other.  On  seeing  the  count,  she  held  out  her  arms  to  him,  embraced  his 
bald  head,  and  looked  again  over  the  bald  head  at  the  letter  and  the 
portrait,  and  in  order  again  to  press  them  to  her  lips,  slightly  repelled 
the  bald  head  from  her.  Vera,  Natasha,  Sonya,  and  Petya  came  into  the 
room,  and  the  reading  of  the  letter  began.  The  letter  briefly  described 
the  march  and  the  two  battles  in  which  Nikolushka  had  taken  part,  and 
the  receiving  of  his  commission,  and  said  that  he  kissed  the  hands  of  his 
mamma  and  papa,  begging  their  blessing,  and  sent  kisses  to  Vera, 
Natasha,  and  Petya.  He  sent  greetings,  too,  to  Monsieur  Schelling  and 
Madame  Schoss,  and  his  old  nurse,  and  begged  them  to  kiss  for  him  his 
darling  Sonya,  whom  he  still  loved  and  thought  of  the  same  as  ever. 
On  hearing  this,  Sonya  blushed  till  the  tears  came  into  her  eyes.  And 
unable  to  stand  the  eyes  fixed  upon  her,  she  ran  into  the  big  hall,  ran 
about  with  a  flushed  and  smiling  face,  whirled  round  and  round  and 
ducked  down,  making  her  skirts  into  a  balloon.  The  countess  was  crying. 

‘What  are  you  crying  about,  mamma?’  said  Vera.  ‘From  all  he  writes, 
we  ought  to  rejoice  instead  of  crying.’ 


2l6 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

This  was  perfectly  true,  but  the  count  and  the  countess  and  Natasha 
all  looked  at  her  reproachfully.  ‘And  who  is  it  that  she  takes  after!’ 
thought  the  countess. 

Nikolushka’s  letter  was  read  over  hundreds  of  times,  and  those  who 
were  considered  worthy  of  hearing  it  had  to  come  in  to  the  countess,  who 
did  not  let  it  go  out  of  her  hands.  The  tutors  went  in,  the  nurses,  Mitenka, 
and  several  acquaintances,  and  the  countess  read  the  letter  every  time 
with  fresh  enjoyment  and  every  time  she  discovered  from  it  new  virtues 
in  her  Nikolushka.  How  strange,  extraordinary,  and  joyful  it  was  to  her 
to  think  that  her  son — the  little  son,  whose  tiny  limbs  had  faintly  stirred 
within  her  twenty  years  ago,  for  whose  sake  she  had  so  often  quarrelled 
with  the  count,  who  would  spoil  him,  the  little  son,  who  had  first  learnt 
to  say  grusha,  and  then  had  learnt  to  say  baba — that  that  son  was  now 
in  a  foreign  land,  in  strange  surroundings,  a  manly  warrior,  alone  without 
help  or  guidance,  doing  there  his  proper  manly  work.  All  the  world-wide 
experience  of  ages,  proving  that  children  do  imperceptibly  from  the  cradle 
grow  up  into  men,  did  not  exist  for  the  countess.  The  growth  of  her  son 
had  been  for  her  at  every  stage  of  his  growth  just  as  extraordinary  as 
though  millions  of  millions  of  men  had  not  grown  up  in  the  same  way. 
Just  as,  twenty  years  before,  she  could  not  believe  that  the  little  creature 
that  was  lying  somewhere  under  her  heart,  would  one  day  cry  and  suck 
her  breast  and  learn  to  talk,  now  she  could  not  believe  that  the  same  little 
creature  could  be  that  strong,  brave  man,  that  paragon  of  sons  and  of 
men  that,  judging  by  this  letter,  he  was  now. 

‘What  style,  how  charmingly  he  describes  everything!’  she  said,  read¬ 
ing  over  the  descriptions  in  the  letter.  ‘And  what  soul!  Of  himself  not  a 
word  .  .  .  not  a  word!  A  great  deal  about  a  man  called  Denisov,  though 
he  was  himself,  I  dare  say,  braver  than  any  one.  He  doesn’t  write  a  word 
about  his  sufferings.  What  a  heart!  How  like  him  it  is!  How  he  thinks 
of  every  one!  No  one  forgotten.  I  always,  always  said,  when  he  was  no 
more  than  that  high,  I  always  used  to  say  .  .  .’ 

For  over  a  week  they  were  hard  at  work  preparing  a  letter  to  Niko¬ 
lushka  from  all  the  household,  writing  out  rough  copies,  copying  out  fair 
copies.  With  the  watchful  care  of  the  countess,  and  the  fussy  solicitude 
of  the  count,  all  sorts  of  necessary  things  were  got  together,  and  money, 
too,  for  the  equipment  and  the  uniform  of  the  young  officer.  Anna 
Mihalovna,  practical  woman,  had  succeeded  in  obtaining  special  patron¬ 
age  for  herself  and  her  son  in  the  army,  that  even  extended  to  their 
correspondence.  She  had  opportunities  of  sending  her  letters  to  the  Grand 
Duke  Konstantin  Pavlovitch,  who  wras  in  command  of  the  guards.  The 
Rostovs  assumed  that  ‘The  Russian  Guards  Abroad,’  was  quite  a  suffi¬ 
ciently  definite  address,  and  that  if  a  letter  reached  the  grand  duke  in 
command  of  the  guards,  there  was  no  reason  why  it  should  not  reach 
the  Pavlograd  regiment,  who  were  presumably  somewhere  in  the  same 
vicinity.  And  so  it  was  decided  to  send  off  their  letters,  and  money  by 
the  special  messenger  of  the  grand  duke  to  Boris,  and  Boris  would  have 
to  forward  them  to  Nikolushka.  There  were  letters  from  the  count,  the 


W  A  R  A  N  D  P  E  A  C  E  217 

countess,  Petya,  Vera,  Natasha,  and  Sonya,  a  sum  of  six  thousand 
roubles  for  his  equipment,  and  various  other  things  which  the  count  was 
sending  to  his  son. 


VII 

On  the  12th  of  November,  Kutuzov’s  army,  encamped  near  Olmiitz,  was 
preparing  to  be  reviewed  on  the  following  day  by  the  two  Emperors — 
the  Russian  and  the  Austrian.  The  guards,  who  had  only  just  arrived 
from  Russia,  spent  a  night  fifteen  versts  from  Olmiitz,  and  at  ten  o’clock 
the  next  morning  went  straight  to  be  reviewed  in  the  Olmiitz  plain. 

That  day  Nikolay  Rostov  had  received  a  note  from  Boris  informing 
him  that  the  Ismailovsky  regiment  was  quartered  for  the  night  fifteen 
versts  from  Olmiitz,  and  that  he  wanted  to  see  him  to  give  him  a  letter 
and  some  money.  The  money  Rostov  particularly  needed  just  now,  when 
the  troops  after  active  service  were  stationed  near  Olmiitz,  and  the  camp 
swarmed  with  well-equipped  canteen  keepers  and  Austrian  Jews,  offering 
all  kinds  of  attractions.  The  Pavlograd  hussars  had  been  keeping  up  a 
round  of  gaiety,  fetes  in  honour  of  the  promotions  received  in  the  field, 
and  excursions  to  Olmiitz  to  a  certain  Caroline  la  Hongroise,  who  had 
recently  opened  a  restaurant  there  with  girls  as  waiters.  Rostov  had  just 
been  celebrating  his  commission  as  a  cornet;  he  had  bought  Denisov's 
horse  Bedouin,  too,  and  was,  in  debt  all  round  to  his  comrades  and  the 
canteen  keepers.  On  getting  the  note  from  Boris,  Rostov  rode  into  Olmiitz 
with  a  comrade,  dined  there,  drank  a  bottle  of  wine,  and  rode  on  alone  to 
the  guards’  camp  to  find  the  companion  of  his  childhood.  Rostov  had  not 
yet  got  his  uniform.  Pie  was  wearing  a  shabby  ensign’s  jacket  with  a 
private  soldier’s  cross,  equally  shabby  riding-trousers  lined  with  worn 
leather,  and  an  officer’s  sabre  with  a  sword-knot.  The  horse  he  was  riding 
was  of  the  Don  breed,  bought  of  a  Cossack  on  the  march.  A  crushed  hus¬ 
sars’  cap  was  stuck  jauntily  back  on  one  side  of  his  head.  As  he  rode  up 
to  the  camp  of  the  Ismailovsky  regiment,  he  was  thinking  of  how  he 
would  impress  Boris  and  all  his  comrades  in  the  guards  by  looking  sc 
thoroughly  a  hussar  who  has  been  under  lire  and  roughed  it  at  the  front. 

The  guards  had  made  their  march  as  though  it  were  a  pleasure  excur¬ 
sion,  priding  themselves  on  their  smartness  and  discipline.  They  moved 
by  short  stages,  their  knapsacks  were  carried  in  the  transport  waggons, 
and  at  every  halt  the  Austrian  government  provided  the  officers  with  ex¬ 
cellent  dinners.  The  regiments  made  their  entry  into  towns  and  their  exit 
from  them  with  bands  playing,  and,  according  to  the  grand  duke’s  order, 
the  whole  march  had  (a  point  on  which  the  guards  prided  themselves) 
been  performed  by  the  soldiers  in  step,  the  officers  too'  walking  in  their 
proper  places.  Boris  had  throughout  the  march  walked  and  stayed  with 
Berg,  who  was  by  this  time  a  captain.  Berg,  who  had  received  his  com¬ 
pany  on  the  march,  had  succeeded  in  gaining  the  confidence  of  his  su- 
I  perior  officers  by  his  conscientiousness  and  accuracy,  and  had  established 
his  financial  position  on  a  very  satisfactory  basis.  Boris  had  during  the 


2lS 


WAR  AND  PEACE 
same  period  made  the  acquaintance  of  many  persons  likely  to  be  of  use 
to  him,  and  by  means  of  a  letter  of  recommendation  brought  from  Pierre, 
had  made  the  acquaintance  of  Prince  Andrey  Bolkonsky,  through  whom 
he  had  hopes  of  obtaining  a  post  on  the  staff  of  the  commander-in-chief. 
Berg  and  Boris,  who  had  rested  well  after  the  previous  day’s  march,  were 
sitting  smartly  and  neatly  dressed,  in  the  clean  quarters  assigned  them, 
playing  draughts  at  a  round  table.  Berg  was  holding  between  his  knees  a 
smoking  pipe.  Boris,  with  his  characteristic  nicety,  was  building  the 
draughts  into  a  pyramid  with  his  delicate,  white  fingers,  while  he  waited 
for  Berg  to  play.  He  was  watching  his  partner’s  face,  obviously  thinking 
of  the  game,  his  attention  concentrated,  as  it  always  was,  on  what  he  was 
engaged  in. 

‘Well,  how  are  you  going  to  get  out  of  that?’  he  said. 

‘I  am  going  to  try,’  answered  Berg,  touching  the  pieces,  and  taking  his 
hand  away  again. 

At  that  instant  the  door  opened. 

‘Here  he  is  at  last!’  shouted  Rostov.  ‘And  Berg  too.  Ah,  petisanfan, 
alley  cooshey  dormirl’  he  cried,  repeating  the  saying  of  their  old  nurse’s 
that  had  once  been  a  joke  with  him  and  Boris. 

‘Goodness,  how  changed  you  are!’  Boris  got  up  to  greet  Rostov,  but 
as  he  rose,  he  did  not  forget  to  hold  the  board,  and  to  put  back  the  falling 
pieces.  He  was  about  to  embrace  his  friend,  but  Nikolay  drew  back  from 
him.  With  that  peculiarly  youthful  feeling  of  fearing  beaten  tracks,  of 
wanting  to  avoid  imitation,  to  express  one’s  feelings  in  some  new  way  of 
one’s  own,  so  as  to  escape  the  forms  often  conventionally  used  by  one’s 
elders,  Nikolay  wanted  to  do  something  striking  on  meeting  his  friend. 
He  wanted  somehow  to  give  him  a  pinch,  to  give  Berg  a  shove,  anything 
rather  than  to  kiss,  as  people  always  did  on  such  occasions.  Boris,  on  the 
contrary,  embraced  Rostov  in  a  composed  and  friendly  manner,  and  gave 
him  three  kisses. 

It  was  almost  six  months  since  they  had  seen  each  other.  And  being 
at  the  stage  when  young  men  take  their  first  steps  along  the  path  of 
life,  each  found  immense  changes  in  the  other,  quite  new  reflections  of 
the  different  society  in  which  they  had  taken  those  first  steps.  Both  had 
changed  greatly  since  they  were  last  together,  and  both  wanted  to  show 
as  soon  as  possible  what  a  change  had  taken  place. 

‘Ah,  you  damned  floor  polishers!  Smart  and  clean,  as  if  you’d  been 
enjoying  yourselves;  not  like  us  poor  devils  at  the  front,’  said  Rostov, 
with  martial  swagger,  and  with  baritone  notes  in  his  voice  that  were  new 
to  Boris.  He  pointed  to  his  mud-stained  riding-breeches.  The  German 
woman  of  the  house  popped  her  head  out  of  a  door  at  Rostov’s  loud  voice. 

‘A  pretty  woman,  eh?’  said  he,  winking. 

‘Why  do  you  shout  so?  You  are  frightening  them,’  said  Boris.  ‘I  didn’t 
expect  you  to-day,’  he  added.  ‘I  only  sent  the  note  off, to  you  yesterday 
— through  an  adjutant  of  Kutuzov’s,  who’s  a  friend  of  mine — Bolkonsky. 
I  didn’t  expect  he  would  send  it  to  you  so  quickly.  Well,  how  are  you? 
Been  under  fire  already?’  asked  Boris. 


219 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

Without  answering,  Rostov,  in  soldierly  fashion,  shook  the  cross  of 
St.  George  that  hung  on  the  cording  of  his  uniform,  and  pointing  to  his 
arm  in  a  sling,  he  glanced  smiling  at  Berg. 

‘As  you  see,’  he  said. 

‘To  be  sure,  yes,  yes,’  said  Boris,  smiling,  ‘and  we  have  had  a  capital 
march  here  too.  You  know  his  Highness  kept  all  the  while  with  our 
regiment,  so  that  we  had  every  convenience  and  advantage.  In  Poland, 
the  receptions,  the  dinners,  the  balls! — I  can’t  tell  you.  And  the  Tsare¬ 
vitch  was  very  gracious  to  all  our  officers.’  And  both  the  friends  began 
describing;  one,  the  gay  revels  of  the  hussars  and  life  at  the  front;  the 
other,  the  amenities  and  advantages  of  service  under  the  command  of 
royalty. 

‘Oh,  you  guards,’  said  Rostov.  ‘But,  I  say,  send  for  some  wine.’ 

Boris  frowned. 

‘If  you  really  want  some,’  he  said.  And  he  went  to  the  bedstead,  took 
a  purse  from  under  the  clean  pillows,  and  ordered  some  wine.  ‘Oh,  and  I 
have  a  letter  and  money  to  give  you,’  he  added. 

Rostov  took  the  letter,  and  flinging  the  money  on  the  sofa,  put  both 
his  elbows  on  the  table  and  began  reading  it.  He  read  a  few  lines,  and 
looked  wrathfully  at  Berg.  Meeting  his  eyes,  Rostov  hid  his  face  with 
the  letter. 

‘They  sent  you  a  decent  lot  of  money,  though,’  said  Berg,  looking  at 
the  heavy  bag,  that  sank  into  the  sofa.  ‘But  we  manage  to  scrape  along 
on  our  pay,  count,  I  can  tell  you  in  my  own  case.  .  .  .’ 

‘I  say,  Berg,  my  dear  fellow,’  said  Rostov;  ‘when  you  get  a  letter  from 
home  and  meet  one  of  your  own  people,  whom  you  want  to  talk  every¬ 
thing  over  with,  and  I’m  on  the  scene.  I’ll  clear  out  at  once,  so  as  not  to 
be  in  your  way.  Do  you  hear,  be  off,  please,  anywhere,  anywhere  .  .  . 
to  the  devil!  ’  he  cried,  and  immediately  seizing  him  by  the  shoulder,  and 
looking  affectionately  into  his  face,  evidently  to  soften  the  rudeness  of 
his  words,  he  added:  ‘you  know,  you’re  not  angry,  my  dear  fellow,  I 
speak  straight  from  the  heart  to  an  old  friend  like  you.’ 

‘Why,  of  course,  count,  I  quite  understand,’  said  Berg,  getting  up  and 
speaking  in  his  deep  voice. 

‘You  might  go  and  see  the  people  of  the  house;  they  did  invite  you,’ 
added  Boris. 

Berg  put  on  a  spotless  clean  coat,  brushed  his  lovelocks  upwards  be¬ 
fore  the  looking-glass,  in  the  fashion  worn  by  the  Tsar  Alexander  Pav- 
lovitch,  and  having  assured  himself  from  Rostov’s  expression  that  his 
coat  had  been  observed,  he  went  out  of  the  room  with  a  bland  smile. 

‘Ah,  what  a  beast  I  am,  though,’  said  Rostov,  as  he  read  the  letter. 

‘Oh,  why?’ 

,  ‘Ah,  what  a  pig  I’ve  been,  never  once  to  have  written  and  to  have 
?iven  them  such  a  fright.  Ah,  what  a  pig  I  am!’  he  repeated,  flushing  all 
At  once.  ‘Well,  did  you  send  Gavrila  for  some  wine?  That’s  right,  let’s 
| lave  some! ’  said  he. 

With  the  letters  from  his  family  there  had  been  inserted  a  letter  of 


220 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

recommendation  to  Prince  Bagration,  by  Anna  Mihalovna’s  advice, 
which  Countess  Rostov  had  obtained  through  acquaintances,  and  had 
sent  to  her  son,  begging  him  to  take  it  to  its  address,  and  to  make  use 
of  it. 

‘What  nonsense!  Much  use  to  me,’  said  Rostov,  throwing  the  letter 
under  the  table. 

‘What  did  you  throw  that  away  for?’  asked  Boris. 

‘It’s  a  letter  of  recommendation  of  some  sort;  what  the  devil  do  I 
want  with  a  letter  like  that!’ 

‘What  the  devil  do  you  want  with  it?’  said  Boris,  picking  it  up  and 
reading  the  address;  ‘that  letter  would  be  of  great  use  to  you.’ 

‘I’m  not  in  want  of  anything,  and  I’m  not  going  to  be  an  adjutant 
to  anybody.’ 

‘Why  not?’  asked  Boris. 

‘A  lackey’s  duty.’ 

‘You  are  just  as  much  of  an  idealist  as  ever,  I  see,’  said  Boris,  shaking 
his  head. 

‘And  you’re  just  as  much  of  a  diplomat.  But  that’s  not  the  point.  .  .  . 
Come,  how  are  you?’  asked  Rostov. 

‘Why,  as  you  see.  So  far  everything’s  gone  well;  but  I’ll  own  I  should 
be  very  glad  to  get  a  post  as  adjutant,  and  not  to  stay  in  the  line.’ 

‘What  for?’ 

‘Why,  because  if  once  one  goes  in  for  a  military  career,  one  ought 
to  try  to  make  it  as  successful  a  career  as  one  can.’ 

‘Oh,  that’s  it,’  said  Rostov,  unmistakably  thinking  of  something  else. 
He  looked  intently  and  inquiringly  into  his  friend’s  eyes,  apparently 
seeking  earnestly  the  solution  of  some  question. 

Old  Gavrila  brought  in  the  wine. 

‘Shouldn’t  we  send  for  Alphonse  Karlitch  now?’  said  Boris.  ‘He’ll 
drink  with  you,  but  I  can’t.! 

‘Send  for  him,  send  for  him.  Well,  how  do  you  get  on  with  the  Teuton?’ 
said  Rostov,  with  a  contemptuous  smile. 

‘He’s  a  very,  very  nice,  honest,  and  pleasant  fellow,’  said  Boris. 

Rostov  looked  intently  into  Boris’s  face  once  more  and  he  sighed. 
Berg  came  back,  and  over  the  bottle  the  conversation  between  the  three 
officers  became  livelier.  The  guardsmen  told  Rostov  about  their  march 
and  how  they  had  been  feted  in  Russia,  in  Poland,  and  abroad.  They 
talked  of  the  sayings  and  doings  of  their  commander,  the  Grand  Duke, 
and  told  anecdotes  of  his  kind-heartedness  and  his  irascibility.  Berg 
was  silent,  as  he  always  was,  when  the  subject  did  not  concern  him 
personally,  but  a  propos  of  the  irascibility  of  the  Grand  Duke  he  related 
with  gusto  how  he  had  had  some  words  with  the  Grand  Duke  in  Galicia, 
when  his  Highness  had  inspected  the  regiments  and  had  flown  into  a 
rage  over  some  irregularity  in  their  movements.  With  a  bland  smile  on 
his  face  he  described  how  the  Grand  Duke  had  ridden  up  to  him  in  a 
violent  rage,  shouting  ‘Arnauts,’  (‘Arnauts’  was  the  Tsarevitch’s  favourite 
term  of  abuse  when  he  was  in  a  passion),  and  how  he  had  asked  for  the 


221 


WAR  AND  PEACE 
captain.  ‘Would  you  believe  me,  count,  I  wasn’t  in  the  least  alarmed, 
because  I  knew  I  was  right.  Without  boasting,  you  know,  count,  I  may 
say  I  know  all  the  regimental  drill-book  by  heart,  and  the  standing 
orders,  too,  I  know  as  I  know  “Our  Father  that  art  in  Heaven.”  And  so 
that’s  how  it  is,  count,  there’s  never  the  slightest  detail  neglected  in  my 
company.  So  my  conscience  was  at  ease.  I  came  forward.’  (Berg  stood 
up  and  mimicked  how  he  had  come  forward  with  his  hand  to  the  beak 
of  his  cap.  It  would  certainly  have  been  difficult  to  imagine  more  re¬ 
spectfulness  and  more  self-complacency  in  a  face.)  ‘Well,  he  scolded, 
and  scolded,  and  rated  at  me,  and  shouted  his  “Arnauts,”  and  damns, 
and  “to  Siberia,”  ’  said  Berg,  with  a  subtle  smile.  ‘I  knew  I  was  right, 
and  so  I  didn’t  speak;  how  could  I,  count?  “Why  are  you  dumb?”  he 
shouted.  Still  I  held  my  tongue,  and  what  do  you  think,  count?  Next 
day  there  was  nothing  about  it  in  the  orders  of  the  day;  that's  what 
comes  of  keeping  one’s  head.  Yes,  indeed,  count,’  said  Berg,  pulling  at 
his  pipe  and  letting  off  rings  of  smoke. 

‘Yes,  that’s  capital,’  said  Rostov,  smiling;  but  Boris,  seeing  that 
Rostov  was  disposed  to  make  fun  of  Berg,  skilfully  turned  the  conversa¬ 
tion.  He  begged  Rostov  to  tell  them  how  and  where  he  had  been  wounded. 
That  pleased  Rostov,  and  he  began  telling  them,  getting  more  and  more 
eager  as  he  talked.  He  described  to  them  his  battle  at  Schongraben 
exactly  as  men  who  have  taken  part  in  battles  always  do  describe  them, 
that  is,  as  they  would  have  liked  them  to  be,  as  they  have  heard  them 
described  by  others,  and  as  sounds  well,  but  not  in  the  least  as  it  really 
had  been.  Rostov  was  a  truthful  young  man;  he  would  not  have  inten¬ 
tionally  told  a  lie.  He  began  with  the  intention  of  telling  everything  pre¬ 
cisely  as  it  had  happened,  but  imperceptibly,  unconsciously,  and  in¬ 
evitably  he  passed  into  falsehood.  If  he  had  told  the  truth  to  his 
listeners,  who,  like  himself,  had  heard  numerous  descriptions  of  cavalry 
charges,  and  had  formed  a  definite  idea  of  what  a  charge  was  like  and 
were  expecting  a  similar  description,  either  they  would  not  have  believed 
him,  or  worse  still,  would  have  assumed  that  Rostov  was  himself  to 
blame  for  not  having  performed  the  exploits  usually  performed  by  those 
who  describe  cavalry  charges.  He  could  not  tell  them  simply  that  they 
had  all  been  charging  full  gallop,  that  he  had  fallen  off  his  horse, 
sprained  his  arm,  and  run  with  all  his  might  away  from  the  French  into 
the  copse.  And  besides,  to  tell  everything  exactly  as  it  happened,  he 
would  have  had  to  exercise  considerable  self-control  in  order  to  tell 
nothing  beyond  what  happened.  To  tell  the  truth  is  a  very  difficult  thing; 
and  young  people  are  rarely  capable  of  it.  His  listeners  expected  to  hear 
how  he  had  been  all  on  fire  with  excitement,  had  forgotten  himself,  had 
flown  like  a  tempest  on  the  enemy’s  square,  had  cut  his  way  into  it, 
hewing  men  down  right  and  left,  how  a  sabre  had  been  thrust  into  his 
flesh,  how  he  had  fallen  unconscious,  and  so  on.  And  he  described  all 
that.  In  the  middle  of  his  tale,  just  as  he  was  saying:  ‘You  can’t  fancy 
what  a  strange  frenzy  takes  possession  of  one  at  the  moment  of  the 
charge,’  there  walked  into  the  room  Prince  Andrey  Bolkonsky,  whom 


222  WARANDPEACE 

Boris  was  expecting.  Prince  Andrey  liked  to  encourage  and  assist  younger 
men,  he  was  flattered  at  being  applied  to  for  his  influence,  and  well 
disposed  to  Boris,  who  had  succeeded  in  making  a  favourable  impres¬ 
sion  on  him  the  previous  day;  he  was  eager  to  do  for  the  young  man 
what  he  desired.  Having  been  sent  with  papers  from  Kutuzov  to  the 
Tsarevitch,  he  called  upon  Boris,  hoping  to  find  him  alone.  When  he 
came  into  the  room  and  saw  the  hussar  with  his  soldierly  swagger  de¬ 
scribing  his  warlike  exploits  (Prince  Andrey  could  not  endure  the  kind 
of  men  who  are  fond  of  doing  so),  he  smiled  cordially  to  Boris,  but 
frowned  and  dropped  his  eyelids  as  he  turned  to  Rostov  with  a  slight 
bow.  Wearily  and  languidly  he  sat  down  on  the  sofa,  regretting  that  he 
had  dropped  into  such  undesirable  society.  Rostov,  perceiving  it,  grew 
hot,  but  he  did  not  care;  this  man  was  nothing  to  him.  Glancing  at  Boris, 
he  saw,  however,  that  he  too  seemed  ashamed  of  the  valiant  hussar.  In 
spite  of  Prince  Andrey’s  unpleasant,  ironical  manner,  in  spite  of  the  ! 
disdain  with  which  Rostov,  from  his  point  of  view  of  a  fighting  man  in  1 
the  regular  army,  regarded  the  whole  race  of  staff-adjutants  in  general — 
the  class  to  which  the  new-comer  unmistakably  belonged — he  yet  felt 
abashed,  reddened,  and  subsided  into  silence.  Boris  inquired  what  news 
there  was  on  the  staff  and  whether  he  could  not  without  indiscretion 
tell  them  something  about  our  plans. 

‘Most  likely  they  will  advance,’  answered  Bolkonsky,  obviously  un-  ' 
willing  to  say  more  before  outsiders.  Berg  seized  the  opportunity  to  in- 
quire  with  peculiar  deference  whether  the  report  was  true,  as  he  had  I 
heard,  that  the  allowance  of  forage  to  captains  of  companies  was  to  be  , 
doubled.  To  this  Prince  Andrey  replied  with  a  smile  that  he  could  not 
presume  to  offer  an  opinion  on  state  questions  of  such  gravity,  and  Berg 
laughed  with  delight. 

‘As  to  your  business,’  Prince  Andrey  turned  again  to  Boris,  ‘we  will 
talk  of  it  later,’  and  he  glanced  at  Rostov.  ‘You  come  to  me  after  the 
review,  and  we’ll  do  what  we  can.’  And  looking  round  the  room  he 
addressed  Rostov,  whose  childish,  uncontrollable  embarrassment,  pass¬ 
ing  now  into  anger,  he  did  not  think  fit  to  notice:  ‘You  were  talking,  I 
think,  about  the  Schongraben  action?  Were  you  there?’ 

‘I  was  there,’  Rostov  said  in  a  tone  of  exasperation,,  which  he  seemed 
to  intend  as  an  insult  to  the  adjutant.  Bolkonsky  noticed  the  hussar’s 
state  of  mind,  and  it  seemed  to  amuse  him.  He  smiled  rather  disdain¬ 
fully. 

‘Ah!  there  are  a  great  many  stories  now  about  that  engagement.’ 

‘Yes,  stories!’  said  Rostov  loudly,  looking  from  Boris  to  Bolkonsky 
with  eyes  full  of  sudden  fury,  ‘a  great  many  stories,  I  dare  say,  but  our 
stories  are  the  stories  of  men  who  have  been  under  the  enemy’s  fire,  our 
stories  have  some  weight,  they’re  not  the  tales  of  little  staff  upstarts, 
who  draw  pay  for  doing  nothing.’ 

‘The  class  to  which  you  assume  me  to  belong,’  said  Prince  Andrey,  with 
a  calm  and  particularly  amiable  smile. 


WAR  AND  PEACE  223 

A  strange  feeling  of  exasperation  was  mingled  in  Rostov’s  heart  with 
respect  for  the  self-possession  of  this  person. 

‘I’m  not  talking  about  you,’  he  said;  ‘I  don’t  know  you,  and,  I’ll  own. 
I  don’t  want  to.  I’m  speaking  of  staff-officers  in  general.’ 

‘Let  me  tell  you  this,’  Prince  Andrey  cut  him  short  in  a  tone  of  quiet 
authority,  ‘you  are  trying  to  insult  me,  and  I’m  ready  to  agree  with  you 
that  it  is  very  easy  to  do  so,  if  you  haven’t  sufficient  respect  for  yourself. 
But  you  will  agree  that  the  time  and  place  is  ill-chosen  for  this  squabble. 
In  a  day  or  two  we  have  to  take  part  in  a  great  and  more  serious  duel, 
and  besides,  Drubetskoy,  who  tells  me  he  is  an  old  friend  of  yours,  is 
in  no  way  to  blame  because  my  physiognomy  is  so  unfortunate  as  to 
displease  you.  However,’  he  said,  getting  up,  ‘you  know  my  name,  and 
know  where  to  find  me;  but  don’t  forget,’  he  added,  ‘that  I  don’t  con¬ 
sider  either  myself  or  you  insulted,  and  my  advice,  as  a  man  older  than 
you,  is  to  let  the  matter  drop.  So  on  Friday,  after  the  review,  I  shall 
expect  you,  Drubetskoy;  good-bye  till  then,’  cried  Prince  Andrey,  and 
he  went  out,  bowing  to  both. 

Rostov  only  bethought  him  of  what  he  ought  to  have  answered  when 
he  had  gone.  And  he  was  more  furious  still  that  he  had  not  thought 
of  saying  it.  He  ordered  his  horse  to  be  brought  round  at  once,  and  tak¬ 
ing  leave  of  Boris  coldly,  he  rode  back.  Whether  to  ride  to-morrow  to 
headquarters  and  challenge  that  conceited  adjutant,  or  whether  really 
to  let  the  matter  drop,  was  the  question  that  worried  him  all  the  way. 
At  one  moment  he  thought  vindictively  how  he  would  enjoy  seeing  the 
fright  that  feeble,  little,  conceited  fellow  would  be  in,  facing  his  pistol, 
at  the  next  he  was  feeling  with  surprise  that,  of  all  the  men  he  knew, 
there  was  no  one  he  would  be  more  glad  to  have  for  his  friend  than  that 
detested  little  adjutant. 

VIII 

The  day  after  Rostov’s  visit  to  Boris,  the  review  took  place  of  the 
Austrian  and  Russian  troops,  both  the  reinforcements  freshly  arrived 
from  Russia  and  the  troops  that  had  been  campaigning  with  Kutuzov. 
Both  Emperors,  the  Russian  Emperor  with  the  Tsarevitch,  and  the 
Austrian  with  the  archduke,  were  to  assist  at  this  review  of  the  allied 
forces,  making  up  together  an  army  of  eighty  thousand  men.  From  early 
morning  the  troops,  all  smart  and  clean,  had  been  moving  about  the 
plain  before  the  fortress.  Thousands  of  legs  and  bayonets  moved  with 
flags  waving,  and  halted  at  the  word  of  command,  turned  and  formed  at 
regular  intervals,  moving  round  other  similar  masses  of  infantry  in  dif¬ 
ferent  uniforms.  With  the  rhythmic  tramp  of  hoofs,  the  smartly  dressed 
:avalry  in  blue,  and  red,  and  green  laced  uniforms  rode  jingling  by  on 
black  and  chestnut  and  grey  horses,  the  bandsmen  in  front  covered  with 
embroidery.  Between  the  infantry  and  the  cavalry  the  artillery,  in  a 
ong  line  of  polished,  shining  cannons  quivering  on  their  carriages,  crawled 
slowly  by  with  their  heavy,  brazen  sound,  and  their  peculiar  smell  from 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


the  linstocks,  and  ranged  themselves  in  their  places.  Not  only  the 
generals  in  their  full  parade  uniform,  wearing  scarves  and  all  their 
decorations,  with  waists,  portly  and  slim  alike,  pinched  in  to  the  utter¬ 
most,  and  red  necks  squeezed  into  stiff  collars,  not  only  the  pomaded, 
dandified  officers,  but  every  soldier,  with  his  clean,  washed,  and  shaven 
face,  and  weapons  polished  to  the  utmost  possibility  of  glitter,  every 
horse  rubbed  down  till  its  coat  shone  like  satin,  and  every  hair  in  its 
moistened  mane  lay  in  place — all  alike  felt  it  no  joking  matter,  felt  that 
something  grave  and  solemn  was  going  forward.  Every  general  and  every 
soldier  was  conscious  of  his  own  insignificance,  feeling  himself  but  a 
grain  of  sand  in  that  ocean  of  humanity,  and  at  the  same  time  was  con¬ 
scious  of  his  might,  feeling  himself  a  part  of  that  vast  whole.  There 
had  been  strenuous  exertion  and  bustle  since  early  morning,  and  by  ten 
o’clock  everything  was  in  the  required  order.  The  rows  of  soldiers  were 
standing  on  the  immense  plain.  The  whole  army  was  drawn  out  in  three 
lines.  In  front  was  the  cavalry;  behind,  the  artillery;  still  further  back, 
the  infantry. 

Between  each  two  ranks  of  soldiery  there  was  as  it  were  a  street.  The 
army  was  sharply  divided  into  three  parts:  Kutuzov’s  army  (on  the  right 
flank  of  which  stood  the  Pavlograd  hussars  in  the  front  line),  the  regi¬ 
ments  of  the  line  and  the  guards  that  had  arrived  from  Russia,  and  the 
Austrian  troops.  But  all  stood  in  one  line,  under  one  command,  and  in 
similar  order. 

Like  a  wind  passing  over  the  leaves,  the  excited  whisper  fluttered  over 
the  plain:  ‘They  are  coming!  they  are  coming!’  There  was  a  sound  of 
frightened  voices,  and  the  hurried  men’s  fuss  over  the  last  finishing 
touches  ran  like  a  wave  over  the  troops. 

A  group  came  into  sight  moving  towards  them  from  Olmutz  in  front 
of  them.  And  at  the  same  moment,  though  there  had  been  no  wind,  a 
faint  breeze  fluttered  over  the  army,  and  stirred  the  streamers  on  the 
lances,  and  sent  the  unfurled  flags  flapping  against  their  flag-staffs.  It 
looked  as  though  in  this  slight  movement  the  army  itself  were  expressing 
its  joy  at  the  approach  of  the  Emperors.  One  voice  was  heard  saying: 
‘Steady!’  Then  like  cocks  at  sunrise,  voices  caught  up  and  repeated  the 
sound  hi  different  parts  of  the  plain.  And  all  sank  into  silence. 

In  the  deathlike  stillness,  the  only  sound  was  the  tramp  of  hoofs.  It 
was  the  Emperors’  suite.  The  Emperors  rode  towards  the  flank,  and  the 
trumpets  of  the  first  cavalry  regiment  began  playing  a  march.  It  seemed 
as  though  the  sound  did  not  come  from  the  trumpeters,  but  that  the 
army  itself  was  naturally  giving  forth  this  music  in  its  delight  at  the 
Emperors’  approach.  Through  the  music  could  be  distinctly  heard  one 
voice,  the  genial,  youthful  voice  of  the  Emperor  Alexander.  He  uttered 
some  words  of  greeting,  and  the  first  regiment  boomed  out:  ‘Hurrah!’ 
with  a  shout  so  deafening,  so  prolonged,  so  joyful,  that  the  men  them¬ 
selves  felt  awestruck  at  the  multitude  and  force  of  the  mass  they  made  up. 

Rostov,  standing  in  the  foremost  ranks  of  Kutuzov’s  army,  which  the 
Tsar  approached  first  of  all,  was  possessed  by  the  feeling,  common  to 


WARANDPEACE  225 

every  man  in  that  army — a  feeling  of  self-oblivion,  of  proud  conscious¬ 
ness  of  their  might  and  passionate  devotion  to  the  man  who  was  the 
centre  of  that  solemn  ceremony. 

He  felt  that  at  one  word  from  that  man  all  that  vast  mass  (and  he,  an 
insignificant  atom  bound  up  with  it,)  would  rush  through  fire  and  water, 
to  crime,  to  death,  or  to  the  grandest  heroism,  and  so  he  could  not  but 
thrill  and  tremble  at  the  sight  of  the  man  who  was  the  embodiment  of 
that  word. 

‘Hurrah!  hurrah!  hurrah!’  thundered  on  all  sides,  and  one  regiment 
after  another  greeted  the  Tsar  with  the  strains  of  the  march,  then  hur¬ 
rah!  .  .  .  then  the  march,  and  again  hurrah!  and  hurrah!  which  growing 
stronger  and  fuller,  blended  into  a  deafening  roar. 

Before  the  Tsar  had  reached  it,  each  regiment  in  its  speechless  im 
mobility  seemed  like  a  lifeless  body.  But  as  soon  as  the  Tsar  was  on 
a  level  with  it,  each  regiment  broke  into  life  and  noise,  which  joined  with 
the  roar  of  all  the  line,  by  which  the  Tsar  had  passed  already.  In  the 
terrific,  deafening  uproar  of  those  voices,  between  the  square  masses  of 
troops,  immobile  as  though  turned  to  stone,  moved  carelessly,  but  sym¬ 
metrically  and  freely,  some  hundreds  of  men  on  horseback,  the  suite, 
and  in  front  of  them  two  figures — the  Emperors.  Upon  these  was  entirely 
concentrated  the  repressed,  passionate  attention  of  all  that  mass  of 
j  men. 

The  handsome,  youthful  Emperor  Alexander,  in  the  uniform  of  the 
Horse  Guards,  in  a  triangular  hat  with  the  base  in  front,  attracted  the 
:  greater  share  of  attention  with  his  pleasant  face  and  sonorous,  low  voice. 

Rostov  was  standing  near  the  trumpeters,  and  with  his  keen  eyes  he 
recognised  the  Tsar  from  a  distance  and  watched  him  approaching.  When 
the  Tsar  w’as  only  twenty  paces  away,  and  Nikolay  saw  clearly  in  every 
detail  the  handsome,  young,  and  happy  face  of  the  Emperor,  he  ex¬ 
perienced  a  feeling  of  tenderness  and  ecstasy  such  as  he  had  never  known 
before.  Everything  in  the  Tsar — every  feature,  every  movement — 
seemed  to  him  full  of  charm. 

Halting  before  the  Pavlograd  regiment,  the  Tsar  said  something  in 
French  to  the  Austrian  Emperor  and  smiled. 

Seeing  that  smile,  Rostov  unconsciously  began  to  smile  himself  and 
felt  an  even  stronger  rush  of  love  for  his  Emperor.  He  longed  to  express 
his  love  for  the  Tsar  in  some  way.  He  knew  it  was  impossible,  and  he 
wanted  to  cry.  The  Tsar  called  up  the  colonel  of  the  regiment  and  said 
a  few  words  to  him. 

‘By  God!  what  would  happen  to  me  if  the  Emperor  were  to  address 
me!’  thought  Rostov;  ‘I  should  die  of  happiness.’ 

The  Tsar  addressed  the  officers,  too. 

‘All  of  you.  gentlemen’  (every  word  sounded  to  Rostov  like  heavenly 
music),  ‘I  thank  you  with  all  my  heart.’ 

How  happy  Rostov  would  have  been  if  he  could  have  died  on  the 
spot  for  his  Emperor. 


226 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘You  have  won  the  flags  of  St.  George  and  will  be  worthy  of  them.’ 

‘Only  to  die,  to  die  for  him!’  thought  Rostov. 

The  Tsar  said  something  more  which  Rostov  did  not  catch,  and  the 
soldiers,  straining  their  lungs,  roared  ‘hurrah!’ 

Rostov,  too,  bending  over  in  his  saddle,  shouted  with  all  his  might, 
feeling  he  would  like  to  do  himself  some  injury  by  this  shout,  if  only 
he  could  give  full  expression  to  his  enthusiasm  for  the  Tsar. 

The  Tsar  stood  for  several  seconds  facing  the  hussars,  as  though  he 
were  hesitating. 

‘How  could  the  Emperor  hesitate?’  Rostov  wondered;  but  then,  even 
that  hesitation  seemed  to  him  majestic  and  enchanting,  like  all  the 
Tsar  did. 

The  Tsar’s  hesitation  lasted  only  an  instant.  The  Tsar’s  foot,  in  the 
narrow-pointed  boot  of  the  day,  touched  the  belly  of  the  bay  English 
thoroughbred  he  was  riding.  The  Tsar’s  hand  in  its  white  glove  gathered 
up  the  reins  and  he  moved  off,  accompanied  by  the  irregularly  heaving 
sea  of  adjutants.  Further  and  further  he  rode  away,  stopping  at  the  other 
regiments,  and  at  last  the  white  plume  of  his  hat  was  all  that  Rostov 
could  see  above  the  suite  that  encircled  the  Emperors. 

Among  the  gentlemen  of  the  suite,  Rostov  noticed  Bolkonsky,  sitting 
his  horse  in  a  slack,  indolent  pose.  Rostov  remembered  his  quarrel  with 
him  on  the  previous  day  and  his  doubt  whether  he  ought  or  ought  not 
to  challenge  him.  ‘Of  course,  I  ought  not,’  Rostov  reflected  now.  .  .  . 
‘And  is  it  worth  thinking  and  speaking  of  it  at  such  a  moment  as  the 
present?  At  the  moment  of  such  a  feeling  of  love,  enthusiasm,  and  self- 
sacrifice,  what  are  all  our  slights  and  squabbles?  I  love  every  one,  I 
forgive  every  one  at  this  moment,’  thought  Rostov. 

When  the  Tsar  had  made  the  round  of  almost  all  the  regiments,  the 
troops  began  to  file  by  him  in  a  parade  march,  and  Rostov  on  Bedouin, 
which  he  had  lately  bought  from  Denisov,  was  the  officer  at  the  rear, 
that  is,  had  to  pass  last,  alone,  and  directly  in  view  of  the  Tsar. 

Before  he  reached  the  Tsar,  Rostov,  who  was  a  capital  horseman,  set 
spurs  twice  to  his  Bedouin,  and  succeeded  in  forcing  him  into  that  frantic 
form  of  gallop  into  which  Bedouin  always  dropped  when  he  was  excited. 
Bending  his  foaming  nose  to  his  chest,  arching  his  tail,  and  seeming  to 
skim  through  the  air  without  touching  the  earth,  Bedouin,  as  though 
he,  too,  were  conscious  of  the  Tsar’s  eye  upon  him,  flew  by  in  superb 
style,  with  a  graceful  high  action  of  his  legs. 

Rostov  himself  drew  back  his  legs  and  drew  in  his  stomach,  and 
feeling  himself  all  of  a  piece  with  his  horse,  rode  by  the  Tsar  with  a 
frowming  but  blissful  face,  looking  a  regular  devil,  as  Denisov  used  to  say. 

‘Bravo,  Pavlograds!’  said  the  Tsar. 

‘My  God!  shouldn’t  I  be  happy  if  he  bade  me  fling  myself  into  fire 
this  instant,’  thought  Rostov. 

When  the  review  was  over,  the  officers,  both  of  the  reinforcements 
and  of  Kutuzov’s  army,  began  to  gather  together  in  groups.  Conversations 
sprang  up  about  the  honours  that  had  been  conferred,  about  the  Aus- 


WAR  AND  PEACE  227 

trians  and  their  uniforms,  and  their  front  line,  about  Bonaparte  and  the 
bad  time  in  store  for  him  now,  especially  when  Essen’s  corps,  too,  should 
arrive,  and  Prussia  should  take  our  side.  But  the  chief  subject  of  con¬ 
versation  in  every  circle  was  the  Emperor  Alexander;  every  word  he  had 
uttered,  every  gesture  was  described  and  expatiated  upon  with  enthusi¬ 
asm. 

There  was  but  one  desire  in  all:  under  the  Emperor’s  leadership  to 
face  the  enemy  as  soon  as  possible.  Under  the  command  of  the  Emperor 
himself  they  would  not  fail  to  conquer  any  one  whatever:  so  thought 
Rostov  and  most  of  the  officers  after  the  review. 

After  the  review  they  all  felt  more  certain  of  victory  than  they  could 
have  been  after  two  decisive  victories. 


IX 

The  day  after  the  review  Boris  Drubetskoy  put  on  his  best  uniform, 
and  accompanied  by  his  comrade  Berg’s  good  wishes  for  his  success, 
rode  to  Olmiitz  to  see  Bolkonsky,  in  the  hope  of  profiting  by  his  friend¬ 
liness  to  obtain  a  better  position,  especially  the  position  of  an  adjutant 
in  attendance  on  some  personage  of  importance,  a  post  which  seemed  to 
him  particularly  alluring. 

‘It’s  all  very  well  for  Rostov,  whose  father  sends  him  ten  thousand  at 
a  time,  to  talk  about  not  caring  to  cringe  to  any  one,  and  not  being  a 
lackey  to  any  man.  But  I,  with  nothing  of  my  own  but  my  brains,  have 
my  career  to  make,  and  mustn’t  let  opportunities  slip,  but  must  make 
the  most  of  them.’ 

He  did  not  find  Prince  Andrey  at  Olmiitz  that  day.  But  the  sight  of 
Olmutz— where  were  the  headquarters  and  the  diplomatic  corps,  and 
where  both  Emperors  with  their  suites,  their  households,  and  their  court, 
were  staying — only  strengthened  his  desire  to  belong  to  this  upper  wrorld. 

He  knew  no  one;  and  in  spite  of  his  smart  guardsman's  uniform,  all 
these  exalted  persons,  racing  to  and  fro  about  the  streets  in  their  elegant 
carriages,  plumes,  ribbons,  and  orders,  courtiers  and  military  alike,  all 
seemed  to  be  so  immeasurably  above  him,  a  little  officer  in  the  Guards,  as 
to  be  not  simply  unwilling,  but  positively  unable  to  recognise  his  existence. 
At  the  quarters  of  the  commander-in-chief,  Kutuzov,  where  he  asked  for 
Bolkonsky,  all  the  adjutants  and  even  the  orderlies  looked  at  him  as 
though  they  wished  to  impress  on  him  that  a  great  many  officers  of  his  sort 
came  hanging  about  here,  and  that  they  were  all  heartily  sick  of  seeing 
them.  In  spite  of  this,  or  rather  in  consequence  of  it,  he  went  again  the 
following  day,  the  15th,  after  dinner,  to  Olmutz,  and  going  into  the  house 
occupied  by  Kutuzov,  asked  for  Bolkonsky.  Prince  Andrey  was  at  home, 
and  Boris  was  ushered  into  a  large  room,  probably  at  some  time  used  for 
dancing.  Now  there  were  five  bedsteads  in  it  and  furniture  of  various 
kinds:  a  table,  chairs,  a  clavichord.  One  adjutant  wras  sitting  in  a  Persian 
dressing-gown  wanting  at  a  table  near  the  door.  Another,  the  stout,  red- 


228 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

faced  Nesvitsky,  was  lying  on  a  bed,  his  arms  under  his  head,  laughing 
with  an  officer  sitting  by  the  bedside.  A  third  was  playing  a  Vienna  waltz 
on  the  clavichord,  while  a  fourth  lay  on  the  clavichord,  humming  to  the 
tune.  Bolkonsky  was  not  in  the  room.  Not  one  of  these  gentlemen  changed 
his  position  on  observing  Boris.  The  one  who  was  writing,  on  being  ap¬ 
plied  to  by  Boris,  turned  round  with  an  air  of  annoyance,  and  told  him 
that  Bolkonsky  was  the  adjutant  on  duty,  and  that  he  should  go  to  the 
door  to  the  left,  into  the  reception-room,  if  he  wanted  to  see  him.  Boris 
thanked  him,  and  went  to  the  reception-room.  There  he  found  some  ten 
officers  and  generals. 

At  the  moment  when  Boris  entered,  Prince  Andrey  dropping  his  eyelids 
disdainfully  (with  that  peculiar  air  of  courteous  weariness  which  so  dis¬ 
tinctly  says,  ‘If  it  were  not  my  duty,  I  would  not  stay  talking  to  you  for  a 
minute’),  was  listening  to  an  old  Russian  general  with  many  decorations, 
who,  rigidly  erect,  almost  on  tiptoe,  was  laying  some  matter  before  Prince 
Andrey  with  the  obsequious  expression  of  a  common  soldier  on  his  purple 
face. 

‘Very  good,  be  so  kind  as  to  wait  a  moment,’  he  said  to  the  general  in 
Russian,  with  that  French  accent  with  which  he  always  spoke  when  he 
meant  to  speak  disdainfully,  and  noticing  Boris,  Prince  Andrey  took  no 
further  notice  of  the  general  (who  ran  after  him  with  entreaties,  begging 
him  to  hear  something  more),  but  nodded  to  Boris  with  a  bright  smile,  as 
he  turned  towards  him.  At  that  moment  Boris  saw  distinctly  what  he  had 
had  an  inkling  of  before,  that  is,  that  quite  apart  from  that  subordination 
and  discipline,  which  is  written  down  in  the  drill-book,  and  recognised  in 
the  regiment  and  known  to  him,  there  was  in  the  army  another  and  more 
actual  subordination,  that  which  made  this  rigid,  purple-faced  general 
wait  respectfully  while  Prince  Andrey — of  captain’s  rank — found  it  more 
in  accordance  with  his  pleasure  to  talk  to  Lieutenant  Drubetskoy.  Boris 
felt  more  than  ever  determined  to  follow  in  future  the  guidance  not  of  the 
written  code  laid  down  in  the  regulations,  but  of-  this  unwritten  code.  He 
felt  now  that  simply  because  he  had  been  recommended  to  Prince  Andrey, 
he  had  become  at  one  step  superior  to  the  general,  who  in  other  circum¬ 
stances,  at  the  front,  could  annihilate  a  mere  lieutenant  in  the  guards  like 
him.  Prince  Andrey  went  up  to  him  and  shook  hands. 

‘Very  sorry  you  didn’t  find  me  in  yesterday.  I  was  busy  the  whole  day 
with  the  Germans.  We  went  with  Weierother  to  survey  the  disposition. 
When  Germans  start  being  accurate,  there’s  no  end  to  it!  ’ 

Boris  smiled,  as  though  he  understood,  as  a  matter  of  common  knowl¬ 
edge,  what  Prince  Andrey  was  referring  to.  Bat  it  was  the  first  time  he 
had  heard  the  name  of  Weierother,  or  even  the  word  ‘disposition’  used  in 
that  sense. 

‘Well,  my  dear  boy,  you  still  want  an  adjutant’s  post?  I  have  been 
thinking  about  you  since  I  saw  you.’ 

‘Yes,’  said  Boris,  involuntarily  flushing  for  some  reason,  ‘I  was  think¬ 
ing  of  asking  the  commander-in-chief ;  he  has  had  a  letter  about  me  from 
Prince  Kuragin;  and  I  wanted  to  ask  him  simply  because,’  he  added,  as 


WA.R  AND  PEACE  229 

though  excusing  himself,  ‘I  am  afraid  the  guards  won’t  be  in  action.’ 

‘Very  good,  very  good!  we  will  talk  it  over  later,’  said  Prince  Andrey, 
‘only  let  me  report  on  this  gentleman’s  business  and  I  am  at  your  disposal.’ 
While  Prince  Andrey  was  away  reporting  to  the  commander-in-chief  on 
the  business  of  the  purple-faced  general,  that  general,  who  apparently  did 
not  share  Boris’s  views  as  to  the  superior  advantages  of  the  unwritten 
code,  glared  at  the  insolent  lieutenant,  who  had  hindered  his  having  his 
say  out,  so  that  Boris  began  to  be  uncomfortable.  He  turned  away  and 
waited  with  impatience  for  Prince  Andrey  to  come  out  of  the  commander- 
in-chief's  room. 

‘Well,  my  dear  fellow,  I  have  been  thinking  about  you,’  said  Prince 
Andrey,  when  they  had  gone  into  the  big  room  with  the  clavichord  in  it. 
‘It’s  no  use  your  going  to  the  commander-in-chief;  he  will  say  a  lot  of 
polite  things  to  you,  will  ask  you  to  dine  with  him’  (‘that  wouldn’t  come 
amiss  in  the  service  of  that  unwritten  code,’  thought  Boris),  ‘but  nothing 
more  would  come  of  it;  we  shall  soon  have  a  complete  battalion  of 
adjutants  and  orderly  officers.  But  I  tell  you  what  we  will  do:  I  have  a 
friend,  a  general  adjutant  and  an  excellent  fellow,  Prince  Dolgorukov. 
And  though  you  may  not  be  aware  of  it,  the  fact  is  that  Kutuzov  and  his 
staff  and  all  of  us  are  just  now  of  no  account  at  all.  Everything  now  is  con¬ 
centrated  about  the  Emperor,  so  we’ll  go  together  to  Dolgorukov.  I  have 
to  go  to  see  him,  and  I  have  already  spoken  of  you  to  him.  So  we  can  see 
whether  he  may  not  think  it  possible  to  find  a  post  for  you  on  his  staff,  or' 
somewhere  there  nearer  to  the  sun.’ 

Prince  Andrey  was  always  particularly  keen  over  guiding  a  young  man 
and  helping  him  to  attain  worldly  success.  Under  cover  of  this  help  for 
another,  which  he  would  never  have  accepted  for  himself,  he  was  brought 
into  the  circle  which  bestowed  success,  and  which  attracted  him.  He  very 
readily  took  up  Boris’s  cause,  and  went  with  him  to  Prince  Dolgorukov. 

It  was  late  in  the  evening  as  they  entered  the  palace  at  Olmiitz,  occu¬ 
pied  by  the  Emperors  and  their  retinues. 

There  had  been  on  that  same  day  a  council  of  war,  at  which  all  the 
members  of  the  Hofkriegsrath  and  the  two  Emperors  had  been  present. 
At  the  council  it  had  been  decided,  contrary  to  the  advice  of  the  elder- 
generals,  Kutuzov  and  Prince  Schwarzenberg,  to  advance  at  once  and  to 
fight  a  general  engagement  with  Bonaparte.  The  council  of  war  was  only 
just  over  when  Prince  Andrey,  accompanied  by  Boris,  went  into  the 
palace  in  search  of  Prince  Dolgorukov.  Every  one  at  headquarters  was 
still  under  the  spell  of  the  victory  gained  that  day  by  the  younger  party 
at  the  council  of  war.  The  voices  of  those  who  urged  delay,  and  counselled 
waiting  for  something  and  not  advancing,  had  been  so  unanimously 
drowned  and  their  arguments  had  been  confuted  by  such  indubitable 
proofs  of  the  advantages  of  advancing,  that  what  had  been  discussed  at 
the  council,  the  future  battle  and  the  victory  certain  to  follow  it,  seemed 
no  longer  future  but  past.  All  the  advantages  were  on 'our  side.  Our  im¬ 
mense  forces,  undoubtedly  superior  to  those  of  Napoleon,  were  concen¬ 
trated  in  one  place;  the  troops  were  encouraged  by  the  presence  of  the 


230  WAR  AND  PEACE 

two  Emperors,  and  were  eager  for  battle.  The  strategic  position  on  which 
the}’  were  to  act  was  to  the  minutest  detail  known  to  the  Austrian  general 
Weierother,  who  was  at  the  head  of  the  troops  (as  a  lucky  chance  would 
have  it,  the  Austrian  troops  had  chosen  for  their  manoeuvres  the  very 
fields  in  which  they  had  now  to  fight  the  French).  Every  detail  of  the 
surrounding  neighbourhood  was  known  and  put  down  on  maps,  while 
Bonaparte,  apparently  growing  feebler,  was  taking  no  measures. 

Dolgorukov,  who  had  been  one  of  the  warmest  advocates  of  attack,  had 
just  come  back  from  the  council,  weary,  exhausted,  but  eager  and  proud 
of  the  victory  he  had  gained.  Prince  Andrey  presented  the  officer  for 
whom  he  was  asking  his  influence,  but  Prince  Dolgorukov,  though  he 
shook  hands  politely  and  warmly,  said  nothing  to  Boris.  Obviously  un¬ 
able  to  restrain  himseff  from  uttering  the  thoughts  which  were  engrossing 
him  at  that  moment,  he  addressed  Prince  Andrey  in  French. 

‘Well,  my  dear  fellow,  what  a  battle  we  have  won!  God  only  grant 
that  the  one  which  will  be  the  result  of  it  may  be  as  victorious.  I  must  own, 
though,  my  dear  fellow,’  he  said,  jerkily  and  eagerly,  ‘my  shortcomings 
compared  with  the  Austrians  and  especially  Weierother.  What  accuracy, 
what  minuteness,  what  knowledge  of  the  locality,  what  foresight  of  every 
possibility,  every  condition,  of  every  minutest  detail!  No,  my  dear  boy, 
anything  more  propitious  than  the  circumstance  we  are  placed  in  could  j 
not  have  been  found,  if  one  had  arranged  it  purposely.  The  union  of  j 
Austrian  exactitude  with  Russian  valour — what  could  you  wish  for  more?' 

‘So  an  attack  has  been  finally  decided  upon?’  said  Bolkonsky. 

‘And  do  you  know,  I  fancy,  Bonaparte  really  has  lost  his  head.  You 
know  that  a  letter  came  from  him  to-day  to  the  Emperor.’  Dolgorukov 
smiled  significantly. 

‘You  don’t  say  so!  What  does  he  write?’  asked  Bolkonsky. 

‘What  can  he  write?  Tradi-ri-di-ra — all  simply  to  gain  time.  I  tell  you 
he’s  in  our  hands;  that’s  the  fact!  But  the  most  amusing  part  of  it  all,’ 
he  said,  breaking  all  at  once  into  a  good-natured  laugh,  ‘is  that  they 
couldn’t  think  how  to  address  an  answer  to  him.  If  not  “consul,”  and  of  ! 
course  not  “emperor,”  it  should  be  “general”  Bonaparte,  it  seemed  to  me.’ 

‘But  between  not  recognising  him  as  emperor  and  calling  him  General 
Bonaparte,  there’s  a  difference,’  said  Bolkonsky. 

‘That’s  just  the  point,’  Dolgorukov  interrupted  quickly,  laughing. 
‘You  know  Bilibin,  he’s  a  very  clever  fellow;  he  suggested  addressing  it,  j 
“To  the  Usurper  and  Enemy  of  the  Human  Race,”  ’  Dolgorukov  chuckled 
merrily. 

‘And  nothing  more?’  observed  Bolkonsky. 

‘But  still  it  was  Bilibin  who  found  the  suitable  form  of  address  in 
earnest.  He’s  both  shrewd  and  witty  .  .  .’ 

‘Howt  was  it?’ 

‘To  the  Chief  of  the  French  Government:  au  chef  du  gouvernement 
jrancais,’  Dolgorukov  said  seriously  and  with  satisfaction.  'That  was  the 
right  thing,  wasn’t  it?’ 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


231 

‘It  was  all  right,  but  he  will  dislike  it  extremely,’  observed  Bolkonsky. 

‘Oh,  extremely!  My  brother  knows  him;  he’s  dined  more  than  once 
with  him — nowadays  the  emperor — in  Paris,  and  used  to  tell  me  that  he’d 
never  seen  a  subtler  and  more  crafty  diplomat;  you  know,  a  combination 
of  French  adroitness  and  the  Italian  actor-faculty!  You  know  the  anecdote 
about  Bonaparte  and  Count  Markov?  Count  Markov  was  the  only  per¬ 
son  who  knew  how  to  treat  him.  You  know  the  story  of  the  handkerchief? 
It's  a  gem!’  And  the  talkative  Dolgorukov  turning  from  Boris  to  Prince 
Audrey  told  the  story  of  how  Bonaparte,  to  test  Markov,  our  ambassador, 
had  purposely  dropped  his  handkerchief  before  him,  and  had  stood  look¬ 
ing  at  him,  probably  expecting  Markov  to  pick  it  up  for  him,  and  how 
Markov  promptly  dropped  his  own  beside  it,  and  had  picked  up  his  own 
without  touching  Bonaparte’s. 

‘Capital,’  said  Bolkonsky.  ‘But,  prince,  I  have  come  to  you  as  a  peti¬ 
tioner  in  behalf  of  this  young  friend.  You  see  .  .  .’  But  before  Prince 
Andrey  could  finish,  an  adjutant  came  into  the  room  to  summon  Prince 
Dolgorukov  to  the  Emperor. 

‘Ah,  how  annoying!’  said  Dolgorukov,  getting  up  hurriedly  and  shak¬ 
ing  hands  with  Prince  Andrey  and  Boris.  ‘You  know  I  shall  be  very 
glad  to  do  all  that  depends  on  me  both  for  you  and  for  this  charming 
young  man.’  Once  more  he  shook  hands  with  Boris  with  an  expression 
of  good-natured,  genuine,  heedless  gaiety.  ‘But  you  see  .  .  .  another 
time!  ’ 

Boris  was  excited  by  the  thought  of  being  so  close  to  the  higher  powers, 
as  he  felt  himself  to  be  at  that  instant.  He  was  conscious  here  of  being 
in  contact  with  the  springs  that  controlled  all  those  vast  movements  of 
the  masses,  of  which  in  his  regiment  he  felt  himself  a  tiny,  humble,  and 
insignificant  part.  They  followed  Prince  Dolgorukov  out  into  the  cor¬ 
ridor  and  met  (coming  out  of  the  door  of  the  Tsar’s  room  at  which 
Dolgorukov  went  in)  a  short  man  in  civilian  dress  with  a  shrewd  face 
and  a  sharply  projecting  lower  jaw,  which,  without  spoiling  his  face, 
gave  him  a  peculiar  alertness  and  shiftiness  of  expression.  This  short 
man  nodded  to  Dolgorukov,  as  if  he  were  an  intimate  friend,  and  stared 
with  an  intently  cold  gaze  at  Prince  Andrey,  walking  straight  towards 
him  and  apparently  expecting  him  to  bow  or  move  out  of  his  way. 
Prince  Andrey  did  neither;  there  was  a  vindictive  look  on  his  face,  and 
the  short  young  man  turned  away  and  walked  at  the  side  of  the  corridor. 

‘Who’s  that?’  asked  Boris. 

‘That’s  one  of  the  most  remarkable  men — and  the  most  unpleasant  to 
me.  The  minister  of  foreign  affairs,  Prince  Adam  Tchartorizhsky.’ 

‘Those  are  the  men,’  added  Bolkonsky  with  a  sigh  which  he  could  not 
suppress,  as  they  went  out  of  the  palace,  ‘those  are  the  men  who  decide 
the  fates  of  nations.’ 

Next  day  the  troops  set  off  on  the  march,  and  up  to  the  time  of  the 
battle  of  Austerlitz,  Boris  did  not  succeed  in  seeing  Bolkonsky  or 
Dolgorukov  again,  and  remained  for  a  while  in  the  Ismailov  regiment. 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


X 

At  dawn  on  the  16th,  Denisov's  squadron,  in  which  Xikolay  Rostov  was 
serving;  and  which  formed  part  of  Prince  Bagration's  detachment,  moved 
on  from  its  halting  place  for  the  night — to  advance  into  action,  as  was 
said.  After  about  a  mile’s  march,  in  tire  rear  of  other  columns,  it  was 
brought  to  a  standstill  on  the  high-road.  Rostov  saw  the  Cossacks,  the 
first  and  second  squadrons  of  hussars,  and  the  infantry  battalions  with 
the  artillery  pass  him  and  march  on  ahead:  he  also  saw  the  Generals 
Bagration  and  Dolgorukov  ride  by  with  their  adjutants.  All  the  panic 
he  had  felt,  as  before,  at  the  prospect  of  battle,  all  the  inner  conflict  by 
means  of  which  he  had  overcome  that  panic,  all  his  dreams  of  dis¬ 
tinguishing  himself  in  true  hussar  style  in  this  battle — all  were  for  noth¬ 
ing.  His  squadron  was  held  back  in  reserve,  and  Xikolay  Rostov  spent 
a  tedious  and  wretched  day.  About  nine  o'clock  in  the  morning  he  heard 
firing  ahead  of  him.  and  shouts  of  hurrah,  saw  the  wounded  being  brought 
back  i  there  were  not  many  of  them),  and  finally  saw  a  whole  detach¬ 
ment  of  French  cavalry  being  brought  away  in  the  midst  of  a  company 
of  Cossacks.  Obviously  the  action  was  over,  and  the  action  had.  ob¬ 
viously,  been  a  small  one.  but  successful.  The  soldiers  and  officers  as 
they  came  back  were  talking  of  a  brilliant  victory,  of  the  taking  of  the 
town  of  Yishau.  and  a  whole  French  squadron  taken  prisoners.  The  day 
was  bright  and  sunny  after  a  sharo  frost  at  night,  and  the  cheerful  bright¬ 
ness  of  the  autumn  day  was  in  keeping  with  the  news  of  victory,  which 
was  told  not  only  by  the  accounts  of  those  who  had  taken  part  in  it, 
but  by  the  joyful  expression  of  soldiers,  officers,  generals,  and  adjutants, 
who  rode  to  and  fro  by  Rostov.  All  the  greater  was  the  pang  in  Xikolay's 
heart  that  he  should  have  suffered  the  dread  that  goes  before  the  battle 
for  nothing,  and  have  spent  that  happy  day  in  inactivity-. 

•Rostov,  come  here,  let's  drink  "begone,  dull  care!  "  '  shouted  Denisov, 
sitting  at  the  roadside  before  a  bottle  and  some  edibles.  The  officers 
gathered  in  a  ring,  eating  and  talking,  round  Denisov's  wine-case. 

Here  they're  bringing  another!’  said  one  of  the  officers,  pointing  to  a 
French  prisoner,  a  dragoon,  who  was  being  led  on  foot  by-  two  Cossacks. 
One  of  them  was  leading  by  the  bridle  the  prisoner's  horse,  a  tall  and 
beautiful  French  beast. 

'Sell  the  horse?'  Denisov  called  to  the  Cossacks. 

"If  you  will,  your  honour.’ 

The  officers  got  up  and  stood  round  the  Cossacks  and  the  prisoner. 
The  French  dragoon  was  a  young  fellow,  an  Alsatian  who  spoke  French 
with  a  German  accent.  He  was  breathless  with  excitement,  his  face  was 
red.  and  hearing  French  spoken  he  began  quickly  speaking  to  the 
officers,  turning  from  one  to  another.  He  said  that  they-  wouldn’t  have 
taken  him.  that  it  wasn’t  his  fault  he  was  taken,  but  the  fault  of  the 
corporal,  who  had  sent  him  to  get  the  horsecloths,  that  he  had  told  him 
the  Russians  were  there.  And  at  every  word  he  added:  ‘But  don’t  let 


W  A  R  AND  PEACE 

anybody  hurt  my  little  horse,’  and  stroked  his  horse.  It  v 
he  did  not  quite  grasp  where  he  was.  At  one  moment 
himself  for  having  been  taken  prisoner,  at  the  next,  i 
before  his  superior  officers,  he  was  trying  to  prove  his  r 
and  zeal  for  the  service.  He  brought  with  him  in  all 
our  rearguard  the  atmosphere  of  the  French  army,  sc 

The  Cossacks  sold  the  horse  for  two  gold  pieces,  a 
the  richest  of  the  officers  since  he  had  received  mon 
bought  it. 

‘Be  good  to  the  little  horse  I’  the  Alsatian  said  with  simple-hearted 
good-nature  to  Rostov,  when  the  horse  was  handed  to  the  hussar. 

Rostov  smiling,  soothed  the  dragoon,  and  gave  him  money. 

‘Alley!  Alley!’  said  the  Cossack,  touching  the  prisoner's  arm  to  make 
him  go  on. 

‘The  Emperor!  the  Emperor!’  was  suddenly  heard  among  the  hussars. 
Everything  was  bustle  and  hurry,  and  Rostov  saw  behind  them  on  the 
road  several  horsemen  riding  up  with  white  plumes  in  their  hats.  In  a 
single  moment  all  were  in  their  places  and  eagerly  expectant. 

Rostov  had  no  memory  and  no  consciousness  of  how  he  ran  to  his 
post  and  got  on  his  horse.  Instantly  his  regret  at  not  taking  part  in  the 
battle,  his  humdrum  mood  among  the  men  he  saw  even-  day — all  was 
gone;  instantly  all  thought  of  self  had  vanished.  He  was  entirely  ab¬ 
sorbed  in  the  feeling  of  happiness  at  the  Tsar's  being  near.  His  near¬ 
ness  alone  made  up  to  him  by  itself,  he  felt,  for  the  loss  of  the  whole  day. 
He  was  happy,  as  a  lover  is  happy  when  the  moment  of  the  longed-for 
meeting  has  come.  Xot  daring  to  look  round  from  the  front  line,  by  an 
ecstatic  instinct  without  looking  round,  he  felt  his  approach.  And  he 
felt  it  not  only  from  the  sound  of  the  tramping  hoofs  of  the  approaching 
cavalcade,  he  felt  it  because  as  the  Tsar  came  nearer  everything  grew 
brighter,  more  joyful  and  significant,  and  more  festive.  Nearer  and 
nearer  moved  this  sun.  as  he  seemed  to  Rostov,  shedding  around  him 
rays  of  mild  and  majestic  light,  and  now  he  felt  himself  enfolded  in  that 
radiance,  he  heard  his  voice — that  voice  caressing,  calm,  majestic,  and 
yet  so  simple.  A  deathlike  silence  had  come — as  seemed  to  Rostov  fitting 
— and  in  that  silence  he  heard  the  sound  of  the  Tsar's  voice. 

‘The  Pavlograd  hussars?'  he  was  saying  interrogatively. 

‘The  reserve,  sire.’  replied  a  voice — such  a  human  voice,  after  the 
superhuman  voice  that  had  said:  ‘Les  hussards  de  Pavlograd?’ 

The  Tsar  was  on  a  level  with  Rostov,  and  he  stood  still  there.  Alex¬ 
ander's  face  was  even  handsomer  than  it  had  been  at  the  review  three 
days  before.  It  beamed  with  such  gaiety  and  youth,  such  innocent  youth¬ 
fulness,  that  suggested  the  playfulness  of  a  boy  of  fourteen,  and  yet  it 
was  still  the  face  of  the  majestic  Emperor.  Glancing  casually  along  the 
squadron,  the  Tsar’s  eyes  met  the  eyes  of  Rostov,  and  for  not  more 
than  two  seconds  rested  on  them.  Whether  it  was  that  the  Tsar  saw 
what  was  passing  in  Rostov's  soul  (it  seemed  Rostov  that  he  saw 
everything),  any  way  he  looked  for  two  seconds  with  his  blue  eyes  into 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

(A  soft,  mild  radiance  beamed  from  them.)  Then  all  at 
his  eyebrows,  struck  his  left  foot  sharply  against  his 
ed  on. 

oeror  could  not  restrain  his  desire  to  be  present  at  the 
:te  of  the  expostulations  of  his  courtiers,  at  twelve 
rom  the  third  column  which  he  had  been  following, 
le  vanguard.  Before  he  reached  the  hussars,  several 
xim  with  news  of  the  successful  issue  of  the  engagement. 

±ne  action,  which  had  simply  consisted  in  the  capture  of  a  squadron 
of  the  French,  was  magnified  into  a  brilliant  victory  over  the  enemy, 
and  so  the  Tsar  and  the  whole  army  believed,  especially  while  the  smoke 
still  hung  over  the  field  of  battle,  that  the  French  had  been  defeated, 
and  had  been  forced  to  retreat  against  their  will.  A  few  minutes  after 
the  Tsar  had  galloped  on,  the  division  of  the  Pavlograd  hussars  received 
orders  to  move  forward.  In  Vishau  itself,  a  little  German  town,  Rostov 
saw  the  Tsar  once  more.  In  the  market-place  of  the  town  where  there 
had  been  rather  a  heavy  firing  before  the  Tsar’s  arrival,  lay  several 
dead  and  wounded  soldiers,  whom  there  had  not  been  time  to  pick  up. 
The  Tsar,  surrounded  by  his  suite  of  officers  and  courtiers,  was  mounted 
on  a  different  horse  from  the  one  he  had  ridden  at  the  review,  a  chestnut  | 
English  thoroughbred.  Bending  on  one  side  with  a  graceful  gesture,  hold¬ 
ing  a  gold  field-glass  to  his  eyes,  he  was  looking  at  a  soldier  lying  on  his  , 
face  with  a  blood-stained  and  uncovered  head.  The  wounded  soldier  was 
an  object  so  impure,  so  grim,  and  so  revolting,  that  Rostov  was  shocked 
at  his  being  near  the  Emperor.  Rostov  saw  how  the  Tsar’s  stooping 
shoulders  shuddered,  as  though  a  cold  shiver  had  passed  over  them,  i 
how  his  left  foot  convulsively  pressed  the  spur  into  the  horse’s  side,  and 
how  the  trained  horse  'looked  round  indifferently  and  did  not  stir.  An 
adjutant  dismounting  lifted  the  soldier  up  under  his  arms,  and  began 
laying  him  on  a  stretcher  that  came  up.  The  soldier  groaned. 

‘Gently,  gently,  can’t  you  do  it  more  gently?’  said  the  Tsar,  apparently 
suffering  more  than  the  dying  soldier,  and  he  rode  away. 

Rostov  saw  the  tears  in  the  Tsar’s  eyes,  and  heard  him  say  in  French 
to  Tchartorizhsky,  as  he  rode  off:  ‘What  an  awful  thing  war  is,  what 
an  awdul  thing!  ’ 

The  forces  of  the  vanguard  were  posted  before  Vishau  in  sight  of  the 
enemy’s  line,  which  had  been  all  day  retreating  before  us  at  the  slightest  ! 
exchange  of  shots.  The  Tsar’s  thanks  w7ere  conveyed  to  the  vanguard, 
rewards  were  promised,  and  a  double  allowance  of  vodka  was  served-  out 
to  the  men.  Even  more  gaily  than  on  the  previous  night  the  bivouac  fires 
crackled,  and  the  soldiers  sang  their  songs.  Denisov  on  that  night  cele¬ 
brated  his  promotion  to  major,  and,  towards  the  end  of  the  carousal, 
after  a  good  deal  of  drinking,  Rostov  proposed  a  toast  to  the  health  of  i 
the  Emperor,  but  ‘not  our  Sovereign  the  Emperor,  as  they  say  at  official 
dinners,’  said  he,  ‘but  to  the  health  of  the  Emperor,  the  good,  enchanting,  : 
great  man,  let  us  drink  to  his  health,  and  to  a  decisive  victory  over  the 
French! ’ 


WARANDPEACE  235 

‘If  we  fought  before/  said  he,  ‘and  would  not  yield  an  inch  before  the 
French,  as  at  Schongraben,  what  will  it  be  now  when  he  is  at  our  head? 
We  will  all  die,  we  will  gladly  die  for  him.  Eh,  gentlemen?  Perhaps  I’m 
not  saying  it  right.  I’ve  drunk  a  good  deal,  but  that’s  how  I  feel,  and 
you  do  too.  To  the  health  of  Alexander  the  First!  Hurrah!’ 

‘Hurrah!’  rang  out  the  cheery  voices  of  the  officers.  And  the  old  cap¬ 
tain  Kirsten  shouted  no  less  heartily  and  sincerely  than  Rostov,  the 
boy  of  twenty. 

When  the  officers  had  drunk  the  toast  and  smashed  their  glasses, 
Kirsten  filled  some  fresh  ones,  and  in  his  shirt-sleeves  and  riding-breeches 
went  out  to  the  soldiers’  camp-fires,  glass  in  hand,  and  waving  his  hand 
in  the  air  stood  in  a  majestic  pose,  with  his  long  grey  whiskers  and  his 
white  chest  visible  through  the  open  shirt  in  the  light  of  the  camp-fire. 

‘Lads,  to  the  health  of  our  Sovereign  the  Emperor,  to  victory  over 
our  enemies,  hurrah!’  he  roared  in  his  stalwart  old  soldier’s  baritone. 
The  hussars  thronged  about  him  and  responded  by  a  loud  shout  in 
unison. 

Late  at  night,  when  they  had  all  separated,  Denisov  clapped  his  short 
hand  on  the  shoulder  of  his  favourite  Rostov.  ‘To  be  sure  he’d  no  one 
to  fall  in  love  with  in  the  field,  so  he’s  fallen  in  love  with  the  Tsar,’  he 
said. 

‘Denisov,  don’t  joke  about  that,’  cried  Rostov,  ‘it’s  such  a  lofty,  such 
a  sublime  feeling,  so  .  .  .’ 

‘I  believe  you,  I  believe  you,  my  dear,  and  I  share  the  feeling  and 
approve  .  .  .’ 

‘No,  you  don’t  understand!’  And  Rostov  got  up  and  went  out  to 
wander  about  among  the  camp-fires,  dreaming  of  what  happiness  it 
would  be  to  die — not  saving  the  Emperor’s  life— (of  that  he  did  not 
even  dare  to  dream),  but  simply  to  die  before  the  Emperor’s  eyes.  He 
really  was  in  love  with  the  Tsar  and  the  glory  of  the  Russian  arms  and 
the  hope  of  coming  victory.  And  he  was  not  the  only  man  who  felt  thus 
in  those  memorable  days  that  preceded  the  battle  of  Austerlitz:  nine- 
tenths  of  the  men  in  the  Russian  army  were  at  that  moment  in  love, 
though  less  ecstatically,  with  their  Tsar  and  the  glory  of  the  Russian 
arms. 


XI 

The  following  day  the  Tsar  stayed  in  Vishau.  His  medical  attendant, 
Villier,  was  several  times  summoned  to  him.  At  headquarters  and  among 
the  troops  that  were  nearer,  the  news  circulated  that  the  Tsar  was  unwell. 
He  was  eating  nothing  and  had  slept  badly  that  night,  so  those  about  him 
reported.  The  cause  of  this  indisposition  was  the  too  violent  shock  given 
to  the  sensitive  soul  of  the  Tsar  by  the  sight  of  the  killed  and  wounded. 

At  dawn  on  the  1 7th,  a  French  officer  was  conducted  from  our  outposts 
into  Vishau.  He  came  under  a  flag  of  t*uce  to  ask  for  an  interview  with 
the  Russian  Emperor.  This  officer  was  Savary.  The  Tsar  had  only  just 


236 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


fallen  asleep,  and  so  Savary  had  to  wait.  At  midday  he  was  admitted  to 
the  Emperor,  and  an  hour  later  he  rode  away  accompanied  by  Prince 
Dolgorukov  to  the  outposts  of  the  French  army.  Savary’s  mission  was-,  so 
it  was  rumoured,  to  propose  a  meeting  between  Alexander  and  Napoleon. 
A  personal  interview  was,  to  the  pride  and  rejoicing  of  the  whole  army, 
refused,  and  instead  of  the  Tsar,  Prince  Dolgorukov,  the  general  victori¬ 
ous  in  the  action  at  Vishau,  was  despatched  with  Savary  to  undertake 
negotiations  with  Napoleon,  if  these  negotiations — contrary  to  expecta¬ 
tion— were  founded  on  a  real  desire  for  peace.  In  the  evening  Dolgorukov 
came  back,  went  straight  to  the  Tsar  and  remained  a  long  while  alone 
with  him. 

On  the  iSth  and  19th  the  troops  moved  forward  two  days’  march,  and 
the  enemy’s  outposts,  after  a  brief  interchange  of  shots,  retired.  In  the 
higher  departments  of  the  army  an  intense,  bustling  excitement  and  ac¬ 
tivity  prevailed  from  midday  of  the  19th  till  the  morning  of  the  following 
day,  the  20th  of  November,  on  which  was  fought  the  memorable  battle 
of  Austerlitz.  Up  to  midday  of  the  19th  the  activity,  the  eager  talk,  the 
bustle,  and  the  despatching  of  adjutants  was  confined  to  the  headquarters 
of  the  Emperors;  after  midday  the  activity  had  reached  the  headquarters 
of  Kutuzov  and  the  staff  of  the  commanding  officers  of  the  columns. 
By  evening  this  activity  had  been  carried  by  the  adjutants  in  all  direc¬ 
tions  into  every  part  of  the  army,  and  in  the  night  of  the  19th  the  multi¬ 
tude  of  the  eighty  thousands  of  the  allied  army  rose  from  its  halting- 
place,  and  with  a  hum  of  talk  moved  on,  a  heaving  mass  nine  versts 
long. 

The  intense  activity  that  had  begun  in  the  morning  in  the  headquarters 
of  the  Emperors,  and  had  given  the  impetus  to  all  the  activity  in  remoter 
parts,  was  like  the  first  action  in  the  centre  wheel  of  a  great  tower  clock. 
Slowly  one  wheel  began  moving,  another  began  turning,  and  a  third,  and 
more  and  more  rapidly,  levers,  wheels,  and  blocks  began  to  revolve, 
chimes  began  playing,  figures  began  to  pop  out,  and  the  hands  began 
moving  rhythmically,  as  a  result  of  that  activity. 

Just  as  in  the  mechanism  of  the  clock,  in  the  mechanism  of  the  military 
machine  too,  once  the  impetus  given,  it  was  carried  on  to  the  last  results, 
and  just  as  unsympathetically  stationary  were  the  parts  of  the  machinery 
which  the  impulse  had  not  yet  reached.  Wheels  creak  on  their  axles,  and 
teeth  bite  into  cogs,  and  blocks  whir  in  rapid  motion,  while  the  next  wheel 
stands  as  apathetic  and  motionless  as  though  it  were  ready  to  stand  so 
for  a  hundred  years.  But  the  momentum  reaches  it — the  lever  catches, 
and  the  wheel,  obeying  the  impulse,  creaks  and  takes  its  share  in  the  com¬ 
mon  movement,  the  result  and  aim  of  which  are  beyond  its  ken. 

Just  as  in  the  clock,  the  result  of  the  complex  action  of  countless  dif¬ 
ferent  wheels  and  blocks  is  only  the  slow,  regular  movement  of  the  hand 
marking  the  time,  so  the  result  of  all  the  complex  human  movement  of 
those  160,000  Russians  and  Frenchmen — of  all  the  passions,  hopes,  re¬ 
grets,  humiliations,  sufferings,  impulses  of  pride,  of  fear,  and  of  en¬ 
thusiasm  of  those  men— was  only  the  loss  of  the  battle  of  Austerlitz,  the 


! 


fl( 


WARANDPEACE  237 

so-called  battle  of  the  three  Emperors,  that  is,  the  slow  shifting  of  the 
registering  hand  on  the  dial  of  the  history  of  mankind. 

Prince  Andrey  was  on  duty  that  day,  and  in  close  attendance  on  the 
commander-in-chief.  At  six  o’clock  in  the  evening  Kutuzov  visited  the 
headquarters  of  the  Emperors,  and  after  a  brief  interview  with  the  Tsar, 
went  in  to  see  the  Ober-Hofmarschall  Count  Tolstoy. 

Bolkonsky  took  advantage  of  this  interval  to  go  in  to  Dolgorukov  to 
try  and  learn  details  about  the  coming  action.  Prince  Andrey  felt  that 
Kutuzov  was  disturbed  and  displeased  about  something,  and  that  they 
were  displeased  with  him  at  headquarters,  and  that  all  the  persons  at  the 
Emperor’s  headquarters  took  the  tone  with  him  of  people  who  knew  some¬ 
thing  other  people  are  not  aware  of ;  and  for  that  reason  he  wanted  to 
have  some  talk  with  Dolgorukov. 

‘Oh,  good  evening,  my  dear  boy/  said  Dolgorukov,  who  was  sitting 
at  tea  with  Bilibin.  ‘The  fete’s  for  to-morrow.  How’s  your  old  fellow?  out 
of  humour?’ 

‘I  won’t  say  he’s  out  of  humour,  but  I  fancy  he  would  like  to  get  a 
hearing.’ 

‘But  he  did  get  a  hearing  at  the  council  of  war,  and  he  will  get  a  hearing 
when  he  begins  to  talk  sense.  But  to  delay  and  wait  about  now  when 
Bonaparte  fears  a  general  engagement  more  than  anything — is  out  of 
the  question.’ 

‘Oh  yes,  you  have  seen  him,’  said  Prince  Andrey.  ‘Well,  what  did  you 
think  of  Bonaparte?  What  impression  did  he  make  on  you?’ 

‘Yes,  I  saw  him,  and  I’m  persuaded  he  fears  a  general  engagement  more 
than  anything  in  the  world,’  repeated  Dolgorukov,  who  evidently  at¬ 
tached  great  value  to  this  general  deduction  he  had  made  from  his  inter¬ 
view  with  Napoleon.  ‘If  he  weren't  afraid  of  an  engagement  what  reason 
has  he  to  ask  for  this  interview,  to  open  negotiations,  and,  above  all,  to 
i  retreat,  when  retreat  is  contrary  to  his  whole  method  of  conducting  war¬ 
fare?  Believe  me,  he’s  afraid,  afraid  of  a  general  engagement;  his  hour 
has  come,  mark  my  words.’ 

‘But  tell  me  what  was  he  like,  how  did  he  behave?’  Prince  Andrey  still 
insisted. 

‘He’s  a  man  in  a  grey  overcoat,  very  anxious  to  be  called  “your 
majesty,”  but  disappointed  at  not  getting -a  title  of  any  kind  out  of  me. 
That’s  the  sort  of  man  he  is,  that’s  all,’  answered  Dolgorukov,  looking 
round  with  a  smile  at  Bilibin. 

‘In  spite  of  my  profound  respect  for  old  Kutuzov,’  he  pursued,  ‘a  pretty 
set  of  fools  we  should  be  to  wait  about  and  let  him  have  a  chance  to  get 
away  or  cheat  us,  when  as  it  is  he’s  in  our  hands  for  certain.  No,  we 
mustn’t  forget  Suvorov  and  his  rule — never  to  put  oneself  in  a  position 
to  be  attacked,  but  to  make  the  attack  oneself.  Believe  me,  the  energy 
of  young  men  is  often  a  safer  guide  in  warfare  than  all  the  experience  of 

I  the  old  cunctators.’ 

‘But  in  what  position  are  you  going  to  attack  him?  I  have  been  at  the 
outposts  to-day,  and  there  was  no  making  out  where  his  chief  forces  are 


338  WAR  AND  PEACE 

concentrated,’  said  Prince  Andrey.  He  was  longing  to  explain  to  Dolgoru¬ 
kov  his  own  idea,  the  plan  of  attack  he  had  formed. 

‘Ah,  that’s  a  matter  of  no  consequence  whatever,’  Dolgorukov  said 
quickly,  getting  up  and  unfolding  a  map  on  the  table.  'Every  contingency 
has  been  provided  for;  if  he  is  concentrated  at  Briinn.  .  .  .’  And  Prince 
Dolgorukov  gave  a  rapid  and  vague  account  of  Weierother’s  plan  of  a 
flank  movement. 

Prince  Andrey  began  to  make  objections  and  to  explain  his  own  plan, 
which  may  have  been  as  good  as  Weierother’s,  but  had  the  fatal  disad¬ 
vantage  that  Weierother’s  plan  had  already  been  accepted.  As  soon  as 
Prince  Andrey  began  to  enlarge  on  the  drawbacks  of  the  latter  and  the 
advantages  of  his  own  scheme.  Prince  Dolgorukov  ceased  to  attend,  and 
looked  without  interest  not  at  the  map,  but  at  Prince  Andrey 's  face. 

‘There  is  to  be  a  council  of  war  at  Kutuzov’s  to-night,  though;  you  can 
explain  all  that  then,’  said  Dolgorukov. 

‘That’s  what  I  am  going  to  do,’  said  Prince  Andrey,  moving  away  from 
the  map. 

‘And  what  are  you  worrying  yourselves  about,  gentlemen?’  said  Bilibin, 
who  had  till  then  been  listening  to  their  talk  with  a  beaming  smile,  but 
now  unmistakably  intended  to  make  a  joke.  ‘Whether  there  is  victory  or 
defeat  to-morrow,  the  glory  of  the  Russian  arms  is  secure.  Except  your 
Kutuzov,  there’s  not  a  single  Russian  in  command  of  a  column.  The  com¬ 
manders  are:  Herr  General  Wimpfen,  le  comte  de  Langeron,  le  prince  de 
Lichtenstein,  le  prince  de  Hohenlohe  and  Prishprshiprsh,  or  some  such 
Polish  name.’ 

‘Hold  your  tongue,  backbiter,’  said  Dolgorukov.  ‘It’s  not  true,  there  are 
two  Russians:  Miloradovitch  and  Dohturov,  and  there  would  have  been 
a  third,  Count  Araktcheev,  but  for  his  weak  nerves.’ 

‘Mihail  Ilarionovitch  has  come  out,  I  think,’  said  Prince  Andrey.  ‘Good 
luck  and  success  to  you,  gentlemen,’  he  added,  and  went  out,  after  shak¬ 
ing  hands  with  Dolgorukov  and  Bilibin. 

On  returning  home  Prince  Andrey  could  not  refrain  from  asking 
Kutuzov,  who  sat  near  him  in  silence,  what  he  thought  about  the  coming 
battle.  Kutuzov  looked  sternly  at  his  adjutant,  and  after  a  pause,  an¬ 
swered:  ‘I  think  the  battle  will  be  lost,  and  I  said  so  to  Count  Tolstoy  and 
asked  him  to  give  that  message  to  the  Tsar.  And  what  do  you  suppose  was 
the  answer  he  gave  me?  “Eh,  mon  cher  general,  je  me  mele  de  riz  et  de 
edtelettes,  melez-vous  des  affaires  de  la  guerre.”  Yes.  .  .  .  That’s  the  an¬ 
swer  I  got!’ 

XII 

At  ten  o’clock  in  the  evening,  Weierother  with  his  plans  rode  over  to 
Kutuzov’s  quarters,  where  the  council  of  war  was  to  take  place.  All  the 
commanders  of  columns  were  summoned  to  the  commander-in-chief’s,  and 
with  the  exception  of  Prince  Bagration,  who  declined  to  come,  all  of  them 
arrived  at  the  hour  fixed. 


WAR  AND  PEACE  239 

Weierother,  who  was  entirely  responsible  for  all  the  arrangements  for 
the  proposed  battle,  in  his  eagerness  and  hurry,  was  a  striking  contrast 
to  the  ill-humoured  and  sleepy  Kutuzov,  who  reluctantly  played  the  part 
of  president  and  chairman  of  the  council  of  war.  Weierother  obviously  felt 
himself  at  the  head  of  the  movement  that  had  been  set  going  and  could 
not  be  stopped.  He  was  like  a  horse  in  harness  running  downhill  with 
a  heavy  load  behind  him.  Whether  he  were  pulling  it  or  it  were  pushing 
him,  he  could  not  have  said,  but  he  was  flying  along  at  full  speed  with  nc 
time  to  consider  where  this  swift  motion  would  land  him.  Weierother  had 
been  twice  that  evening  to  make  a  personal  inspection  up  to  the  enemy’s 
line,  and  twice  he  had  been  with  the  Emperors,  Russian  and  Austrian,  to 
report  and  explain,  and  to  his  office,  where  he  had  dictated  the  disposition 
of  the  German  troops.  He  came  now,  exhausted,  to  Kutuzov’s. 

He  was  evidently  so  much  engrossed  that  he  even  forgot  to  be  respect¬ 
ful  to  the  commander-in-chief.  He  interrupted  him,  talked  rapidly  and 
indistinctly,  without  looking  at  the  person  he  was  addressing,  failed  to 
answer  questions  that  were  put  to  him,  was  spattered  with  mud,  and  had 
an  air  pitiful,  exhausted,  distracted,  and  at  the  same  time  self-confident 
and  haughty. 

Kutuzov  was  staying  in  a  small  nobleman’s  castle  near  Austerlitz.  In 
the  drawing-room,  which  had  been  made  the  commander-in-chief’s  study, 
were  gathered  together:  Kutuzov  himself,  Weierother,  and  the  members  of 
the  council  of  war.  They  were  drinking  tea.  They  were  only  waiting  for 
Prince  Bagration  to  open  the  council.  Presently  Bagration’s  orderly  officer 
came  with  a  message  that  the  prince  could  not  be  present.  Prince  Andrey 
came  in  to  inform  the  commander-in-chief  of  this;  and,  profiting  by  the 
permission  previously  given  him  by  Kutuzov  to  be  present  at  the  council, 
he  remained  in  the  room. 

‘Well,  since  Prince  Bagration  isn't  coming,  we  can  begin,’  said  Weier¬ 
other,  hastily  getting  up  from  his  place  and  approaching  the  table,  on 
which  an  immense  map  of  the  environs  of  Brunn  lay  unfolded. 

Kutuzov,  his  uniform  unbuttoned,  and  his  fat  neck  as  though  set  free 
from  bondage,  bulging  over  the  collar,  was  sitting  in  a  low  chair  with  his 
podgy  old  hands  laid  symmetrically  on  the  arms;  he  was  almost  asleep. 

At  the  sound  of  Weierother’s  voice,  he  made  an  effort  and  opened  his 
solitary  eye. 

‘Yes,  yes,  please,  it’s  late  as  it  is,’  he  assented,  and  nodding  his  head, 
he  let  it  droop  and  closed  his  eyes  again. 

If  the  members  of  the  council  had  at  first  believed  Kutuzov  to  be  sham¬ 
ming  sleep,  the  nasal  sounds  to  which  he  gave  vent  during  the  reading 
that  followed,  proved  that  the  commander-in-chief  was  concerned  with 
something  of  far  greater  consequence  than  the  desire  to  show  his  contempt 
for  their  disposition  of  the  troops  or  anything  else  whatever ;  he  was  con¬ 
cerned  with  the  satisfaction  of  an  irresistible  human  necessity — -sleep.  He 
was  really  asleep.  Weierother,  with  the  gesture  of  a  man  too  busy  to  lose 
even  a  minute  of  his  time,  glanced  at  Kutuzov  and  satisfying  himself  that 
he  was  asleep,  he  took  up  a  paper  and  in  a  loud,  monotonous  tone  began 


240 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

reading  the  disposition  of  the  troops  in  the  approaching  battle  under  a 
heading,  which  he  also  read. 

‘Disposition  for  the  attack  of  the  enemy’s  position  behind  Cobelnitz  and 
Sokolnitz,  November  20,  1805.’ 

The  disposition  was  very  complicated  and  intricate. 

‘As  the  enemy’s  left  wing  lies  against  the  wooded  hills  and  their  right 
wing  is  advancing  by  way  of  Kobelnitz  and  Sokolnitz  behind  the  swamps 
that  lie  there,  while  on  the  other  hand  our  left  wing  stretches  far  beyond 
their  right,  it  will  be  advantageous  to  attack  this  last-named  wing,  espe¬ 
cially  if  we  have  possession  of  the  villages  of  Sokolnitz  and  Kobelnitz,  by 
which  means  we  can  at  once  fall  on  them  in  the  rear,  and  pursue  them  in 
the  open  between  Schlapanitz  and  the  Thuerassa-Wald,  thereby  avoiding 
the  defiles  of  Schlapanitz  and  Bellowitz,  which  are  covered  by  the  enemy’s 
front.  With  this  ultimate  aim  it  will  be  necessary  .  .  .  The  first  column 
marches  .  .  .  The  second  column  marches  .  .  .  The  third  column 
marches’  .  .  .  read  Weierother. 

The  generals  seemed  to  listen  reluctantly  to  the  intricate  account  of 
the  disposition  of  the  troops.  The  tall,  fair-haired  general,  Buxhevden, 
stood  leaning  his  back  against  the  wall,  and  fixing  his  eyes  on  a  burning 
candle,  he  seemed  not  to  be  listening,  not  even  to  wish  to  be  thought  to 
be  listening.  Exactly  opposite  to  Weierother,  with  his  bright,  wide-open 
eyes  fixed  upon  him  was  Miloradovitch,  a  ruddy  man,  with  whiskers  and 
shoulders  turned  upwards,  sitting  in  a  military  pose  with  his  hands  on  his 
knees  and  his  elbows  bent  outwards.  He  sat  in  obstinate  silence,  staring 
into  Weierother’s  face,  and  only  taking  his  eyes  off  him  when  the  Austrian 
staff-commander  ceased  speaking.  Then  Miloradovitch  looked  round  sig¬ 
nificantly  at  the  other  generals.  But  from  that  significant  glance  it  was 
impossible  to  tell  whether  he  agreed  or  disagreed,  was  pleased  or  dis¬ 
pleased,  at  the  arrangements.  Next  to  Weierother  sat  Count  Langeron, 
with  a  subtle  smile  that  never  left  his  Southern  French  face  during  the 
reading;  he  gazed  at  his  delicate  fingers  as  he  twisted  round  a  golden 
snuff-box  with  a  portrait  on  it.  In  the  middle  of  one  of  the  lengthy  para¬ 
graphs  he  stopped  the  rotatory  motion  of  the  snuff-box,  lifted  his  head, 
and  with  hostile  courtesy  lurking  in  the  corners  of  his  thin  lips,  inter¬ 
rupted  Weierother  and  would  have  said  something.  But  the  Austrian  gen¬ 
eral,  continuing  to  read,  frowned  angrily  with  a  motion  of  the  elbows  that 
seemed  to  say:  ‘Later,  later,  you  shall  give  your  opinion,  now  be  so  good 
as  to  look  at  the  map  and  listen.’  Langeron  turned  up  his  eyes  with  a  look 
of  bewilderment,  looked  round  at  Miloradovitch,  as  though  seeking  en¬ 
lightenment,  but  meeting  the  significant  gaze  of  Miloradovitch,  that  sig¬ 
nified  nothing,  he  dropped  his  eyes  dejectedly,  and  fell  to  twisting  his 
snuff-box  again. 

‘A  geography  lesson,’  he  murmured  as  though  to  himself,  but  loud 
enough  to  be  heard. 

Przhebyshevsky,  with  respectful  but  dignified  courtesy,  put  his  hand 
up  to  his  ear  on  the  side  nearest  Weierother,  with  the  air  of  a  man  ab¬ 
sorbed  in  attention.  Dohturov,  a  little  man,  sat  opposite  Weierother  with 


WARANDPEACE  241 

a  studious  and  modest  look  on  his  face.  Bending  over  the  map,  he  was 
conscientiously  studying  the  arrangement  of  the  troops  and  the  unfamiliar 
locality.  Several  times  he  asked  Weierother  to  repeat  words  and  difficult 
names  of  villages  that  he  had  not  caught.  Weierother  did  so,  and  Dohturov 
made  a  note  of  them. 

When  the  reading,  which  lasted  more  than  an  hour,  was  over,  Langeron, 
stopping  his  twisting  snuff-box,  began  to  speak  without  looking  at  Weier¬ 
other  or  any  one  in  particular.  He  pointed  out  how  difficult  it  was  to  carry 
out  such  a  disposition,  in  which  the  enemy’s  position  was  assumed  to  be 
known,  when  it  might  well  be  uncertain  seeing  that  the  enemy  was  in 
movement.  Langeron’s  objections  were  well  founded,  yet  it  was  evident 
that  their  principal  object  was  to  make  Weierother,  who  had  read  his 
plans  so  conceitedly,  as  though  to  a  lot  of  schoolboys,  feel  that  he  had  to 
deal  not  with  fools,  but  with  men  who- could  teach  him  something  in  mili¬ 
tary  matters. 

When  the  monotonous  sound  of  Weierother’s  voice  ceased,  Kutuzov 
opened  his  eyes,  as  the  miller  wakes  up  at  any  interruption  in  the  droning 
of  the  mill-wheels,  listened  to  what  Langeron  was  saying,  and  as  though 
saying  to  himself:  ‘Oh,  you’re  still  at  the  same  nonsense!’  made  haste  to 
close  his  eyes  again,  and  let  his  head  sink  still  lower. 

Langeron,  trying  to  deal  the  most  malignant  thrusts  possible  at  Weier¬ 
other’s  military  vanity  as  author  of  the  plan,  showed  that  Bonaparte  might 
easily  become  the  attacking  party  instead  of  waiting  to  be  attacked,  and 
so  render  all  this  plan  of  the  disposition  of  the  troops  utterly  futile.  Weier¬ 
other  met  all  objections  with  a  confident  anu  contemptuous  smile,  ob¬ 
viously  prepared  beforehand  for  every  objection,  regardless  of  what  they 
might  say  to  him. 

‘If  he  could  have  attacked  us,  he  would  have  done  so  to-day,’  he  said. 

‘You  suppose  him,  then,  to  be  powerless?’  said  Langeron. 

‘I  doubt  if  he  has  as  much  as  forty  thousand  troops,’  answered  Weier¬ 
other  with  the  smile  of  a  doctor  to  whom  the  sick-nurse  is  trying  to  ex¬ 
pound  her  own  method  of  treatment. 

‘In  that  case,  he  is  going  to  meet  his  ruin  in  awaiting  our  attack,’  said 
Langeron  with  a  subtle,  ironical  smile;  looking  round  again  for  support 
to  Miloradovitch  near  him.  But  Miloradovitch  was  obviously  thinking  at 
that  instant  of  anything  in  the  world  rather  than  the  matter  in  dispute 
between  the  generals. 

‘Ma  foi,’  he  said,  ‘to-morrow  we  shall  see  all  that  on  the  field  of  battle.’ 

Weierother  smiled  again,  a  smile  that  said  that  it  was  comic  and  queer 
for  him  to  meet  with  objections  from  Russian  generals  and  to  have  to  give 
proofs  to  confirm  what  he  was  not  simply  himself  convinced  of,  but  had 
thoroughly  convinced  their  majesties  the  Emperors  of  too. 

‘The  enemy  have  extinguished  their  fires  and  a  continual  noise  has  been 
heard  in  their  camp,’  he  said.  ‘What  does  that  mean?  Either  they  are 
1  retreating — the  only  thing  we  have  to  fear,  or  changing  their  position’  (he 
smiled  ironically).  ‘But  even  if  they  were  to  take  up  their  position  at 


242  WARANDPEACE 

T uras,  it  would  only  be  saving  us  a  great  deal  of  trouble,  and  all  our 
arrangements  will  remain  unchanged  in  the  smallest  detail.’ 

‘How  can  that  be?  .  .  said  Prince  Andrey,  who  had  a  long  while  been 
looking  out  for  an  opportunity  of  expressing  his  doubts.  Kutuzov  waked 
up,  cleared  his  throat  huskily,  and  looked  round  at  the  generals. 

‘Gentlemen,  the  disposition  for  to-morrow,  for  to-day  indeed  (for  it’s 
going  on  for  one  o’clock),  can’t  be  altered  now,’  he  said.  ‘You  have  heard 
it,  and  we  will  all  do  our  duty.  And  before  a  battle  nothing  is  of  so  much 
importance  .  .  .’  (he  paused)  ‘as  a  good  night’s  rest.’ 

He  made  a  show  of  rising  from  his  chair.  The  generals  bowed  them¬ 
selves  out.  It  was  past  midnight.  Prince  Andrey  went  out. 

The  council  of  war  at  which  Prince  Andrey  had  not  succeeded  in  ex¬ 
pressing  his  opinion,  as  he  had  hoped  to  do,  had  left  on  him  an  impression 
of  uncertainty  and  uneasiness.  Which  was  right — Dolgorukov  and  Weier- 
other,  or  Kutuzov  and  Langeron  and  the  others,  who  did  not  approve  of 
the  plan  of  attack — he  did  not  know.  But  had  it  really  been  impossible  for 
Kutuzov  to  tell  the  Tsar  his  views  directly?  Could  it  not  have  been  man¬ 
aged  dirferently?  On  account  of  personal  and  court  considerations  were 
tens  of  thousands  of  lives  to  be  risked — ‘and  my  life,  mine?’  he  thought. 

‘Yes,  it  may  well  be  that  I  shall  be  killed  to-morrow,’  he  thought. 

And  all  at  once,  at  that  thought  of  death,  a  whole  chain  of  memories, 
the  most  remote  and  closest  to  his  heart,  rose  up  in  his  imagination.  He 
recalled  his  last  farewell  to  his  father  and  his  wife;  he  recalled  the  early 
days  of  his  love  for  her,  thought  of  her  approaching  motherhood;  and  he 
felt  sorry  for  her  and  for  himself,  and  in  a  nervously  overwrought  and 
softened  mood  he  went  out  of  the  cottage  at  which  he  and  Nesvitsky  were 
putting  up,  and  began  to  walk  to  and  fro  before  it.  The  night  was  foggy, 
and  the  moonlight  glimmered  mysteriously  through  the  mist.  ‘Yes,  to¬ 
morrow,  to-morrow!’  he  thought.  ‘To-morrow,  may  be,  all  will  be  over 
for  me,  all  these  memories  will  be  no  more,  all  these  memories  will  have 
no  more  meaning  for  me.  To-morrow,  perhaps — for  certain,  indeed — - 
to-morrow,  I  have  a  presentiment,  I  shall  have  for  the  .first  time  to  show  all 
I  can  do.’  And  he  pictured  the  engagement,  the  loss  of  it,  the  concentra¬ 
tion  of  the  fighting  at  one  point,  and  the  hesitation  of  all  the  commanding 
officers.  And  then  the  happy  moment — that  Toulon  he  had  been  waiting 
for  so  long — at  last  comes  to  him.  Resolutely  and  clearly  he  speaks  his 
opinion  to  Kutuzov  and  Weierother,  and  the  Emperors.  All  are  struck  by 
the  justness  of  his  view,  but  no  one  undertakes  to  carry  it  into  execution, 
and  behold,  he  leads  the  regiment,  only  making  it  a  condition  that  no  one 
is  to  interfere  with  his  plans,  and  he  leads  his  division  to  the  critical  point 
and  wins  the  victory  alone.  ‘And  death  and  agony!’  said  another  voice. 
But  Prince  Andrey  did  not  answer  that  voice,  and  went  on  with  his  tri¬ 
umphs.  The  disposition  of  the  battle  that  ensues  is  all  his  work  alone. 
Nominally,  he  is  an  adjutant  on  the  staff  of  Kutuzov,  but  he  does  every¬ 
thing  alone.  The  battle  is  gained  by  him  alone.  Kutuzov  is  replaced,  he 
is  appointed.  .  .  .  ‘Well,  and  then?’  said  the  other  voice  again,  ‘what 


WAR  AND  PEACE  243 

then,  if  you  do  a  dozen  times  over  escape  being  wounded,  killed,  or  de¬ 
ceived  before  that;  well,  what  then?’  ‘Why,  then  .  .  Prince  Andrey 
answered  himself,  ‘I  don’t  know  what  will  come  then,  I  can’t  know,  and 
don’t  want  to;  but  if  I  want  that,  if  I  want  glory,  want  to  be  known  to 
men,  want  to  be  loved  by  them,  it’s  not  my  fault  that  I  want  it,  that  it’s 
the  only  thing  I  care  for,  the  only  thing  I  live  for.  Yes,  the  only  thing! 
I  shall  never  say  to  any  one,  but,  my  God!  what  am  I  to  do,  if  I  care 
for  nothing  but  glory,  but  men’s  love?  Death,  wounds,  the  loss  of  my 
family — nothing  has  terrors  for  me.  And  dear  and  precious  as  many 
people  are  to  me:  father,  sister,  wife— the  people  dearest  to  me;  yet 
dreadful  and  unnatural  as  it  seems,  I  would  give  them  all  up  for  a  mo¬ 
ment  of  glory,  of  triumph  over  men,  of  love  from  men  whom  I  don’t 
know,  and  shall  never  know,  for  the  love  of  those  people  there,’  he 
thought,  listening  to  the  talk  in  the  courtyard  of  Kutuzov’s  house.  He 
could  hear  the  voices  of  the  officers’  servants  packing  up;  one  of  them, 
probably  a  coachman,  was  teasing  Kutuzov’s  old  cook,  a  man  called 
Tit,  whom  Prince  Andrey  knew.  He  kept  calling  him  and  making  a 
joke  on  his  name. 

‘Tit,  hey,  Tit?’  he  said. 

‘Well?’  answered  the  old  man. 

‘Tit,  stupay  molotit’  (‘Tit,  go  a  thrashing’),  said  the  jester. 

‘Pooh,  go  to  the  devil,  do,’  he  heard  the  cook’s  voice,  smothered  in 
the  laughter  of  the  servants. 

‘And  yet,  the  only  thing  I  love  and  prize  is  triumph  over  all  of  them, 
that  mysterious  power  and  glory  which  seems  hovering  over  me  in 
this  mist!’ 


XIII 

Rostov  had  been  sent  that  night  with  a  platoon  on  picket  duty  to  the 
line  of  outposts  in  the  foremost  part  of  Bagration’s  detachment.  His 
hussars  were  scattered  in  couples  about  the  outposts;  he  himself  rode 
about  the  line  of  the  outposts  trying  to  struggle  against  the  sleepiness 
which  kept  overcoming  him.  Behind  him  could  be  seen  the  immense  ex¬ 
panse  of  the  dimly  burning  fires  of  our  army;  before  him  was  the  misty 
darkness.  However  intently  Rostov  gazed  into  this  misty  distance,  he 
could  see  nothing;  at  one  moment  there  seemed  something  greyish,  at 
the  next  something  blackish,  then  something  like  the  glimmer  of  a  fire 
over  there  where  the  enemy  must  be,  then  he  fancied  the  glimmer  had 
been  only  in  his  own  eyes.  His  eyes  kept  closing,  and  there  floated  before 
his  mind  the  image  of  the  Emperor,  then  of  Denisov,  and  Moscow  memo¬ 
ries,  and  again  he  opened  his  eyes  and  saw  close  before  him  the  head  and 
ears  of  the  horse  he  was  riding,  and  sometimes  black  figures  of  hussars, 
when  he  rode  within  six  paces  of  them,  but  in  the  distance  still  the  same 
misty  darkness.  ‘Why?  it  may  well  happen,’  mused  Rostov,  ‘that  the 
Emperor  will  meet  me  and  give  me  some  commission,  as  he  might  to 
any  officer;  he’ll  say,  “Go  and  find  out  what’s  there.”  There  are  a  lot 


244  WAR  AND  PEACE 

of  stories  of  how  quite  by  chance  he  has  made  the  acquaintance  of  officers 
and  given  them  some  place  close  to  him  too.  Oh,  if  he  were  to  give  me 
a  place  in  attendance  on  him!  Oh,  what  care  I  would  take  of  him,  how 
I  would  tell  him  the  whole  truth,  how  I  would  unmask  all  who  deceive 
him!’  And  to  picture  his  love  and  devotion  to  the  Tsar  more  vividly, 
Rostov  imagined  some  enemy  or  treacherous  German,  whom  he  would 
with  great  zest  not  simply  kill,  but  slap  in  the  face  before  the  Tsar’s 
eyes.  All  at  once  a  shout  in  the  distance  roused  Rostov.  He  started  and 
opened  his  eyes.  ‘Where  am  I?  Yes,  in  the  picket  line;  the  pass  and 
watchword — shaft,  Olmiitz.  How  annoying  that  our  squadron  will  be 
in  reserve  .  .  .’  he  thought.  T’ll  ask  to  go  to  the  front.  It  may  be  my 
only  chance  of  seeing  the  Emperor.  And  now  it’s  not  long  before  I’m  off 
duty.  I’ll  ride  round  once  more,  and  as  I  come  back,  I’ll  go  to  the  general 
and  ask  him.’  He  sat  up  straight  in  the  saddle  and  set  off  to  ride  once 
more  round  his  hussars.  It  seemed  to  him  that  it  was  lighter.  On  the  left 
side  he  could  see  a  sloping  descent  that  looked  lighted  up  and  a  black 
knoll  facing  it  that  seemed  steep  as  a  wall.  On  this  knoll  was  a  white 
patch  which  Rostov  could  not  understand;  was  it  a  clearing  in  the  wood, 
lighted  up  by  the  moon,  or  the  remains  of  snow,  or  white  horses?  It 
seemed  to  him  indeed  that  something  was  moving  over  that  white  spot. 
‘It  must  be  snow — that  spot:  a  spot — une  tache,’  Rostov  mused  dream¬ 
ily.  ‘But  that’s  not  a  tache  .  .  .  Na  .  .  .  tasha,  my  sister,  her  black 
eyes.  Na  .  .  .  tasha  (won’t  she  be  surprised  when  I  tell  her  how  I’ve 
seen  the  Emperor!)  Natasha  .  .  .  tasha  .  .  .  sabretache.  .  .  .’  ‘Keep 
to  the  right,  your  honour,  there  are  bushes  here,’  said  the  voice  of  an 
hussar,  by  whom  Rostov  was  riding  as  he  fell  asleep.  Rostov  lifted  his 
head,  which  had  dropped  on  to  his  horse’s  mane,  and  pulled  up  beside 
the  hussar.  He  could  not  shake  off  the  youthful,  childish  drowsiness  that 
overcame  him.  ‘But,  I  say,  what  was  I  thinking?  I  mustn’t  forget.  How 
I  am  going  to  speak  to  the  Emperor?  No,  not  that — that’s  to-morrow. 
Yes,  yes!  Natasha,  attacks,  tacks  us, — whom?  The  hussars.  Ah,  the 
hussars  with  their  moustaches  .  .  .  Along  the  Tversky  boulevard  rode 
that  hussar  with  the  moustaches,  I  was  thinking  of  him  too  just  opposite 
Guryev’s  house.  .  .  .  Old  Guryev.  .  .  .  Ah,  a  fine  fellow  Denisov!  But 
that’s  all  nonsense.  The  great  thing  is  that  the  Emperor’s  here  now.  How 
he  looked  at  me  and  longed  to  say  something,  but  he  did  not  dare.  .  .  . 
No,  it  was  I  did  not  dare.  But  that’s  nonsense,  and  the  great  thing  is  not 
to  forget  something  important  I  was  thinking  of,  yes.  Natasha,  attacks 
us,  yes,  yes,  yes.  That’s  right.’  And  again  he  dropped  with  his  head  on 
his  horse’s  neck.  All  at  once  it  seemed  to  him  that  he  was  being  fired 
at.  ‘What?  what?  .  .  .  Cut  them  down!  What?’  Rostov  was  saying,  as 
he  wakened  up.  At  the  instant  that  he  opened  his  eyes,  Rostov  heard  in 
front,  over  where  the  enemy  were,  the  prolonged  shouting  of  thousands 
of  voices.  His  horse  and  the  horse  of  the  hussar  near  him  pricked  up 
their  ears  at  these  shouts.  Over  where  the  shouts  came  from,  a  light  was 
lighted  and  put  out,  then  another,  and  all  along  the  line  of  the  French 
troops  on  the  hillside  fires  were  lighted  and  the  shouts  grew  louder  and 


WAR  AND  PEACE  245 

louder.  Rostov  heard  the  sound  of  French  words  though  he  could  not 
distinguish  them.  He  could  only  hear:  aaaa!  and  rrrr! 

‘What  is  it?  What  do  you  think?’  Rostov  said  to  the  hussai  near  him. 
‘That’s  in  the  enemy’s  camp  surely?’ 

The  hussar  made  no  reply. 

‘Why,  don’t  you  hear  it?’  Rostov  asked  again,  after  waiting  some 
time  for  a  reply. 

‘Who  can  tell,  your  honour?’  the  hussar  answered  reluctantly. 

‘From  the  direction  it  must  be  the  enemy,’  Rostov  said  again. 

‘May  be  ’tis,  and  may  be  not,’  said  the  hussar;  ‘it’s  dark.  Now! 
steady,’  he  shouted  to  his  horse,  who  fidgeted.  Rostov’s  horse  too  was 
restless,  and  pawed  the  frozen  ground  as  it  listened  to  the  shouts  and 
looked  at  the  lights.  The  shouting  grew  louder  and  passed  into  a  mingled 
roar  that  could  only  be  produced  by  an  army  of  several  thousands.  The 
lights  stretched  further  and  further  probably  along  the  line  of  the 
French  camp.  Rostov  was  not  sleepy  now.  The  gay,  triumphant  shouts 
in  the  enemy’s  army  had  a  rousing  effect  on  him.  ‘Vive  VEmpereur  1 
V Empereur !’  Rostov  could  hear  distinctly  now. 

‘Not  far  off,  beyond  the  stream  it  must  be,’  he  said  to  the  hussar 
near  him. 

The  hussar  merely  sighed  without  replying,  and  cleared  his  throat 
angrily.  They  heard  the  thud  of  a  horse  trotting  along  the  line  of  hussars, 
and  there  suddenly  sprang  up  out  of  the  night  mist,  looking  huge  as  an 
elephant,  the  figure  of  a  sergeant  of  hussars. 

‘Your  honour,  the  generals!’  said  the  sergeant,  riding  up  to  Rostov. 
Rostov,  still  looking  away  towards  the  lights  and  shouts,  rode  with  the 
sergeant  to  meet  several  men  galloping  along  the  line.  One  was  on  a 
white  horse.  Prince  Bagration  with  Prince  Dolgorukov  and  his  adjutant 
had  ridden  out  to  look  at  the  strange  demonstration  of  lights  and  shouts 
in  the  enemy’s  army.  Rostov,  going  up  to  Bagration,  reported  what  he 
had  heard  and  seen  to  him,  and  joined  the  adjutants,  listening  to  what 
the  generals  were  saying. 

‘Take  my  word  for  it,’  Prince  Dolgorukov  was  saying  to  Bagration, 
‘it’s  nothing  but  a  trick;  they  have  retreated  and  ordered  the  rearguard 
to  light  fires  and  make  a  noise  to  deceive  us.’ 

‘I  doubt  it,’  said  Bagration;  ‘since  evening  I  have  seen  them  on  that 
knoll;  if  they  had  retreated,  they  would  have  withdrawn  from  there 
too.  Monsieur  1’officier,’  Prince  Bagration  turned  to  Rostov,  ‘are  the 
enemy’s  pickets  still  there?’ 

‘They  were  there  this  evening,  but  now  I  can’t  be  sure,  your  excel¬ 
lency.  Shall  I  go  with  some  hussars  and  see?’  said  Rostov. 

Bagration  stood  still,  and  before  answering,  tried  to  make  out  Rostov’s 
face  in  the  mist. 

‘Well,  go  and  see,’  he  said  after  a  brief  pause. 

‘Yes,  sir.’ 

Rostov  put  spurs  to  his  horse,  called  up  the  sergeant  Fedtchenko,  and 
two  other  hussars,  told  them  to  ride  after  him,  and  trotted  off  downhill 


246  WAR  AND  PEACE 

in  the  direction  of  the  shouting,  which  still  continued.  Rostov  felt  both 
dread  and  joy  in  riding  alone  with  three  hussars  into  that  mysterious 
and  dangerous,  misty  distance,  where  no  one  had  been  before  him. 
Bagration  shouted  to  him  from  the  hill  not  to  go  beyond  the  stream,  but 
Rostov  made  as  though  he  had  not  heard  his  words,  and  rode  on  without 
stopping,  further  and  further,  continually  mistaking  bushes  for  trees  and 
ravines  for  men,  and  continually  discovering  his  mistakes.  As  he  galloped 
downhill  he  lost  sight  both  of  our  men  and  the  enemy,  but  more  loudly 
and  distinctly  he  heard  the  shouts  of  the  French.  In  the  valley  he  saw 
ahead  of  him  something  that  looked  like  a  river,  but  when  he  had  ridden 
up  to  it,  he  found  out  it  was  a  road.  As  he  got  out  on  the  road  he  pulled 
up  his  horse,  hesitating  whether  to  go  along  it  or  to  cut  across  it,  and 
ride  over  the  black  held  up  the  hillside.  To  follow  the  road,  which 
showed  lighter  in  the  mist,  was  more  dangerous,  because  figures  could 
be  more  easily  descried  upon  it.  ‘Follow  me,’  he  said;  ‘cut  across  the 
road,’  and  began  galloping  up  the  hill  towards  the  point  where  the  French 
picket  had  been  in  the  evening. 

‘Your  honour,  here  he  is!’  said  one  of  the  hussars  behind;  and  before 
Rostov  had  time  to  make  out  something  that  rose  up  suddenly  black  in 
the  mist,  there  was  a  flash  of  light,  the  crack  of  a  shot  and  a  bullet,  that 
seemed  whining  a  complaint,  whizzed  high  in  the  air  and  flew  away  out 
of  hearing.  Another  shot  missed  fire,  but  there  was  a  flash  in  the  pan. 
Rostov  turned  his  horse’s  head  and  galloped  back.  He  heard  four  more 
shots  at  varying  intervals,  and  four  more  bullets  Avhistled  in  varying 
tones  somewhere  in  the  mist.  Rostov  held  in  his  horse,  who  seemed  in¬ 
spirited,  as  he  was  himself  by^  the  shots,  and  rode  back  at  a  walking-pace. 
‘Now,  then,  some  more;  now  then,  more!’  a  sort  of  light-hearted  voice 
murmured  in  his  soul.  But  there  were  no  more  shots.  Only  as  he  ap¬ 
proached  Bagration,  Rostov  put  his  horse  into  a  gallop  again,  and  with 
his  hand  to  his  cap,  rode  up  to  him. 

Dolgorukov  was  still  insisting  on  his  opinion  that  the  French  were 
retreating,  and  had  only  lighted  fires  to  mislead  them.  ‘What  does  it 
prove?’  he  was  saying,  as  Rostov  rode  up  to  them.  ‘They  might  have 
retreated  and  left  pickets.’ 

‘It’s  clear  they  have  not  all  retired,  prince,’  said  Bagration.  ‘We  must 
wait  till  morning;  to-morrow  we  shall  know  all  about  it.’ 

‘The  picket’s  on  the  hill,  your  excellency,  still  where  it  was  in  the 
evening,’  Rostov  announced,  his  hand  to  his  cap,  unable  to  restrain  the 
smile  of  delight  that  had  been  called  up  by  his  expedition  and  the  whiz 
of  the  bullets. 

‘Very  good,  very  good,’  said  Bagration,  ‘I  thank  you,  monsieur  l’officie'r.’ 

‘Your  excellency,’  said  Rostov,  ‘may  I  ask  a  favour?’ 

‘What  is  it?’ 

‘To-morrow  our  squadron  is  ordered  to  the  rear;  may  I  beg  you  to 
attach  me  to  the  first  squadron?’ 

‘What’s  your  name?’ 

‘Count  Rostov.’ 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


247 


'Ah,  very  good!  You  may  stay  in  attendance  on  me.’ 

‘Ilya  Andreitch’s  son?’  said  Dolgorukov.  But  Rostov  made  him  no 
reply. 

‘So  I  may  reckon  on  it,  your  excellency.’ 

‘I  will  give  the  order.’ 

‘To-morrow,  very  likely,  they  will  send  me  with  some  message  to  the 
Emperor,’  he  thought.  ‘Thank  God!’ 

The  shouts  and  lights  in  the  enemy’s  army  had  been  due  to  the  fact 
that  while  Napoleon’s  proclamation  had  been  read  to  the  troops,  the 
Emperor  had  himself  ridden  among  the  bivouacs.  The  soldiers  on  seeing 
the  Emperor  had  lighted  wisps  of  straw  and  run  after  him,  shouting, 
‘Vive  I’empereur !’  Napoleon's  proclamation  was  as  follows: — 

‘Soldiers!  The  Russian  army  is  coming  to  meet  you,  to  avenge  the 
Austrian  army,  the  army  of  Ulm.  They  are  the  forces  you  have  defeated 
at  Hollabrunn,  and  have  been  pursuing  ever  since  up  lo  this  place.  The 
position  we  occupy  is  a  powerful  one,  and  while  they  will  march  to  out¬ 
flank  me  on  the  right,  they  will  expose  their  flank  to  me!  Soldiers!  I  will 
myself  lead  your  battalions.  I  will  keep  out  of  fire,  if  you,  with  your 
habitual  bravery,  carry  defeat  and  disorder  into  the  ranks  of  the  enemy. 
But  if  victory  is  for  one  moment  doubtful,  you  will  see  your  Emperor 
exposed  to  the  enemy’s  hottest  attack,  for  there  can  be  no  uncertainty 
of  victory,  especially  on  this  day,  when  it  is  a  question  of  the  honour  of 
the  French  infantry,  on  which  rests  the  honour  of  our  nation.  Do  not, 
on  the  pretext  of  removing  the  wounded,  break  the  order  of  the  ranks! 
Let  every  man  be  fully  penetrated  by  the  idea  that  we  must  subdue  these 
minions  of  England,  who  are  inspired  by  such  hatred  of  our  country. 
This  victory  will  conclude  our  campaign,  and  we  can  return  to  winter 
quarters,  where  we  shall  be  reinforced  by  fresh  forces  now  being  formed 
in  France;  and  then  the  peace  I  shall  conclude  will  be  one  worthy  of 
my  people,  of  you  and  me.  Napoleon.’ 


XIV 

At  five  o’clock  in  the  morning  it  was  still  quite  dark.  The  troops  of  the 
centre,  of  the  reserves,  and  of  Bagration’s  right  flank,  were  still  at  rest. 
But  on  the  left  flank  the  columns  of  the  infantry,  cavalry,  and  artillery, 
destined  to  be  the  first  to  descend  from  the  heights,  so  as  to  attack  the 
French  right  flank,  and,  according  to  Weiercther’s  plan,  to  drive  it  back 
to  the  Bohemian  mountains,  were  already  up  and  astir.  The  smoke  from 
the  camp-fires,  into  which  they  were  throwing  everything  superfluous, 
made  the  eyes  smart.  It  was  cold  and  dark.  The  officers  were  hurriedly 
drinking  tea  and  eating  breakfast;  the  soldiers  were  munching  biscuits, 
stamping  their  feet  rhythmically,  while  they  gathered  about  the  fires 
warming  themselves,  and  throwing  into  the  blaze  remains  of  shanties, 
chairs,  tables,  wheels,  tubs,  everything  superfluous  that  they  could  not 
take  away  with  them.  Austrian  officers  were  moving  in  and  <->ut  among 


248  WAR  AND  PEACE 

the  Russian  troops,  coming  everywhere  as  heralds  of  their  advance.  As 
soon  as  an  Austrian  officer  appeared  near  a  commanding  officer’s  quar¬ 
ters,  the  regiment  began  to  bestir  themselves;  the  soldiers  ran  from  the 
fires,  thrust  pipes  into  boot-legs,  bags  into  waggons,  saw  to  their  muskets, 
and  formed  into  ranks.  The  officers  buttoned  themselves  up,  put  on  their 
sabres  and  pouches,  and  moved  up  and  down  the  ranks  shouting.  The 
commissariat  men  and  officers’  servants  harnessed  the  horses,  packed  and 
tied  up  the  waggons.  The  adjutants  and  the  officers  in  command  of  regi¬ 
ments  and  battalions  got  on  their  horses,  crossed  themselves,  gave  final 
orders,  exhortations  and  commissions  to  the  men  who  remained  behind 
with  the  baggage,  and  the  monotonous  thud  of  thousands  of  feet  began. 
The  columns  moved,  not  knowing  where  they  were  going,  and  unable 
from  the  crowds  round  them,  the  smoke,  and  the  thickening  fog,  to  see 
either  the  place  which  they  were  leaving,  or  that  into  which  they  were 
advancing. 

The  soldier  in  movement  is  as  much  shut  in,  surrounded,  drawn  along 
by  his  regiment,  as  the  sailor  is  by  his  ship.  However  great  a  distance  he 
traverses,  however  strange,  unknown,  and  dangerous  the  regions  to  which 
he  penetrates,  all  about  him,  as  the  sailor  has  the  deck  and  masts  and 
rigging  of  his  ship,  he  has  always  everywhere  the  same  comrades,  the 
same  ranks,  the  same  sergeant  Ivan  Mitritch,  the  same  regimental  dog 
Zhutchka,  the  same  officers.  The  soldier  rarely  cares  to  know  into  what 
region  his  ship  has  sailed;  but  on  the  day  of  battle — God  knows  how  or 
whence  it  comes — there  may  be  heard  in  the  moral  world  of  the  troops 
a  sterner  note  that  sounds  at  the  approach  of  something  grave  and 
solemn,  and  rouses  them  to  a  curiosity  unusual  in  them.  On  days  of 
battle,  soldiers  make  strenuous  efforts  to  escape  from  the  routine  of  their 
regiment’s  interests,  they  listen,  watch  intently,  and  greedily  inquire 
what  is  being  done  around  them. 

The  fog  had  become  so  thick  that  though  it  was  growing  light,  they 
could  not  see  ten  steps  in  front  of  them.  Bushes  looked  like  huge  trees, 
level  places  looked  like  ravines  and  slopes.  Anywhere,  on  any  side,  they 
might  stumble  upon  unseen  enemies  ten  paces  from  them.  But  for  a 
long  while  the  columns  marched  on  in  the  same  fog,  going  downhill  and 
uphill,  passing  gardens  and  fences,  in  new  and  unknown  country,  with¬ 
out  coming  upon  the  enemy  anywhere.  On  the  contra^,  the  soldiers  be¬ 
came  aware  that  in  front,  behind,  on  all  sides,  were  the  Russian  columns 
moving  in  the  same  direction.  Every  soldier  felt  cheered  at  heart  by 
knowing  that  where  he  was  going,  to  that  unknown  spot  were  going  also 
many,  many  more  of  our  men. 

‘I  say,  the  Kurskies  have  gone  on,’  they  were  saying  in  the  ranks. 

‘Stupendous,  my  lad,  the  forces  of  our  men  that  are  met  together! 
Last  night  I  looked  at  the  fires  burning,  no  end  of  them.  A  regular 
Moscow!  ’ 

Though  not  one  of  the  officers  in  command  of  the  columns  rode  up 
to  the  ranks  nor  talked  to  the  soldiers  (the  commanding  officers,  as  we 
have  seen  at  the  council  of  war,  were  out  of  humour,  and  displeased  with 


VV  A  R  A  N  D  P  E  A  C  E  249 

the  plans  that  had  been  adopted,  and  so  they  simply  carried  out  their 
orders  without  exerting  themselves  to  encourage  the  soldiers),  yet  the 
soldiers  marched  on  in  good  spirits,  as  they  always  do  when  advancing 
into  action,  especially  when  on  the  offensive. 

But  after  they  had  been  marching  on  for  about  an  hour  in  the  thick 
fog,  a  great  part  of  the  troops  had  to  halt,  and  an  unpleasant  impression 
of  mismanagement  and  misunderstanding  spread  through  the  ranks.  In 
what  way  that  impression  reached  them  it  is  very  difficult  to  define.  But 
there  is  no  doubt  that  it  did  reach  them,  and  with  extraordinary  correct¬ 
ness  and  rapidity,  and  spread  imperceptibly  and  irresistibly,  like  water 
flowing  over  a  valley.  Had  the  Russian  army  been  acting  alone,  without 
allies,  possibly  it  would  have  taken  a  long  time  for  this  impression  of 
mismanagement  to  become  a  general  conviction.  But  as  it  was,  it  was  so 
particularly  pleasant  and  natural  to  ascribe  the  mismanagement  to  the 
senseless  Germans,  and  all  believed  that  there  was  some  dangerous 
muddle  due  to  a  blunder  on  the  part  of  the  sausage-makers. 

‘What  are  they  stopping  for?  Blocked  up  the  way,  eh?  Or  hit  upon 
the  French  at  last?’ 

‘No,  not  heard  so.  There’d  have  been  firing.  After  hurrying  us  to 
march  off,  and  we’ve  marched  off — to  stand  in  the  middle  of  a  field  for 
no  sense — all  the  damned  Germans  making  a  muddle  of  it.  The  senseless 
devils!  I’d  have  sent  them  on  in  front.  But  no  fear,  they  crowd  to  the 
rear.  And  now  one’s  to  stand  with  nothing  to  eat.’ 

‘I  say,  will  they  be  quick  there?’ 

‘The  cavalry  is  blocking  up  the  road,  they  say,’  said  an  officer. 

‘Ah,  these  damned  Germans,  they  don’t  know  their  own  country,’  said 
another. 

‘Which  division  are  you?’  shouted  an  adjutant,  riding  up. 

‘Eighteenth.’ 

‘Then  why  are  you  here?  You  ought  to  have  been  in  front  long  ago; 
you  won’t  get  there  now  before  evening.’ 

‘The  silly  fools’  arrangements,  they  don’t,  know  themselves  what 
•  they’re  about,’  said  the  officer,  and  he  galloped  away.  Then  a  general 
trotted  up,  and  shouted  something  angrily  in  a  foreign  tongue. 

‘Ta-ja-la-ja,  and  no  making  out  what  he’s  jabbering,’  said  a  soldier, 
mimicking  the  retreating  general.  ‘I’d  like  to  shoot  the  lot  of  them, 
the  blackguards!’ 

‘Our  orders  were  to  be  on  the  spot  before  ten  o’clock,  and  we’re  not 
halfway  there.  That’s  a  nice  way  of  managing  things!’  was  repeated  on 
different  sides,  and  the  feeling  of  energy  with  which  the  troops  had 
started  began  to  turn  to  vexation  and  anger  against  the  muddled  arrange¬ 
ments  and  the  Germans. 

The  muddle  originated  in  the  fact  that  while  the  Austrian  cavalry  w'ere 
in  movement,  going  to  the  left  flank,  the  chief  authorities  had  come  to 
1  the  conclusion  that  our  centre  was  too  far  from  the  right  flank,  and  all 
the  cavalry  had  received  orders  to  cross  over  to  the  right.  Several  thou- 


250  WAR-  A  'ND  PEACE 

sands  of  mounted  troops  had  to  cross  in  front  of  the  infantry,  and  the 
infantry  had  to  wait  till  they  had  gone  by. 

Ahead  of  the  troops  a  dispute  had  arisen  between  the  Austrian  officer 
and  the  Russian  general.  The  Russian  general  shouted  a  request  that 
the  cavalry  should  stop.  The  Austrian  tried  to  explain  that  he  was  not 
responsible,  but  the  higher  authorities.  The  troops  meanwhile  stood, 
growing  listless  and  dispirited.  After  an  hour’s  delay  the  troops  moved 
on  at  last,  and  began  going  downhill.  The  fog,  that  overspread  the  hill, 
lay  even  more  densely  on  the  low  ground  to  which  the  troops  were  de¬ 
scending.  Ahead  in  the  fog  they  heard  one  shot,  and  another,  at  first  at 
random,  at  irregular  intervals;  tratta-tat,  then  growing  more  regular  and 
frequent,  and  the  skirmish  of  the  little  stream,  the  Holdbach,  began. 

Not  having  reckoned  on  meeting  the  enemy  at  the  stream,  and  coming 
upon  them  unexpectedly  in  the  fog,  not  hearing  a  word  of  encouragement 
from  their  commanding  officers,  with  a  general  sense  of  being  too  late, 
and  seeing  nothing  before  or  about  them  in  the  fog,  the  Russians  fired 
slowly  and  languidly  at  the  enemy,  never  receiving  a  command  in  time 
from  the  officers  and  adjutants,  who  wandered  about  in  the  fog  in  an 
unknown  country,  unable  to  find  their  own  divisions.  This  was  how  the 
battle  began  for  the  first,  the  second,  and  the  third  columns,  who  had 
gone  down  into  the  low-lying  ground.  The  fourth  column,  with  which 
Kutuzov  was,  was  still  on  the  plateau  of  Pratzen. 

The  thick  fog  still  hung  over  the  low  ground  where  the  action  was 
beginning;  higher  up  it  was  beginning  to  clear,  but  still  nothing  could 
be  seen  of  what  was  going  on  in  front.  Whether  all  the  enemy’s  forces 
were,  as  we  had  assumed,  ten  versts  away  from  us,  or  whether  they  were 
close  by  in  that  stretch  of  fog,  no  one  knew  till  nine  o’clock. 

Nine  o’clock  came.  The  fog  lay  stretched  in  an  unbroken  sea  over 
the  plain,  but  at  the  village  of  Schlapanitz  on  the  high  ground  where 
Napoleon  was,  surrounded  by  his  marshals,  it  was  now  perfectly  clear. 
There  was  bright  blue  sky  over  his  head,  and  the  vast  orb  of  the  sun, 
like  a  huge,  hollow,  purple  float,  quivered  on  the  surface  of  the  milky 
sea  of  fog.  Not  the  French  troops  only,  but  Napoleon  himself  with  his 
staff  were  not  on  the  further  side  of  the  streams,  and  the  villages  of 
Sokolnitz  and  Schlapanitz,  beyond  which  we  had  intended  to  take  up 
our  position  and  begin  the  attack,  but  were  on  the  nearer  side,  so  close 
indeed  to  our  forces  that  Napoleon  could  distinguish  a  cavalry  man  from 
a  foot  soldier  in  our  army  with  the  naked  eye.  Napoleon  was  standing 
a  little  in  front  of  his  marshals,  on  a  little  grey  Arab  horse,  wearing  the 
same  blue  overcoat  he  had  worn  through  the  Italian  campaign.  He  was 
looking  intently  and  silently  at  the  hills,  which  stood  up  out  of  the  sea 
of  mist,  and  the  Russian  troops  moving  across  them  in  the  distance,  and 
he  listened  to  the  sounds  of  firing  in  the  valley.  His  face — still  thin  in 
those  days — did  not  stir  a  single  muscle;  his  gleaming  eyes  were  fixed 
intently  on  one  spot.  His  forecasts  were  turning  out  correct.  Part  of  the 
Russian  forces  were  going  down  into  the  Valley  towards  the  ponds  and 
lakes,  while  part  were  evacuating  the  heights  of  Pratzen,  which  he  re- 


WAR  AND  PEACE  251 

garded  as  the  key  of  the  position,  and  had  intended  to  take.  He  saw 
through  the  fog,  in  the  dip  between  two  hills  near  the  village  of  Pratzen, 
Russian  columns  with  glittering  bayonets  moving  always  in  one  direc¬ 
tion  towards  the  valleys,  and  vanishing  one  after  another  into  the 
mist.  From  information  he  had  received  over  night,  from  the  sounds  of 
wheels  and  footsteps  he  had  heard  in  the  night  at  the  outposts,  from  the 
loose  order  of  the  march  of  the  Russian  columns,  from  all  the  evidence, 
he  saw  clearly  that  the  allies  believed  him  to  be  a  long  way  in  front  of 
them,  that  the  columns  moving  close  to  Pratzen  constituted  the  centre 
of  the  Russian  army,  and  that  the  centre  was  by  this  time  too  much 
weakened  to  be  able  to  attack  him  successfully.  But  still  he  delayed 
beginning  the  battle. 

That  day  was  for  him  a  day  of  triumph — the  anniversary  of  his 
coronation.  He  had  slept  for  a  few  hours  in  the  early  morning,  and  feeling 
fresh,  and  in  good  health  and  spirits,  in  that  happy  frame  of  mind  in 
which  everything  seems  possible  and  everything  succeeds,  he  got  on  his 
horse  and  rode  out.  Pie  stood  without  stirring,  looking  at  the  heights 
that  rose  out  of  the  fog,  and  his  cold  face  wore  that  peculiar  shade  of 
confident,  self-complacent  happiness,  seen  on  the  face  of  a  happy  boy 
in  love.  The  marshals  stood  behind  him,  and  did  not  venture  to  distract 
his  attention.  He  looked  at  the  heights  of  Pratzen,  then  at  the  sun 
floating  up  out  of  the  mist. 

When  the  sun  had  completely  emerged  from  the  fog,  and  was  glitter¬ 
ing  with  dazzling  brilliance  over  the  fields  and  the  mist  (as  though 
he  had  been  waiting  for  that  to  begin  the  battle),  he  took  his  glove  off 
his  handsome  white  hand,  made  a  signal  with  it  to  his  marshals,  and 
gave  orders  for  the  battle  to  begin.  The  marshals,  accompanied  by  adju¬ 
tants,  galloped  in  various  directions,  and  in  a  few  minutes  the  chief 
forces  of  the  French  army  were  moving  towards  those  heights  of  Pratzen, 
which  were  left  more  and  more  exposed  by  the  Russian  troops  as  the 
latter  kept  moving  to  the  left  towards  the  valley. 


XV 

At  eight  o’clock  Kutuzov  rode  out  to  Pratzen  at  the  head  of  Milorado- 
vitch’s  fourth  column,  the  one  which  was  to  occupy  the  place  left  vacant 
by  the  columns  of  Przhebyshevsky  and  Langeron,  who  had  by  this  time 
gone  down  to  the  plain.  He  greeted  the  men  of  the  foremost  regiment, 
and  gave  them  the  command  to  march,  showing  thereby  that  he  meant 
to  lead  that  column  himself.  On  reaching  the  village  of  Pratzen  he  halted. 
Prince  Andrey  was  behind  among  the  immense  number  of  persons  who 
made  up  the  commander-in-chief’s  suite.  Prince  Andrey  was  in  a  state 
of  excitement,  of  irritation,  and  at  the  same  time  of  repressed  calm,  as 
a  man  often  is  on  attaining  a* long-desired  moment.  He  was  firmly  con¬ 
vinced  that  to-day  would  be  the  day  of  his  Toulon  or  his  bridge  of 
Areola.  How  it  would  come  to  pass  he  knew  not,  but  he  was  firmly  con- 


25  2  WAR  AND  PEACE 

vinced  that  it  would  be  so.  The  locality  and  the  position  of  our  troops 
he  had  mastered  to  the  minutest  detail,  so  far  as  they  could  be  known 
to  any  one  in  our  army.  His  own  strategic  plan,  which  obviously  could 
not  conceivably  be  carried  out  now,  was  forgotten  by  him.  Throwing 
himself  into  Weierother’s  plan,  Prince  Andrey  was  now  deliberating 
over  the  contingencies  that  might  arise,  and  inventing  new  combinations, 
in  which  his  rapidity  of  resource  and  decision  might  be  called  for. 

On  the  left,  below  in  the  fog,  could  be  heard  firing  between  unseen 
forces.  There,  it  seemed  to  Prince  Andrey,  the  battle  would  be  concen¬ 
trated,  there  ‘the  difficulty  would  arise,  and  there  I  shall  be  sent,’  he 
thought,  ‘with  a  brigade  or  a  division,  and  there,  flag  in  hand,  I  shall 
march  forward  and  shatter  all  before  me.5 

Prince  Andrey  could  not  look  unmoved  upon  the  flags  of  the  passing 
battalions.  Looking  at  the  flag,  he  kept  thinking;  perhaps  it  is  that  very 
flag  with  which  I  shall  have  to  lead  the  men.  Towards  morning  nothing 
was  left  of  the  fog  on  the  heights  but  a  hoar  frost  passing  into  dew,  but 
in  the  valleys  the  fog  still  lay  in  a  milky-white  sea.  Nothing  could  be 
seen  in  the  valley  to  the  left  into  which  our  troops  had  vanished,  and 
from  which  sounds  of  firing  were  coming.  Above  the  heights  stood  a 
clear,  dark  blue  sky,  and  on  the  right  the  vast  orb  of  the  sun.  In  the 
distance  in  front,  on  the  coast  of  that  sea  of  mist,  rose  up  the  wooded 
hills,  on  which  the  enemy’s  army  should  have  been,  and  something  could 
be  descried  there.  On  the  right  there  was  the  tramp  of  hoofs  and  rumble 
of  wheels,  with  now  and  then  the  gleam  of  bayonets,  as  the  guards 
plunged  into  the  region  of  mist;  on  the  left,  behind  the  village,  similar 
masses  of  cavalry  were  moving  and  disappearing  into  the  sea  of  fog. 
In  front  and  behind  were  the  marching  infantry.  The  commander-in¬ 
chief  was  standing  at  the  end  of  the  village,  letting  the  troops  pass  be¬ 
fore  him.  Kutuzov  seemed  exhausted  and  irritable  that  morning.  The 
infantry  marching  by  him  halted  without  any  command  being  given, 
apparently  because  something  in  front  blocked  up  the  way. 

‘Do  tell  the  men  to  form  in  battalion  columns  and  go  round  the  vil¬ 
lage,’  said  Kutuzov  angrily  to  a  general  who  rode  up.  ‘How  is  it  you 
don’t  understand,  my  dear  sir,  that  it’s  out  of  the  question  to  let  them 
file  through  the  defile  of  the  village  street,  when  we  are  advancing  to 
meet  the  enemy.’ 

‘I  had  proposed  forming  beyond  the  village,  your  most  high  excellency,’ 
replied  the  general. 

Kutuzov  laughed  bitterly. 

‘A  nice  position  you’ll  be  in,  deploying  your  front  in  sight  of  the 
enemy — very  nice.’ 

‘The  enemy  is  a  long  way  off  yet,  your  most  high  excellency.  Accord¬ 
ing  to  the  disposition.  .  .  .’ 

‘The  disposition!  ’  Kutuzov  cried  with  bitter  spleen;  ‘but  who  told  you 
so?  .  .  .  Kindly  do  as  you  are  commanded.’ 

‘Yes,  sir.’ 


WARANDPEACE  253 

‘My  dear  boy,’  Nesvitsky  whispered  to  Prince  Andrey,  ‘the  old  fellow 
is  in  a  vile  temper.’ 

An  Austrian  officer  wearing  a  white  uniform  and  green  plumes  in  his 
hat,  galloped  up  to  Kutuzov  and  asked  him  in  the  Emperor’s  name: 
Had  the  fourth  column  started? 

Kutuzov  turned  away  without  answering,  and  his  eye  fell  casually  on 
Prince  Andrey,  who  was  standing  near  him.  Seeing  Bolkonsky,  Kutuzov 
let  his  vindictive  and  bitter  expression  soften,  as  though  recognising  that 
his  adjutant  was  not  to  blame  for  what  was  being  done.  And  still  not 
answering  the  Austrian  adjutant,  he  addressed  Bolkonsky. 

‘Go  and  see,  my  dear  fellow,  whether  the  third  division  has  passed 
the  village.  Tell  them  to  stop  and  wait  for  my  orders.’ 

Prince  Andrey  had  scarcely  started  when  he  stopped  him. 

‘And  ask  whether  the  sharpshooters  are  posted,’  he  added.  ‘What  they 
are  doing,  what  they  are  doing!’  he  murmured  to  himself,  still  making 
no  reply  to  the  Austrian. 

Prince  Andrey  galloped  off  to  do  his  bidding.  Overtaking  all  the  ad¬ 
vancing  battalions,  he  stopped  the  third  division  and  ascertained  that 
there  actually  was  no  line  of  sharpshooters  in  advance  of  our  columns. 
The  officer  in  command  of  the  foremost  regiment  was  greatly  astounded 
on  the  order  being  brought  him  from  the  commander-in-chief  to  send  a 
flying  line  of  sharpshooters  in  advance.  The  officer  had  been  resting  in 
the  full  conviction  that  there  were  other  troops  in  front  of  him,  and  that 
the  enemy  could  not  be  less  than  ten  versts  away.  In  reality  there  was 
nothing  in  front  of  him  but  an  empty  stretch  of  ground,  sloping  down¬ 
hill  and  covered  with  fog.  Giving  him  the  commander-in-chief’s  order  to 
rectify  the  omission.  Prince  Andrey  galloped  back.  Kutuzov  was  still  at 
the  same  spot;  his  bulky  frame  drooped  in  the  saddle  with  the  lassitude 
of  old  age,  and  he  was  yawning  wearily  with  closed  eyes.  The  troops  had 
not  yet  moved  on,  but  were  standing  at  attention. 

‘Good,  good,’  he  said  to  Prince  Andrey,  and  he  turned  to  the  general 
l  who,  watch  in  hand,  was  saying  that  it  was  time  they  started,  as  all  the 
;  columns  of  the  left  flank  had  gone  down  already. 

‘We  have  plenty  of  time  yet,  your  excellency,’  Kutuzov  interpolated 
1  between  his  yawns.  ‘Plenty  of  time!’  he  repeated. 

At  that  moment  in  the  distance  behind  Kutuzov  there  were  sounds  of 
regiments  saluting;  the  shouts  came  rapidly  nearer  along  the  whole 
drawn-out  line  of  the  advancing  Russian  columns.  Clearly  he  who  was 
the  object  of  these  greetings  was  riding  quickly.  When  the  soldiers  of 
the  regiment,  in  front  of  which  Kutuzov  was  standing,  began  to  shout,  he 
rode  off  a  little  on  one  side,  and  wrinkling  up  his  face,  looked  round. 
Along  the  road  from  Pratzen,  galloped  what  looked  like  a  whole  squadron 
of  horsemen  of  different  colours.  Two  of  them  galloped  side  by  side 
ahead  of  the  rest.  One  was  in  a  black  uniform  with  a  white  plume,  on  a 
chestnut  English  thoroughbred,  the  other  in  a  white  uniform  on  a  black 
horse.  These  were  the  two  Emperors  and  their  suites.  With  a  sort  of 
affectation  of  the  manner  of  an  old  soldier  at  the  head  of  his  regiment, 


254  WAR  AND  PEACE 

Kutuzov  gave  the  command,  ‘Steady,’  to  the  standing  troops  and  rode 
up  to  the  Emperors,  saluting.  His  whole  figure  and  manner  were  sud¬ 
denly  transformed.  He  assumed  the  air  of  a  subordinate,  a  man  who 
accepts  without  criticism.  With  an  affectation  of  respectfulness  which 
unmistakably  made  an  unpleasant  impression  on  Alexander,  he  rode  up 
and  saluted  him. 

The  unpleasant  impression,  like  the  traces  of  fog  in  a  clear  sky,  merely 
flitted  across  the  young  and  happy  face  of  the  Emperor  and  vanished. 
He  looked  that  day  rather  thinner  after  his  illness  than  he  had  been  at 
the  review  of  Olmiitz,  where  Bolkonsky  had  seen  him  for  the  first  time 
abroad.  But  there  was  the  same  bewitching  combination  of  majesty  and 
mildness  in  his  fine,  grey  eyes,  and  on  his  delicate  lips  the  same  possi¬ 
bility  of  varying  expressions  and  the  predominant  expression  of  noble- 
hearted,  guileless  youth. 

At  the  Olmiitz  review  he  had  been  more  majestic,  here  he  was  livelier 
and  more  energetic.  He  was  flushed  a  little  from  the  rapid  three-verst 
gallop,  and  as  he  pulled  up  his  horse,  he  breathed  a  sigh  of  relief,  and 
looked  round  at  those  among  the  faces  of  his  suite  that  were  as  young 
and  eager  as  his  own.  Behind  the  Tsar  were  Tchartorizhsky,  and  Novo- 
siltsov,  and  Prince  Volkonsky,  and  Stroganov,  and  the  rest,  all  richly 
dressed,  gay  young  men  on  splendid,  well-groomed,  fresh  horses,  slightly 
heated  from  the  gallop.  The  Emperor  Francis,  a  rosy,  long-faced  young 
man,  sat  excessively  erect  on  his  handsome  sable  horse,  casting  deliberate 
and  anxious  looks  around  him.  lie  beckoned  one  of  his  white  adjutants 
and  asked  him  a  question.  ‘Most  likely  at  what  o’clock  they  started,’ 
thought  Prince  Andrey,  watching  his  old  acquaintance  with  a  smile, 
which  he  could  not  repress,  as  he  remembered  his  audience  with  him. 
With  the  Emperors’  suite  were  a  certain  number  of  fashionable  young 
aristocrats—  Russians  and  Austrians — selected  from  the  regiments  of  the 
guards  and  the  line.  Among  them  were  postillions  leading  extra  horses, 
beautiful  beasts  from  the  Tsar’s  stables,  covered  with  embroidered  horse¬ 
cloths. 

Like  a  breath  of  fresh  country  air  rushing  into  a  stuffy  room  through 
an  open  window  was  the  youth,  energy,  and  confidence  of  success  that 
the  cavalcade  of  brilliant  young  people  brought  with  them  into  Kutu¬ 
zov’s  cheerless  staff. 

‘Why  aren’t  you  beginning,  Mihail  Larionovitch?’  the  Emperor  Alex¬ 
ander  said  hurriedly,  addressing  Kutuzov,  while  he  glanced  courteously 
towards  the  Emperor  Francis. 

‘I  am  waiting  to  see,  your  majesty,’  Kutuzov  answered,  bowing 
reverentially. 

The  Emperor  turned  his  ear  towards  him,  with  a  slight  frown  and 
an  air  of  not  having  caught  his  words. 

‘I’m  waiting  to  see,  your  majesty,’  repeated  Kutuzov  (Prince  Andrey 
noticed  that  Kutuzov’s  upper  lip  quivered  unnaturally  as  he  uttered 
that:  ‘I’m  waiting’).  ‘Not  all  the  columns  are  massed  yet,  your  majesty.’ 

The  Tsar  heard  him,  but  the  answer  apparently  did  not  please  him; 


WAR  AND  PEACE  255 

he  shrugged  his  sloping  shoulders,  and  glanced  at  Novosiltsov,  who  stood 
near,  with  a  look  that  seemed  to  complain  of  Kutuzov. 

‘We  are  not  on  the  Tsaritsin  field,  you  know,  Mihail  Larionovitch, 
where  the  parade  is  not  begun  till  all  the  regiments  are  ready,’  said  the 
Tsar,  glancing  again  at  the  Emperor  Francis  as  though  inviting  him,  if 
not  to  take  part,  at  least  to  listen  to  what  he  was  saying.  But  the 
Emperor  Francis  still  gazed  away  and  did  not  listen. 

‘That’s  just  why  I’m  not  beginning,  sire,’  said  Kutuzov  in  a  re¬ 
sounding  voice,  as  though  foreseeing  a  possibility  his  words  might  be 
ignored,  and  once  more  there  was  a  quiver  in  his  face.  ‘That’s  why  I  am 
not  beginning,  sire;  because  we  are  not  on  parade  and  not  on  the 
Tsaritsin  field,’  he  articulated  clearly  and  distinctly. 

All  in  the  Tsar’s  suite  exchanged  instantaneous  glances  with  one 
another,  and  every  face  wore  an  expression  of  regret  and  reproach. 
‘However  old  he  may  be,  he  ought  not,  he  ought  never  to  speak  like 
that,’  the  faces  expressed. 

The  Tsar  looked  steadily  and  attentively  into  Kutuzov’s  face,  waiting 
to  see  if  he  were  not  going  to  say  more.  But  Kutuzov  too  on  his  side, 
bending  his  head  respectfully,  seemed  to  be  waiting.  The  silence  lasted 
about  a  minute. 

‘However,  if  it’s  your  majesty’s  command,’  said  Kutuzov,  lifting  his 
head  and  relapsing  into  his  former  affectation  of  the  tone  of  a  stupid, 
uncritical  general,  who  obeys  orders.  He  moved  away,  and  beckoning 
the  commanding  officer  of  the  column,  Miloradovitch,  gave  him  the  com¬ 
mand  to  advance. 

The  troops  began  to  move  again,  and  two  battalions  of  the  Novgorod 
regiment  and  a  battalion  of  the  Apsheron  regiment  passed  before  the 
Tsar. 

While  the  Apsheron  battalion  was  marching  by,  Miloradovitch,  a  red¬ 
faced  man,  wearing  a  uniform  and  orders,  with  no  overcoat,  and  a 
turned-up  hat  with  huge  plumes  stuck  on  one  side,  galloped  ahead  of 
them,  and  saluting  in  gallant  style,  reined  up  his  horse  before  the  Tsar. 

‘With  God’s  aid,  general,’  said  the  Tsar. 

‘Ma  foi,  sire,  we  will  do  whatever  is  in  our  power  to  do,’  he  answered 
i  gaily,  arousing  none  the  less  an  ironical  smile  among  the  gentlemen 
of  the  Tsar’s  suite  by  his  bad  French  accent.  Miloradovitch  wheeled  his 
horse  round  sharply,  and  halted  a  few  steps  behind  the  Tsar.  The 
Apsheron  men,  roused  by  the  presence  of  the  Tsar,  stepped  out  gallantly 
as  they  marched  by  the  Emperors  and  their  suites. 

‘Lads!’  shouted  Miloradovitch  in  his  loud,  self-confident,  and  cheery 
voice.  He  was  apparently  so  excited  by  the  sounds  of  the  firing,  the 
anticipation  of  battle,  and  the  sight  of  the  gallant  Apsheron  men,  his 
old  comrades  with  Suvorov,  that  he  forgot  the  Tsar’s  presence.  ‘Lads! 
it’s  not  the  first  village  you’ve  had  to  take!’  he  shouted. 

‘Glad  to  do  our  best,’  roared  the  soldiers.  The  Tsar’s  horse  reared  at 
the  unexpected  sound.  This  horse,  who  had  carried  the  Tsar  at  reviews 
in  Russia,  bore  his  rider  here  on  the  field  of  Austerlitz,  patiently  enduring 


256  WAR  AND  PEACE 

the  heedless  blows  of  his  left  foot,  and  pricked  up  his  ears  at  the  sound 
of  shots  as  he  had  done  on  the  review  ground  with  no  comprehension  of 
the  significance  of  these  sounds,  nor  of  the  nearness  of  the  raven  horse 
of  Emperor  Francis,  nor  of  all  that  was  said  and  thought  and  felt  that 
day  by  the  man  who  rode  upon  his  back. 

The  Tsar  turned  with  a  smile  to  one  of  his  courtiers,  pointing  to  the 
gallant-looking  Apsheron  regiment,  and  said  something  to  him. 


XVI 

Kutuzov,  accompanied  by  his  adjutants,  followed  the  carabineers  at  a 
walking  pace. 

After  going  on  for  half  a  mile  at  the  tail  of  the  column,  he  stopped 
at  a  solitary,  deserted  house  (probably  once  an  inn),  near  the  branching 
of  two  roads.  Both  roads  led  downhill,  and  troops  were  marching  along 
both. 

The  fog  was  beginning  to  part,  and  a  mile  and  a  half  away  the  enemy’s 
troops  could  be  indistinctly  seen  on  the  opposite  heights.  On  the  left 
below,  the  firing  became  more  distinct.  Kutuzov  stood  still  in  conversa¬ 
tion  with  an  Austrian  general.  Prince  Andrey  standing  a  little  behind 
watched  them  intently,  and  turned  to  an  adjutant,  meaning  to  ask  him 
for  a  field-glass. 

‘Look,  look!’  this  adjutant  said,  looking  not  at  the  troops  in  the 
distance,  but  down  the  hill  before  him.  ‘It’s  the  French!’ 

The  two  generals  and  the  adjutant  began  snatching  at  the  field-glass, 
pulling  it  from  one  another.  All  their  faces  suddenly  changed,  and 
horror  was  apparent  in  them  all.  They  had  supposed  the  French  to  bt- 
over  a  mile  and  a  half  away,  and  here  they  were  all  of  a  sudden  confront 
ing  us. 

‘Is  it  the  enemy?  .  .  .  No.  .  .  .  But,  look,  it  is  .  .  .  for  certain. 
.  .  .  What  does  it  mean?’  voices  were  heard  saying. 

With  the  naked  eye  Prince  Andrey  saw  to  the  right,  below  them,  a 
dense  column  of  French  soldiers  coming  up  towards  the  Apsheron  regi¬ 
ment,  not  over  five  hundred  paces  from  where  Kutuzov  was  standing. 

‘Here  it  is,  it  is  coming,  the  decisive  moment!  My  moment  has  come,’ 
thought  Prince  Andrey,  and  slashing  his  horse,  he  rode  up  to  Kutuzov. 

‘We  must  stop  the  Apsheron  regiment.,’  he  shouted,  ‘your  most  high 
excellency.’ 

But  at  that  instant  everything  was  lost  in  a  cloud  of  smoke,  there  was 
a  sound  of  firing  close  by,  and  a  voice  in  naive  terror  cried  not  two  paces 
from  Prince  Andrey:  ‘Hey,  mates,  it’s  all  up!  ’  And  this  voice  was  like  a 
command.  At  that  voice  there  was  a  general  rush,  crowds,  growing 
larger  every  moment,  ran  back  in  confusion  to  the  spot  where  five 
minutes  before  they  had  marched  by  the  Emperors.  It  was  not  simply 
difficult  to  check  this  rushing  crowd,  it  was  impossible  not  to  be  carried 
back  with  the  stream  oneself.  Bolkonsky  tried  only  not  to  be  left  behind 


WARANDPEAGE  257 

by  it,  and  looked  about  him  in  bewilderment,  unable  to  grasp  what  was 
taking  place.  Nesvitsky,  with  an  exasperated,  crimson  face,  utterly  un¬ 
like  himself,  was  shouting  to  Kutuzov  that  if  he  didn’t  get  away  at  once 
he’d  be  taken  prisoner  to  a  certainty.  Kutuzov  was  standing  in  the  same 
place:  he  was  taking  out  his  handkerchief,  and  did  not  answer.  The 
blood  was  flowing  from  his  cheek.  Prince  Andrey  forced  his  way  up  to 
him. 

‘You  are  wounded?’  he  asked,  hardly  able  to  control  the  quivering  of 
his  lower  jaw. 

‘The  wound’s  not  here,  but  there,  see!’  said  Kutuzov,  pressing  the 
handkerchief  to  his  wounded  cheek,  and  pointing  to  the  running  soldiers. 

‘Stop  them!’  he  shouted,  and  at  the  same  time  convinced  that  it  was 
impossible  to  stop  them,  he  lashed  his  horse  and  rode  to  the  right.  A 
fresh  rush  of  flying  crowds  caught  him  up  with  it  and  carried  him  back. 

The  troops  were  running  in  such  a  dense  multitude,  that  once  getting 
into  the  midst  of  the  crowd,  it  was  a  hard  matter  to  get  out  of  it.  One 
was  shouting:  ‘Get  on!  what  are  you  lagging  for?’  Another  was  turning 
round  to  fire  in  the  air;  another  striking  the  very  horse  on  which  Kutuzov 
was  mounted.  Getting  out  with  an  immense  effort  from  the  stream  on  the 
left,  Kutuzov,  with  his  suite  diminished  to  a  half,  rode  towards  the  sounds 
of  cannon  close  by.  Prince  Andrey,  trying  not  to  be  left  behind  by 
Kutuzov,  saw,  as  he  got  out  of  the  racing  multitude,  a  Russian  battery 
still  firing  in  the  smoke  on  the  hillside  and  the  French  running  towards 
it.  A  little  higher  up  stood  Russian  infantry,  neither  moving  forward  to 
the  support  of  the  battery,  nor  back  in  the  same  direction  as  the  run¬ 
aways.  A  general  on  horseback  detached  himself  from  the  infantry  and 
rode  towards  Kutuzov.  Of  Kutuzov’s  suite  only  four  men  were  left.  They 
were  all  pale  and  looking  at  one  another  dumbly. 

.  ‘Stop  those  wretches!  ’  Kutuzov  gasped  to  the  officer  in  command  of 
the  regiment,  pointing  to  the  flying  soldiers.  But  at  the  same  instant, 
as  though  in  revenge  for  the  words,  the  bullets  came  whizzing  over  the 
regiment'  and  Kutuzov’s  suite  like  a  flock  of  birds.  The  French  were 
attacking  the  battery,  and  catching  sight  of  Kutuzov,  they  were  shooting 
at  him.  With  this  volley  the  general  clutched  at  his  leg;  several  soldiers 
fell,  and  the  second  lieutenant  standing  with  the  flag  let  it  drop  out  of 
his  hands.  The  flag  tottered  and  was  caught  on  the  guns  of  the  nearest 
soldiers.  The  soldiers  had  begun  firing  without  orders. 

‘Ooogh!’  Kutuzov  growled  with  an  expression  of  despair,  and  he 
dooked  round  him.  ‘Bolkonsky,’  he  whispered  in  a  voice  shaking  with 
the  consciousness  of  his  old  age  and  helplessness.  ‘Bolkonsky,’  he  whis¬ 
pered,  pointing  to  the  routed  battalion  and  the  enemy,  ‘what’s  this?’ 

But  before  he  had  uttered  the  words,  Prince  Andrey,  feeling  the  tears 
of  shame  and  mortification  rising  in  his  throat,  was  jumping  off  his  horse 
and  running  to  the  flag. 

‘Lads,  forward!’  he  shrieked  in  a  voice  of  childish  shrillness.  ‘Here, 
it  is  come!’  Prince  Andrey  thought,  seizing  the  staff  of  the  flag,  and 


2SS  WARANDPEACE 

hearing  with  relief  the  whiz  of  bullets,  unmistakably  aimed  at  him. 

Several  soldiers  dropped.  , 

‘Hurrah!’  shouted  Prince  Andrey,  and  hardly  able  to  hold  up  the 
heavy  flag  in  both  his  hands,  he  ran  forward  in  the  unhesitating  convic¬ 
tion  that  the  whole  battalion  would  run  after  him.  And  in  fact  it  was 
only  for  a  few  steps  that  he  ran  alone.  One  soldier  started,  then  another, 
and  then  the  whole  battalion  with  a  shout  of  ‘hurrah!’  was  running  for¬ 
ward  and  overtaking  him.  An  under-officer  of  the  battalion  ran  up  and 
took  the  flag  which  tottered  from  its  weight  in  Prince  Andrey’s  hands, 
but  he  was  at  once  killed.  Prince  Andrey  snatched  up  the  flag  again,  and 
waving  it  by  the  staff,  ran  on  with  the  battalion.  In  front  of  him  he  saw 
our  artillery  men,  of  whom  some  were  fighting,  while  others  had  aban¬ 
doned  their  cannons  and  were  running  towards  him.  He  saw  French 
infantry  soldiers,  too,  seizing  the  artillery  horses  and  turning  the  can¬ 
nons  round.  Prince  Andrey  and  the  battalion  were  within  twenty  paces 
of  the  cannons.  He  heard  the  bullets  whizzing  over  him  incessantly,  and 
continually  the  soldiers  moaned  and  fell  to  the  right  and  left  of  him. 
But  he  did  not  look  at  them;  his  eyes  were  fixed  on  what  was  going  on 
in  front  of  him — at  the  battery.  He  could  now  see  distinctly  the  figure 
of  the  red-haired  artilleryman,  with  a  shako  crushed  on  one  side,  pulling 
a  mop  one  way,  while  a  French  soldier  was  tugging  it  the  other  way. 
Prince  Andrey  could  see  distinctly  now  the  distraught,  and  at  the  same 
time  exasperated  expression  of  the  faces  of  the  two  men,  who  were  ob¬ 
viously  quite  unconscious  of  what  they  were  doing. 

‘What  are  they  about?’  wondered  Prince  Andrey,  watching  them; 
‘why  doesn’t  the  red-haired  artilleryman  run,  since  he  has  no  weapon? 
Why  doesn’t  the  Frenchman  stab  him?  He  won’t  have  time  to  run  away 
before  the  Frenchman  will  think  of  his  gun,  and  knock  him  on  the 
head.’  Another  Frenchman  did,  indeed,  run  up  to  the  combatants  with 
his  gun  almost  overbalancing  him,  and  the  fate  of  the  red-haired  artillery¬ 
man,  who  still  had  no  conception  of  what  was  awaiting  him,  and  was 
pulling  the  mop  away  in  triumph,  was  probably  sealed.  But  Prince 
Andrey  did  not  see  how  it  ended.  It  seemed  to  him  as  though  a  hard 
stick  were  swung  full  at  him  by  some  soldier  near,  dealing  him  a  violent 
blow  on  the  head.  It  hurt  a  little,  but  the  worst  of  it  was  that  the  pain 
distracted  his  attention,  and  prevented  him  from  seeing  what  he  was 
looking  at. 

‘What’s  this?  am  I  falling?  my  legs  are  giving  way  under  me,’  he 
thought,  and  fell  on  his  back.  He  opened  his  eyes,  hoping  to  see  how 
the  struggle  of  the  French  soldiers  with  the  artilleryman  was  ending,  and 
eager  to  know  whether  the  red-haired  artilleryman  was  killed  or  not, 
whether  the  cannons  had  been  taken  or  saved.  But  he  saw  nothing  of  all 
that.  Above  him  there  was  nothing  but  the  sky — the  lofty  sky,  not  clear, 
but  still  immeasurably  lofty,  with  grey  clouds  creeping  quietly  over  it. 
‘How  quietly,  peacefully,  and  triumphantly,  and  not  like  us  running, 
shouting,  and  fighting,  not  like  the  Frenchman  and  artilleryman  drag¬ 
ging  the  mop  from  one  another  with  frightened  and  frantic  faces,  how 


WAR  AND  PEACE  259 

differently  are  those  clouds  creeping  over  that  lofty,  limitless  sky.  How 
was  it  I  did  not  see  that  lofty  sky  before?  And  how  happy  I  am  to  have 
found  it  at  last.  Yes!  all  is  vanity,  all  is  a  cheat,  except  that  infinite  sky. 
There  is  nothing,  nothing  but  that.  But  even  that  is  not,  there  is  nothing 
but  peace  and  stillness.  And  thank  God!  .  . 


XVII 

On  the  right  flank  in  Bagration’s  detachment,  at  nine  o’clock  the  battle 
had  not  yet  begun.  Not  caring  to  assent  to  Dolgorukov’s  request  that  he 
should  advance  into  action,  and  anxious  to  be  rid  of  all  responsibility, 
Prince  Bagration  proposed  to  Dolgorukov  to  send  to  inquire  of  the 
commander-in-chief.  Bagration  was  aware  that  as  the  distance  between 
one  flank  and  the  other  was  almost  eight  miles,  if  the  messenger  sent 
were  not  killed  (which  was  highly  probable),  and  if  he  were  tc  succeed 
in  finding  the  commander-in-chief  (which  would  be  very  difficult),  he 
would  hardly  succeed  in  making  his  way  back  before  the  evening. 

Bagration  looked  up  and  down  his  suite  with  his  large,  expressionless, 
sleepy  eyes,  and  the  childish  face  of  Rostov,  unconsciously  all  a-quiver 
with  excitement  and  hope,  was  the  first  that  caught  his  eye.  And  he 
sent  him. 

‘And  if  I  meet  his  majesty  before  the  commander-in-chief,  your  ex¬ 
cellency?’  said  Rostov,  with  his  hand  to  the  peak  of  his  cap. 

‘You  can  give  the  message  to  his  majesty,’  said  Dolgorukov,  hurriedly 
interposing  before  Bagration. 

On  being  relieved  from  picket  duty,  Rostov  had  managed  to  get  a 
few  hours’  sleep  before  morning,  and  felt  cheerful,  bold,  and  resolute, 
with  a  peculiar  springiness  in  his  movements,  and  confidence  in  his 
luck,  and  in  that  frame  of  mind  in  which  everything  seems  easy  and 
possible. 

All  his  hopes  had  been  fulfilled  that  morning:  there  was  to  be  a  general 
engagement,  he  was  taking  part  in  it;  more  than  that,  he  was  in  attend¬ 
ance  on  the  bravest  general;  more  than  that,  he  was  being  sent  on  a 
commission  to  Kutuzov,  perhaps  even  to  the  Tsar  himself.  It  was  a  fine 
morning,  he  had  a  good  horse  under  him,  his  heart  was  full  of  joy  and 
happiness.  On  receiving  his  orders,  he  spurred  his  horse  and  galloped 
along  the  line.  At  first  he  rode  along  the  line  of  Bagration’s  troops  which 
had  not  yet  advanced  into  action,  and  were  standing  motionless,  then 
he  rode  into  the  region  occupied  by  Uvarov’s  cavalry,  and  here  he  began 
to  observe  activity  and  signs  of  preparation  for  battle.  After  he  had 
passed  Uvarov’s  cavalry,  he  could  distinctly  hear  the  sound  of  musket- 
fire  and  the  booming  of  cannons  ahead  of  him.  The  firing  grew  louder 
and  more  intense. 

The  sound  that  reached  him  in  the  fresh  morning  air  was  not  now, 
as  before,  the  report  of  two  or  three  shots  at  irregular  intervals,  and 
then  one  or  two  cannons  booming.  Down  the  slopes  of  the  hillsides  before 


260 


WAR  AND  PEACE 
Pratzen,  he  could  hear  volleys  of  musketry,  interspersed  with  such  fre¬ 
quent  shots  of  cannon  that  sometimes  several  booming  shots  could  not 
be  distinguished  from  one  another,  but  melted  into  one  mingled  roar  of 
sound. 

He  could  see  the  puffs  of  musket  smoke  flying  down  the  hillsides,  as 
though  racing  one  another,  while  the  cannon  smoke  hung  in  clouds,  that 
floated  along  and  melted  into  one  another.  He  could  see,  from  the  gleam 
of  bayonets  in  the  smoke,  that  masses  of  infantry  were  moving  down, 
and  narrow  lines  of  artillery  with  green  caissons. 

On  a  hillock  Rostov  stopped  his  horse  to  try  and  make  out  what  was 
going  on.  But  however  much  he  strained  his  attention,  he  could  not  make 
out  and  understand  what  he  saw;  there  were  men  of  some  sort  moving 
about  there  in  the  smoke,  lines  of  troops  were  moving  both  backwards 
and  forwards;  but  what  for?  Who?  where  were  they  going?  it  was  im¬ 
possible  to  make  out.  This  sight,  and  these  sounds,  so  far  from  exciting 
any  feeling  of  depression  or  timidity  in  him,  only  increased  his  energy 
and  determination. 

‘Come,  fire  away,  at  them  again!’  was  his  mental  response  to  the 
sounds  he  heard.  Again  he  galloped  along  the  line,  penetrating  further 
and  further  into  the  part  where  the  troops  were  already  in  action. 

‘How  it  will  be  there,  I  don’t  know,  but  it  will  all  be  all  right!’ 
thought  Rostov. 

After  passing  Austrian  troops  of  some  sort,  Rostov  noticed  that  the 
next  part  of  the  forces  (they  were  the  guards)  had  already  advanced 
into  action. 

‘So  much  the  better!  I  shall  see  it  close,’  he  thought. 

He  was  riding  almost  along  the  front  line.  A  body  of  horsemen  came 
galloping  towards  him.  They  were  a  troup  of  our  Uhlans  returning  in 
disorder  from  the  attack.  Rostov,  as  he  passed  them,  could  not  help 
noticing  one  of  them  covered  with  blood,  but  he  galloped  on. 

‘That’s  no  affair  of  mine!’  he  thought. 

He  had  not  ridden  on  many  hundred  paces  further  when  there  came 
into  sight,  on  his  left,  across  the  whole  extent  of  the  field,  an  immense 
mass  of  cavalry  on  black  horses,  in  dazzling  white  uniforms,  trotting 
straight  towards  him,  cutting  off  his  advance.  Rostov  put  his  horse  to 
his  utmost  speed  to  get  out  of  the  way  of  these  cavalrymen,  and  he 
would  have  cleared  them  had  they  been  advancing  at  the  same  rate,  but 
they  kept  increasing  their  pace,  so  that  several  horses  broke  into  a 
gallop.  More  and  more  loudly  Rostov  could  hear  the  thud  of  their 
horses’  hoofs,  and  the  jingle  of  their  weapons,  and  more  and  more  dis¬ 
tinctly  he  could  see  their  horses,  their  figures,  and  even  their  faces. 
These  were  our  horse-guards,  charging  to  attack  the  French  cavalry, 
who  were  advancing  to  meet  them. 

The  cavalry  guards  were  galloping,  though  still  holding  in  their 
horses.  Rostov  could  see  their  faces  now,  and  hear  the  word  of  com¬ 
mand,  ‘Charge!’  uttered  by  an  officer,  as  he  let  his  thoroughbred  go  at 
full  speed.  Rostov,  in  danger  of  being  trampled  underfoot  or  carried 


26i 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

away  to  attack  the  French,  galloped  along  before  their  line  as  fast  as 
his  horse  could  go,  and  still  he  was  not  in  time  to  escape  them. 

The  last  of  the  line  of  cavalry,  a  pock-marked  man  of  immense 
stature,  scowled  viciously  on  seeing  Rostov  just  in  front  of  him,  where 
he  must  inevitably  come  into  collision  with  him.  This  horse-guard 
would  infallibly  have  overturned  Rostov  and  his  Bedouin  (Rostov  felt 
himself  so  little  and  feeble  beside  these  gigantic  men  and  horses)  if  he 
had  not  bethought  himself  of  striking  the  horse-guard’s  horse  in  the 
face  with  his  riding-whip.  The  heavy,  black,  high  horse  twitched  its 
ears  and  reared,  but  its  pock-marked  rider  brought  it  down  with  a 
violent  thrust  of  the  spurs  into  its  huge  sides,  and  the  horse,  lashing 
its  tail  and  dragging  its  neck,  flew  on  faster  than  ever.  The  horse-guard 
had  hardly  passed  Rostov  when  he  heard  their  shout,  ‘Hurrah!’  and 
looking  round  saw  their  foremost  ranks  mixed  up  with  some  strange 
cavalry,  in  red  epaulettes,  probably  French.  He  could  see  nothing  more, 
for  immediately  after  cannons  were  fired  from  somewhere,  and  every¬ 
thing  was  lost  in  the  smoke. 

At  the  moment  when  the  horse-guards  passing  him  vanished  into  the 
,.;moke,  Rostov  hesitated  whether  to  gallop  after  them  or  to  go  on  where  he 
uad  to  go.  This  was  the  brilliant  charge  of  the  horse-guards  of  which  the 
French  themselves  expressed  their  admiration.  Rostov  was  appalled 
to  hear  afterwards  that  of  all.  that  mass  of  huge,  fine  men,  of  all  those 
brilliant,  rich  young  officers  and  ensigns  who  had  galloped  by  him  on 
Aorses  worth  thousands  of  roubles,  only  eighteen  were  left  after  the  charge. 

‘I  have  no  need  to  envy  them,  my  share  won’t  be  taken  from  me,  and 
may  be  I  shall  see  the  Emperor  in  a  minute!’  thought  Rostov,  and  he 
galloped  on. 

When  he  reached  the  infantry  of  the  guards,  he  noticed  that  cannon 
balls  were  flying  over  and  about  them,  not  so  much  from  the  sound  of  the 
cannon  balls,  as  from  the  uneasiness  he  saw  in  the  faces  of  the  soldiers  and 
the  unnatural,  martial  solemnity  on  the  faces  of  the  officers. 

As  he  rode  behind  one  of  the  lines  of  the  regiments  of  footguards,  he 
heard  a  voice  calling  him  by  name:  ‘Rostov!’ 

‘Eh?’  he  called  back,  not  recognising  Boris. 

‘I  say,  we’ve  been  in  the  front  line!  Our  regiment  marched  to  the  at¬ 
tack!’  said  Boris,  smiling  that  happy  smile  that  is  seen  in  young  men 
who  have  been  for  the  first  time  under  fire.  Rostov  stopped. 

‘Really!  ’  he  said.  ‘Well,  how  was  it?’ 

‘We  beat  them!’  said  Boris,  growing  talkative  in  his  eagerness.  ‘You 
can  fancy  .  .  .’  And  Boris  began  describing  how  the  guards  having  taken 
up  their  position,  and  seeing  troops  in  front  of  them  had  taken  them  for 
Austrians,  and  all  at  once  had  found  out  from  the  cannon  balls  aimed  at 
them  from  those  troops  that  they  were  in  the  front  line,  and  had  quite 
unexpectedly  to  advance  to  battle.  Rostov  set  his  horse  moving  without 
waiting  to  hear  Boris  to  the  end. 

‘Where  are  you  off  to?’  asked  Boris. 

‘To  his  majesty  with  a  commission.’ 


262 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Here  he  is!’  said  Boris,  who  had  not  caught  what  Rostov  said,  and 
thinking  it  was  the  grand  duke  he  wanted,  he  pointed  him  out,  standing 
a  hundred  paces  from  them,  wearing  a  helmet  and  a  horse-guard’s  white 
elk  tunic,  with  his  high  shoulders  and  scowling  brows,  shouting  some¬ 
thing  to  a  pale,  white-uniformed  Austrian  officer. 

‘Why,  that’s  the  grand  duke,  and  I  must  see  the  commander-in-chief 
or  the  Emperor,’  said  Rostov,  and  he  was  about  to  start  again. 

‘Count,  count!  ’  shouted  Berg,  running  up  on  the  other  side,  as  eager  as 
Boris.  ‘I  was  wounded  in  my  right  hand’  (he  pointed  to  his  blood-stained 
hand,  bound  up  with  a  pocket-handkerchief),  ‘and  I  kept  my  place  in  the 
front.  Count,  I  held  my  sabre  in  my  left  hand.  All  my  family,  count,  the 
Von  Bergs,  have  been  knights.’  Berg  would  have  said  more,  but  Rostov 
rode  on  without  listening. 

After  riding  by  the  guards,  and  on  through  an  empty  space,  Rostov 
rode  along  the  line  of  the  reserves  for  fear  of  getting  in  the  way  of  the 
front  line,  as  he  had  done  in  the  charge  of  the  horse-guards,  and  made  a 
wide  circuit  round  the  place  where  he  heard  the  hottest  musket-fire  and 
cannonade.  All  of  a  sudden,  in  front  of  him  and  behind  our  troops,  in  a 
place  where  he  could  never  have  expected  the  enemy  to  be,  he  heard  the 
sound  of  musket-fire  quite  close. 

‘What  can  it  be?’  thought  Rostov.  ‘The  enemy  in  the  rear  of  our  troops? 
It  can’t  be,’  thought  Rostov,  but  a  panic  of  fear  for  himself  and  for  the 
issue  of  the  whole  battle  came  over  him  all  at  once.  ‘Whatever  happens, 
though,’  he  reflected,  ‘it’s  useless  to  try  and  escape  now.  It’s  my  duty  to 
seek  the  commander-in-chief  here,  and  if  everything’s  lost,  it’s  my  duty 
to  perish  with  all  the  rest.’ 

The  foreboding  of  evil  that  had  suddenly  come  upon  Rostov  grew 
stronger  and  stronger  the  further  he  advanced  into  the  region  behind 
the  village  of  Pratzen,  which  was  full  of  crowds  of  troops  of  all  sorts. 

‘What  does  it  mean?  What  is  it?  Whom  are  they  firing  at?  Who  is 
firing?’  Rostov  kept  asking,  as  he  met  Austrian  and  Russian  soldiers 
running  in  confused  crowds  across  his  path. 

‘Devil  knows!  Killed  them  all!  Damn  it  all,’  he  answered  in  Rus¬ 
sian,  in  German,  and  in  Tchekh,  by  the  hurrying  rabble,  who  knew  no 
more  than  he  what  was  being  done. 

‘Kill  the  Germans!  ’  shouted  one. 

‘To  hell  with  them — the  traitors.’ 

‘Zum  Henker  diese  Russen,’  muttered  a  German. 

Several  wounded  were  among  the  crowds  on  the  road.  Shouts,  oaths, 
moans  were  mingled  in  the  general  hubbub.  The  firing  began  to  subside, 
and,  as  Rostov  found  out  later,  the  Russian  and  Austrian  soldiers  had 
been  firing  at  one  another. 

‘My  God!  how  can  this  be?’  thought  Rostov.  ‘And  here,  where  any 
minute  the  Emperor  may  see  them.  .  .  .  No,  these  can  only  be  a  few 
wretches.  It  will  soon  be  over,  it’s  not  the  real  thing,  it  can’t  be,’  he 
thought.  ‘Only  to  make  haste,  make  haste,  and  get  by  them.’ 

The  idea  of  defeat  and  flight  could  not  force  its  way  into  Rostov’s  head. 


WARANDPEACE  263 

Though  he  saw  the  French  cannons  and  troops  precisely  on  Pratzen  hill, 
the  very  spot  where  he  had  been  told  to  look  for  the  commander-in-chief, 
he  could  not  and  would  not  believe  in  it. 


XVIII 

'Near  the  village  of  Pratzen  Rostov  had  been  told  to  look  for  Kutuzov  and 
the  Emperor.  But  there  they  were  not,  nor  was  there  a  single  officer  to 
be  found  in  command,  nothing  but  disorderly  crowds  of  troops  of  different 
sorts.  He  urged  on  his  weary  horse  to  hasten  through  this  rabble,  but  the 
further  he  went  the  more  disorderly  the  crowds  became.  The  high  road, 
along  which  he  rode,  was  thronged  with  carriages,  with  vehicles  of  all 
sorts,  and  Austrian  and  Russian  soldiers  of  every  kind,  wounded  and  un¬ 
wounded.  It  was  all  uproar  and  confused  bustle  under  the  sinister  whiz  of 
the  flying  cannon  balls  from  the  French  batteries  stationed  on  the  heights 
of  Pratzen. 

‘Where’s  the  Emperor?  Where’s  Kutuzov?’  Rostov  kept  asking  of  every 
one  he  could  stop,  and  from  no  one  could  he  get  an  answer. 

At  last  clutching  a  soldier  by  the  collar,  he  forced  him  to  answer  him. 

‘Aye!  brother!  they’ve  all  bolted  long  ago!’  the  soldier  said  to  Rostov, 
laughing  for  some  reason  as  he  pulled  himself  away.  Letting  go  that 
soldier,  who  must,  he  thought,  be  drunk,  Rostov  stopped  the  horse  of  a 
groom  or  postillion  of  some  personage  of  consequence,  and  began  to  cross¬ 
question  him.  The  groom  informed  Rostov  that  an  hour  before  the  Tsar 
had  been  driven  at  full  speed  in  a  carriage  along  this  very  road,  and  that 
the  Tsar  was  dangerously  wounded. 

‘It  can’t  be,’  said  Rostov;  ‘probably  some  one  else.’ 

‘I  saw  him  myself,’  said  the  groom  with  a  self-satisfied  smirk;  ‘it’s  high 
time  I  should  know  the  Emperor,  I  should  think,  after  the  many  times 
I’ve  seen  him  in  Petersburg;  I  saw  him  as  it  might  be  here.  Pale,  deadly 
pale,  sitting  in  the  carriage.  The  way  they  drove  the  four  raven  horses! 
my  goodness,  didn’t  they  dash  by  us!  It  would  be  strange,  I  should  think, 
if  I  didn’t  know  the  Tsar’s  horses  and  Ilya  Ivanitch;  why,  Ilya  never 
drives  any  one  else  but  the  Tsar.’ 

Rostov  let  go  of  the  horse  and  would  have  gone  on.  A  wounded  officer 
passing  by  addressed  him.  ‘Why,  who  is  it  you  want?’  asked  the  officer, 
‘the  commander-in-chief?  Oh,  he  was  killed  by  a  cannon  ball,  struck  in 
the  breast  before  our  regiment.’ 

‘Not  killed — wounded,’  another  officer  corrected  him. 

‘Who?  Kutuzov?’  asked  Rostov. 

‘Not  Kutuzov,  but  what’s  his  name — well,  it’s  all  the  same,  there  are 
not  many  left  alive.  Go  that  way,  over  there  to  that  village,  all  the  com¬ 
manding  officers  are  there,’  said  the  officer,  pointing  to  the  village  of 
Gostieradeck,  and  he  walked  on. 

Rostov  rode  on  at  a  walking  pace,  not  knowing  to  whom  and  with  what 
object  he  was  going  now.  The  Tsar  was  wounded,  the  battle  was  lost. 


264  WARANDPEACE 

There  was  no  refusing  to  believe  in  it  now.  Rostov  rode  in  the  direction 
which  had  been  pointed  out  to  him,  and  saw  in  the  distance  turrets  and  a 
church.  What  had  he  to  hasten  for  now?  What  was  he  to  say  now  to  the 
Tsar  or  to  Kutuzov,  even  if  they  were  alive  and  not  wounded? 

‘Go  along  this  road,  your  honour,  that  way  you  will  be  killed  in  a  trice!  ’ 
a  soldier  shouted  to  him.  ‘You’ll  be  killed  that  way!’ 

‘Oh!  what  nonsense!’  said  another.  ‘Where  is  he  to  go?  That  way’s 
nearest.’  Rostov  pondered,  and  rode  off  precisely  in  the  direction  in  which 
he  had  been  told  he  would  be  killed. 

‘Now,  nothing  matters;  if  the  Emperor  is  wounded,  can  I  try  and  save 
myself?’  he  thought.  He  rode  into  the  region  where  more  men  had  been 
killed  than  anywhere,  in  fleeing  from  Pratzen.  The  French  had  not  yet 
taken  that  region,  though  the  Russians — those  who  were  slightly  wounded 
or  unhurt — had  long  abandoned  it.  All  over  the  field,  like  ridges  of  dung 
on  well-kept  plough-land,  lay  the  heaps  of  dead  and  wounded,  a  dozen 
or  fifteen  bodies  to  every  three  acres.  The  wounded  were  crawling  two  or 
three  together,  and  their  shrieks  and  groans  had  a  painful  and  sometimes 
affected  sound,  it  seemed  to  Rostov.  Rostov  put  his  horse  to  a  trot  to  avoid 
the  sight  of  all  those  suffering  people,  and  he  felt  afraid.  He  was  afraid  of 
losing  not  his  life,  but  his  pluck,  which  he  needed  so  much,  which  he  knew 
would  not  stand  the  sight  of  those  luckless  wretches.  The  French  had 
ceased  firing  at  this  field  that  was  dotted  over  with  dead  and  wounded, 
because  there  seemed  no  one  living  upon  it,  but  seeing  an  adjutant  trotting 
across  it,  they  turned  a  cannon  upon  him  and  shot  off  several  cannon 
balls.  The  sense  of  these  whizzing,  fearful  sounds,  and  of  the  dead  bodies 
all  round  him  melted  into  a  single  impression  of  horror  and  pity  for  him¬ 
self  in  Rostov’s  heart.  He  thought  of  his  mother’s  last  letter.  ‘What  would 
she  be  feeling  now,’  he  thought,  ‘if  she  could  see  me  here  now  on  this  field 
with  cannons  aimed  at  me?’ 

In  the  village  of  Gostieradeck  there  were  Russian  troops,  in  some  con¬ 
fusion  indeed,  but  in  far  better  discipline,  who  had  come  from  the  field  of 
battle.  Here  they  were  out  of  range  of  the  French  cannons,  and  the  sounds 
of  firing  seemed  far  away.  Here  every  one  saw  clearly  that  the  battle  was 
lost,  and  all  were  talking  of  it.  No  one  to  whom  Rostov  applied  could  tell 
him  where  was  the  Tsar,  or  where  was  Kutuzov.  Some  said  that  the  rumour 
of  the  Tsar’s  wound  was  correct,  others  said  not,  and  explained  this  widely 
spread  false  report  by  the  fact  that  the  Ober-Hofmarschall  Tolstoy,  who 
had  come  out  with  others  of  the  Emperor’s  suite  to  the  field  of  battle, 
had  been  seen  pale  and  terrified  driving  back  at  full  gallop  in  the  Tsar’s 
carriage.  One  officer  told  Rostov  that,  behind  the  village  to  the  left,  he  had 
seen  some  one  from  headquarters,  and  Rostov  rode  off  in  that  direction, 
with  no  hope  now  of  finding  any  one,  but  simply  to  satisfy  his  conscience. 
After  going  about  two  miles  and  passing  the  last  of  the  Russian  troops, 
Rostov  saw,  near  a  kitchen-garden  enclosed  by  a  ditch,  two  horsemen 
standing  facing  the  ditch.  One  with  a  white  plume  in  his  hat  seemed  some¬ 
how  a  familiar  figure  to  Rostov,  the  other,  a  stranger  on  a  splendid  chest¬ 
nut  horse  (the  horse  Rostov  fancied  he  had  seen  before)  rode  up  to  the 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


265 

ditch,  put  spurs  to  his  horse,  and  lightly  leaped  over  the  ditch  into  the 
garden.  A  little  earth  from  the  bank  crumbled  off  under  his  horse’s  hind 
hoofs.  Turning  the  horse  sharply,  he  leaped  the  ditch  again  and  deferen¬ 
tially  addressed  the  horseman  in  the  white  plume,  apparently  urging  him 
to  do  the  same.  The  rider,  whose  figure  seemed  familiar  to  Rostov  and 
somehow  riveted  his  attention,  made  a  gesture  of  refusal  with  his  head 
and  his  hand,  and  in  that  gesture  Rostov  instantly  recognised  his  la¬ 
mented,  his  idolised  sovereign. 

‘But  it  can’t  be  he,  alone,  in  the  middle  of  this  empty  field,’  thought 
Rostov.  At  that  moment  Alexander  turned  his  head  and  Rostov  saw  the 
beloved  features  so  vividly  imprinted  on  his  memory.  The  Tsar  was  pale, 
his  cheeks  looked  sunken,  and  his  eyes  hollow,  but  the  charm,  the  mild¬ 
ness  of  his  face  was  only  the  more  striking.  Rostov  felt  happy  in  the 
certainty  that  the  report  of  the  Emperor’s  wound  was  false.  He  was 
happy  that  he  was  seeing  him.  He  knew  that  he  might,  that  he  ought, 
indeed,  to  go  straight  to  him  and  to  give  him  the  message  he  had  been 
commanded  to  give  by  Dolgorukov. 

But,  as  a  youth  in  love  trembles  and  turns  faint  and  dares  not  utter 
what  he  has  spent  nights  in  dreaming  of,  and  looks  about  in  terror,  seek¬ 
ing  aid  or  a  chance  of  delay  or  flight,  when  the  moment  he  has  longed 
for  comes  and  he  stands  alone  at  her  side,  so  Rostov,  now  when  he  was 
attaining  what  he  had  longed  for  beyond  everything  in  the  world,  did  not 
know  how  to  approach  the  Emperor,  and  thousands  of  reasons  why  it  was 
unsuitable,  unseemly,  and  impossible  came  into  his  mind. 

‘What!  it’s  as  though  I  were  glad  to  take  advantage  of  his  being  alone 
and  despondent.  It  may  be  disagreeable  and  painful  to  him,  perhaps,  to 
see  an  unknown  face  at  such  a  moment  of  sadness;  besides,  what  can 
I  say  to  him  now,  when  at  the  mere  sight  of  him  my  heart  is  throbbing 
and  leaping  into  my  mouth?’  Not  one  of  the  innumerable  speeches  he 
had  addressed  to  the  Tsar  in  his  imagination  recurred  to  his  mind  now. 
These  speeches  for  the  most  part  were  appropriate  to  quite  other  circum¬ 
stances;  they  had  been  uttered  for  the  most  part  at  moments  of  victory 
and  triumph,  and  principally  on  his  deathbed  when,  as  he  lay  dying  of 
his  wounds,  the  Emperor  thanked  him  for  his  heroic  exploits,  and  he  gave 
expression  as  he  died  to  the  love  he  had  proved  in  deeds.  ‘And  then,  how 
am  I  to  ask  the  Emperor  for  his  instructions  to  the  right  flank  when  it’s 
four  o’clock  in  the  afternoon  and  the  battle  is  lost?  No,  certainly  I 
ought  not  to  ride  up  to  him,  I  ought  not  to  break  in  on  his  sorrow.  Better 
die  a  thousand  deaths  than  that  he  should  give  me  a  glance,  a  thought 
of  disapproval,’  Rostov  decided,  and  with  grief  and  despair  in  his  heart 
he  rode  away,  continually  looking  back  at  the  Tsar,  who  still  stood  in 
the  attitude  of  indecision. 

While  Rostov  was  making  these  reflections  and  riding  mournfully  away 
from  the  Tsar,  Captain  Von  Toll  happened  to  ride  up  to  the  same  spot, 
and  seeing  the  Emperor,  went  straight  up  to  him,  offered  him  his  services, 
and  assisted  him  to  cross  the  ditch  on  foot.  The  Tsar,  feeling  unwell  and 
in  need  of  rest,  sat  down  under  an  apple-tree,  and  Von  Toll  remained 


-66 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

standing  by  his  side.  Rostov  from  a  distance  saw  with  envy  and  remorse 
how  Yon  Toll  talked  a  long  while  warmly  to  the  Emperor,  how  the  Em¬ 
peror,  apparently  weeping,  hid  his  face  in  his  hand,  and  pressed  Von 
Toll’s  hand. 

‘And  it  might  have  been  I  in  his  place?’  Rostov  thought,  and  hardly 
restraining  his  tears  of  sympathy  for  the  Tsar,  he  rode  away  in  utter 
despair,  not  knowing  where  and  with  what  object  he  was  going  now. 

His  despair  was  all  the  greater  from  feeling  that  it  was  his  own  weakness 
that  was  the  cause  of  his  regret. 

He  might  .  .  .  not  only  might,  but  ought  to  have  gone  up  to  the 
Emperor.  And  it  was  a  unique  chance  of  showing  his  devotion  to  the 
Emperor.  And  he  had  not  made  use  of  it.  .  .  .  ‘What  have  I  done?’  he 
thought.  And  he  turned  his  horse  and  galloped  back  to  the  spot  where 
he  had  seen  the  Emperor;  but  there  was  no  one  now  beyond  the  ditch. 
There  were  only  transport  waggons  and  carriages  going  by.  From  one 
carrier  Rostov  learned  that  Kutuzov’s  staff  were  not  far  off  in  the  village 
towards  which  the  transport  waggons  were  going.  Rostov  followed  them. 

In  front  of  him  was  Kutuzov’s  postillion  leading  horses  in  horsecloths. 
A  baggage  waggon  followed  the  postillion,  and  behind  the  waggon  walked 
an  old  bandy-legged  servant  in  a  cap  and  a  cape. 

‘Tit,  hey.  Tit!’  said  the  postillion. 

‘Eh,’  responded  the  old  man  absent-mindedly. 

‘Tit!  Stupay  molotitl’  (‘Tit,  go  a  thrashing!  ’) 

‘Ugh,  the  fool,  pugh!’  said  the  old  man,  spitting  angrily.  A  short  in¬ 
terval  of  silence  followed,  and  then  the  same  joke  was  repeated. 

By  five  o’clock  in  the  evening  the  battle  had  been  lost  at  every  point. 
More  than  a  hundred  cannons  were  in  the  possession  of  the  French. 
Przhebyshevsky  and  his  corps  had  surrendered.  The  other  columns  had 
retreated,  with  the  loss  of  half  their  men,  in  confused,  disorderly  masses. 
.All  that  were  left  of  Langeron’s  and  Dohturov’s  forces  were  crowded  to¬ 
gether  in  hopeless  confusion  on  the  dikes  and  banks  of  the  ponds  near 
the  village  of  Augest. 

At  six  o’clock  the  only  firing  still  to  be  heard  was  a  heavy  cannonade 
on  the  French  side  from  numerous  batteries  ranged  on  the  slope  of  the 
table-land  of  Pratzen,  and  directed  at  our  retreating  troops. 

In  the  rearguard  Dohturov  and  the  rest,  rallying  their  battalions,  had 
been  firing  at  the  French  cavalry  who  were  pursuing  them.  It  was  begin¬ 
ning  to  get  dark.  On  the  narrow  dam  of  Augest,  where  the  old  miller  in  his 
peaked  cap  had  sat  for  so  many  years  with  his  fishing  tackle,  while  his 
grandson,  with  tucked-up  shirt-sleeves,  turned  over  the  silvery,  flounder¬ 
ing  fish  in  the  net;  on  that  dam  where  the  Moravians,  in  their  shaggy 
caps  and  blue  jackets,  had  for  so  many  years  peacefully  driven  their 
horses  and  waggons,  loaded  with  wheat,  to  the  mill  and  driven  back  over 
the  same  clam,  dusty  with  flour  that  whitened  their  waggons — on  that 
narrow  dam  men,  made  hideous  by  the  terror  of  death,  now  crowded 
together,  amid  army  waggons  and  cannons,  under  horses’  feet  and  be¬ 
tween  carriage-wheels,  crushing  each  other,  dying,  stepping  over  the 


WAR  AND  PEACE  267 

dying,  and  killing  each  other,  only  to  be  killed  in  the  same  way  a  few 
steps  further  on. 

Every  ten  seconds  a  cannon  ball  flew  lashing  the  air  and  thumped 
down,  or  a  grenade  burst  in  the  midst  of  that  dense  crowd,  slaying  men 
and  splashing  blood  on  those  who  stood  near.  Dolohov,  wounded  in  the 
hand,  with  some  dozen  soldiers  of  his  company  on  foot  (he  was  already  an 
officer)  and  his  general  on  horseback,  were  the  sole  representatives  of  a 
whole  regiment.  Carried  along  by  the  crowd,  they  were  squeezed  in  the 
approach  to  the  d:m  and  stood  still,  jammed  in  on  all  sides  because  a 
horse  with  a  cannon  had  fallen,  and  the  crowd  were  dragging  it  away. 
A  cannon  ball  killed  some  one  behind  them,  another  fell  in  front  of  them 
and  spurted  the  blood  upon  Dolohov.  The  crowd  moved  forward  des¬ 
perately,  was  jsmmed,  moved  a  few  steps  and  was  stopped  again.  ‘Only 
to  get  over  these  hundred  steps  and  certain  safety:  stay  here  two  minutes 
and  death  to  a  certainty,’  each  man  was  thinking. 

Dolohov  standing  in  the  centre  of  the  crowd,  forced  his  way  to  the 
edge  of  the  dam,  knocking  down  two  soldiers,  and  ran  on  tp  the  slippery 
ice  that  covered  the  millpond. 

‘Turn  this  way!’  he  shouted,  bounding  over  the  ice,  which  cracked 
under  him.  ‘Turn  this  way!  ’  he  kept  shouting  to  the  cannon.  ‘It  bears!  . .  .’ 
The  ice  bore  him,  but  swayed  and  cracked,  and  it  was  evident  that, 
not  to  speak  of  a  cannon  or  a  crowd  of  people,  it  would  give  way  in  a 
moment  under  him  alone.  Men  gazed  at  him  and  pressed  to  the  bank, 
unable  to  bring  themselves  to  step  on  to  the  ice.  The  general  of  his  regi¬ 
ment  on  horseback  at  the  end  of  the  dam  lifted  his  hand  and  opened  his 
mouth  to  speak  to  Dolohov.  Suddenly  one  of  the  cannon  balls  flew  so 
low  over  the  heads  of  the  crowd  that  all  ducked.  There  was  a  wet  splash, 
as  the  general  fell  from  his  horse  into  a  pool  of  blood.  No  one  glanced 
at  the  general,  no  one  thought  of  picking  him  up. 

‘On  to  the  ice!  Get  on  the  ice!  Get  on!  turn!  don’t  you  hear!  Get  on!’ 
innumerable  voices  fell  to  shouting  immediately  after  the  ball  had  struck 
the  general,  not  knowing  themselves  what  and  why  they  were  shouting. 

One  of  the  hindmost  cannons  that  had  been  got  on  to  the  dam  was 
turned  off  upon  the  ice.  Crowds  of  soldiers  began  running  from  the  dam 
on  to  the  frozen  pond.  The  ice  cracked  under  one  of  the  foremost  soldiers, 
and  one  leg  slipped  into  the  water.  He  tried  to  right  himself  and  floundered 
up  to  his  waist.  The  soldiers  nearest  tried  to  draw  back,  the  driver  of 
the  cannon  pulled  up  his  horse,  but  still  the  shouts  were  heard  from 
behind:  ‘Get  on  to  the  ice,  why  are  you  stopping?  go  on!  go  on!’  And 
:  screams  of  terror  were  heard  in  the  crowd.  The  soldiers  near  the  cannon 
waved  at  the  horses,  and  lashed  them  to  make  them  turn  and  go  on. 
The  horses  moved  from  the  dam’s  edge.  The  ice  that  had  held  under  the 
foot-soldiers  broke  in  a  huge  piece,  and  some  forty  men  who  were  on  it 
dashed,  some  forwards,  some  backwards,  drowning  one  another. 

Still  the  cannon  balls  whizzed  as  regularly  and  thumped  on  to  the 
ice,  into  the  water,  and  most  often  into  the  crowd  that  covered  the  dam, 
the  pond  and  the  bank. 


368 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


XIX 

Prince  Andrey  Bolkonsky  was  lying  on  the  hill  of  Pratzen,  on  the  spot 
where  he  had  fallen  with  the  flagstaff  in  his  hands.  He  was  losing  blood, 
and  kept  moaning  a  soft,  plaintive,  childish  moan,  of  which  he  himself 
knew  nothing.  Towards  evening  he  ceased  moaning  and  became  perfectly 
still.  He  did  not  know  how  long  his  unconsciousness  lasted.  Suddenly  he 
felt  again  that  he  was  alive  and  suffering  from  a  burning,  lacerating  pain 
in  his  head. 

‘Where  is  it,  that  lofty  sky  that  I  knew  not  till  now  and  saw  to-day?’ 
was  his  first  thought.  ‘And  this  agony  I  did  not  know  either,’  he  thought. 
‘Yes,  I  knew  nothing,  nothing. till  now.  But  where  am  I?’ 

He  fell  to  listening,  and  caught  the  sound  of  approaching  hoofs  and 
voices  speaking  French.  He  opened  his  eyes.  Above  him  was  again  the 
same  lofty  sky,  with  clouds  higher  than  ever  floating  over  it,  and  between 
them  stretches  of  blue  infinity.  He  did  not  turn  his  head  and  did  not  see 
the  men  who,  judging  from  the  voices  and  the  thud  of  hoofs,  had  ridden 
up  to  him  and  stopped. 

They  were  Napoleon  and  two  adjutants  escorting  him.  Bonaparte, 
making  a  tour  of  the  field  of  battle,  had  been  giving  his  last  instructions 
for  the  strengthening  of  the  battery  firing  at  the  Augest  dam,  and  was 
inspecting  the  dead  and  wounded  on  the  field  of  battle. 

‘Fine  men!’  said  Napoleon,  looking  at  a  dead  Russian  grenadier,  who 
with  his  face  thrust  into  the  earth  and  blackened  neck  lay  on  his  stomach, 
one  stiff  arm  flung  wide. 

‘The  field-guns  have  exhausted  their  ammunition,’  said  an  adjutant, 
arriving  that  moment  from  the  battery  that  was  firing  at  Augest. 

‘Bring  up  more  from  the  reserve,’  said  Napoleon,  and  riding  a  few 
steps  away  stood  still,  looking  at  Prince  Andrey,  who  lay  on  his  back 
with  the  abandoned  flagstaff  beside  him  (the  flag  had  been  taken  by  the 
French  as  a  trophy). 

‘That’s  a  fine  death!’  said  Napoleon,  looking  at  Bolkonsky.  Prince 
Andrey  knew  that  it  was  said  of  him,  and  that  it  was  Napoleon  saying  it. 
He  heard  the  speaker  of  those  words  addressed  as  ‘your  majesty.’  But 
he  heard  the  words  as  he  heard  the  buzzing  of  flies.  It  was  not  merely  that 
he  took  no  interest  in  them,  but  he  did  not  attend  to  them  and  at  once 
forgot  them.  There  was  a  burning  pain  in  his  head ;  he  felt  he  was  losing 
blood,  and  he  saw  above  him  the  high,  far-away,  everlasting  sky.  He 
knew  it  was  Napoleon — his  hero — but  at  that  moment  Napoleon  seemed 
to  him  such  a  small,  insignificant  creature  in  comparison  with  what  was 
passing  now  between  his  soul  and  that  lofty,  limitless  sky  with  the  clouds 
flying  over  it.  It  meant  nothing  to  him  at  that  moment  who  was  standing 
over  him,  what  was  being  said  of  him.  He  was  only  glad  that  people  were 
standing  over  him,  and  his  only  desire  was  that  these  people  should  help 
him  and  bring  him  back  to  life,  which  seemed  to  him  so  good,  because 
he  saw  it  all  quite  differently  now.  He  made  a  supreme  effort  to  stir  and 


WARANDPEACE  269 

utter  some  sound.  He  moved  his  leg  faintly,  and  uttered  a  weak,  sickly 
moan  that  touched  himself.  ‘Ah,  he’s  alive,’  said  Napoleon.  ‘Pick  up  this 
young  man  and  carry  him  to  an  ambulance!  ’  Saying  this,  Napoleon  rode 
on  to  meet  Marshal  Lannes,  who  rode  up  to  meet  the  conqueror,  smiling, 
taking  off  his  hat  and  congratulating  him  on  his  victory. 

Prince  Andrey  remembered  nothing  more;  he  lost  consciousness  from 
the  excruciating  pain  caused  by  being  laid  on  the  stretcher,  the  jolting 
while  he  was  being  moved,  and  the  sounding  of  his  wound  at  the  am¬ 
bulance.  He  only  regained  consciousness  towards  the  ena  of  the  day  when 
with  other  Russian  officers,  wounded  and  prisoners,  he  was  oeing  taken 
to  the  hospital.  On  this  journey  he  felt  a  little  stronger,  and  could  look 
about  him  and  even  speak. 

The  first  words  he  heard  on  coming  to  himself  were  from  a  French 
convoy  officer  who  was  saying  hurriedly:  They  must  stop  here;  the 
Emperor  will  be  here  directly;  it  will  be  a  pleasure  for  him  to  see  these 
prisoners.’ 

‘There  are  such  a  lot  of  prisoners  io  day,  almost  the  whole  of  the 
Russian  army,  that  he  is  probably  weary  of  seeing  them,’  said  another 
officer. 

‘Well,  but  this  one,  they  say.  is  the  commander  of  all  the  Emperor 
Alexander’s  guards,’  said  the  first  speaker,  pointing  to  a  wounded  Russian 
officer  in  the  white  uniform  of  the  horse-guards.  Bolkonsky  recognised 
Prince  Repnin,  whom  he  had  met  in  Petersburg  society.  Beside  him  stood 
another  officer  of  the  horse -guards,  a  lad  of  nineteen,  also  wounded. 

Bonaparte  rode  up  at  a  gallop  and  pulled  up,  ‘Who  is  the  senior  officer?’ 
he  said,  on  seeing  the  prisoners. 

They  namec  the  colonel,  Prince  Repnin. 

‘Are  yon  the  commander  of  the  regiment  of  Emperor  Alexander’s  horse- 
guards?’  asked  Napoleon. 

‘I  was  in  command  of  a  squadron,’  replied  Repnin. 

1  ‘Tour  regiment  did  its  duty  honourably,’  said  Napoleon. 

‘The  praise  of  a  great  general  is  a  soldier’s  best  reward,’  said  Repnin. 

‘I  bestow  it  upon  you  with  pleasure,’  said  Napoleon.  ‘Who  is  this  young 
man  beside  you?’  Prince  Repnin  gave  his  name,  Lieutenant  Suhtelen. 

Looking  at  him,  Napoleon  said  with  a  smile:  ‘He  has  come  very  young 
to  meddle  with  us.’ 

‘Youth  is  no  hindrance  to  valour,’  said  Suhtelen  in  a  breaking  voice. 

‘A  fine  answer,’  said  Napoleon;  ‘young  man,  you  will  go  far.’ 

Prince  Andrey,  who  had  been  thrust  forward  under  the  Emperor’s 
eyes  to  complete  the  show  of  prisoners,  could  not  fail  to  attract  his  notice. 
Napoleon  apparently  remembered  seeing  him  on  the  field,  and  addressing 
him  he  used  the  same  epithet,  ‘young  man,’  with  which  his  first  sight  of 
Bolkonsky  was  associated  in  his  memory. 

‘And  you,  young  man,’  he  said  to  him,  ‘how  are  you  feeling,  1  non  brave?’ 

Although  five  minutes  previously  Prince  Andrey  had  been  able  to  say 
a  few  words  to  the  soldiers  who  were  carrying  him,  he  was  silent  now, 
with  his  eyes  fastened  directly  upon  Napoleon.  So  trivial  seemed  to  him 


270  WARANDPEACE 

at  that  moment  all  the  interests  that  were  engrossing  Napoleon,  so  petty 
seemed  to  him  his  hero,  with  his  paltry  vanity  and  glee  of  victory,  in 
comparison  with  that  lofty,  righteous,  and  kindly  sky  which  he  had  seen 
and  comprehended,  that  he  could  not  answer  him.  And  all  indeed  seemed 
to  him  so  trifling  and  unprofitable  beside  the  stern  and  solemn  train  of 
thought  aroused  in  him  by  weakness  from  loss  of  blood,  by  suffering 
and  the  nearness  of  death.  Gazing  into  Napoleon’s  eyes,  Prince  Andrey 
mused  on  the  nothingness  of  greatness,  on  the  nothingness  of  life,  of 
which  no  one  could  comprehend  the  significance,  and  on  the  nothingness 
— still  more — of  death,  the  meaning  of  which  could  be  understood  and 
explained  by  none  of  the  living. 

The  Emperor,  after  vainly  pausing  for  a  reply,  turned  away  and  said 
to  one  of  the  officers  in  command — 

‘See  that  they  look  after  these  gentlemen  and  take  them  to  my  bivouac; 
let  my  doctor  Larrey  attend  to  their  wounds.  Au  revoir,  Prince  Repnin,’ 
and  he  galloped  away. 

Plis  face  was  radiant  with  happiness  and  self-satisfaction. 

The  soldiers,  who  had  been  carrying  Prince  Andrey,  had  come  across 
the  golden  relic  Princess  Marya  had  hung  upon  her  brother’s  neck,  and 
taken  it  off  him,  but  seeing  the  graciousness  the  Emperor  had  shown 
to  the  prisoners,  they  made  haste  to  restore  the  holy  image. 

Prince  Andrey  did  not  see  who  put  it  on  him  again,  nor  how  it  was 
replaced,  but  all  at  once  he  found  the  locket  on  its  delicate  gold'chain  on 
his  chest  outside  his  uniform. 

‘How  good  it  would  be,’  thought  Prince  Andrey,  as  he  glanced  at  the 
image  which  his  sister  had  hung  round  his  neck  with  such  emotion  and 
reverence,  ‘how  good  it  would  be  if  all  were  as  clear  and  simple  as  it  seems 
to  Marie.  How  good  to  know  where  to  seek  aid  in  this  life  and  what  to 
expect  after  it,  there,  beyond  the  grave!’ 

‘How  happy  and  at  peace  I  should  be,  if  I  could  say  now,  “Lord,  have 
mercy  on  me!  .  .  .”  But  to  whom  am  I  to  say  that?  Either  a  Power 
infinite,  inconceivable,  to  which  I  cannot  appeal,  which  I  cannot  even 
put  into  words,  the  great  whole,  or  nothing,’  he  said  to  himself,  ‘or  that 
God,  who  has  been  sewn  up  here  in  this  locket  by  Marie?  There  is  nothing, 
nothing  certain  but  the  nothingness  of  all  that  is  comprehensible  to  us, 
and  the  grandeur  of  something  incomprehensible,  but  more  important!’ 

The  stretchers  began  to  be  moved.  At  every  jolt  he  felt  intolerable 
pain  again.  The  fever  became  higher,  and  he  fell  into  delirium.  Visions 
of  his  father,  his  wife,  his  sister,  and  his  future  son,  and  the  tenderness 
he  had  felt  for  them  on  the  night  before  the  battle,  the  figure  of  that  little, 
petty  Napoleon,  and  over  all  these  the  lofty  sky,  formed  the  chief  sub¬ 
stance  of  his  delirious  dreams.  The  quiet  home  life  and  peaceful  happi¬ 
ness  of  Bleak  Hills  passed  before  his  imagination.  He  was  enjoying  that 
happiness  when  suddenly  there  appeared  that  little  Napoleon  with  his 
callous,  narrow  look  of  happiness  in  the  misery  of  others,  and  there  came 
doubts  and  torments,  and  only  the  sky  promised  peace.  Towards  morning 
all  his  dreams  mingled  and  melted  away  in  the  chaos  and  darkness  of 


WAR  AND  PEACE  271 

unconsciousness  and  oblivion,  far  more  likely,  in  the  opinion  of  Na¬ 
poleon’s  doctor,  Larrey,  to  be  ended  by  death  than  by  recovery, 

‘He  is  a  nervous,  bilious  subject,’  said  Larrey;  ‘he  won’t  recover.’ 
Prince  Andrey,  with  the  rest  of  the  hopeless  cases,  was  handed  over  to 
the  care  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  district. 


PART  IV 


I 

At  the  beginning  of  the  year  1806,  Nikolay  Rostov  was  coming  home  on 
leave.  Denisov,  too,  was  going  home  to  Voronezh,  and  Rostov  persuaded 
him  to  go  with  him  to  Moscow  and  to  pay  him  a  visit  there.  Denisov 
met  his  comrade  at  the  last  posting  station  but  one,  drank  three  bottles  of 
.wine  with  him,  and,  in  spite  of  the  jolting  of  the  road  on  the  journey  to 
Moscow,  slept  soundly  lying  at  the  bottom  of  the  posting  sledge  beside 
Rostov,  who  grew  more  and  more  impatient,  as  they  got  nearer  to 
Moscow. 

‘Will  it  come  soon?  Soon?  Oh,  these  insufferable  streets,  bunshops, 
street  lamps,  and  sledge  drivers!’  thought  Rostov,  when  they  had  pre¬ 
sented  their  papers  at  the  town  gates  and  were  driving  into  Moscow. 

‘Denisov,  we’re  here!  Asleep!  ’  he  kept  saying,  flinging  his  whole  person 
forward  as  though  by  that  position  he  hoped  to  hasten  the  progress  of 
the  sledge.  Denisov  made  no  response. 

‘Here’s  the  corner  of  the  cross-roads,  where  Zahar  the  sledge-driver 
used  to  stand;  and  here  is  Zahar,  too,  and  still  the  same  horse.  And  here’s 
the  little  shop  where  we  used  to  buy  cakes.  Make  haste!  Nov/!’ 

‘Which  house  is  it?’  asked  the  driver. 

‘Over  there,  at  the  end,  the  big  one;  how  is  it  you  don’t  see  it?  That’s 
our  house,’  Rostov  kept  saying;  ‘that’s  our  house,  of  course.’ 

‘Denisov!  Denisov!  we  shall  be  there  in  a  minute.’ 

Denisov  raised  his  head,  cleared  his  throat,  and  said  nothing. 

‘Dmitry,’  said  Rostov  to  his  valet  on  the  box,  ‘surely  that  light  is  home?’ 

‘To  be  sure  it  is;  it’s  the  light  in  your  papa’s  study,  too.’ 

‘They’ve  not  gone  to  bed  yet?  Eh?  What  do  you  think?’ 

‘Mind  now,  don’t  forget  to  get  me  out  my  new  tunic,’  added  Rostov, 
fingering  his  new  moustaches. 

‘Come,  get  on,’  he  shouted  to  the  driver.  ‘And  do  wake  up,  Vasya,’  he 
said  to  Denisov,  who  had  begun  nodding  again. 

‘Come,  get  on,  three  silver  roubles  for  vodka — get  on!  ’  shouted  Rostov, 
when  they  were  only  three  houses  from  the  entrance.  It  seemed  to  him 
that  the  horses  were  not  moving.  At  last  the  sledge  turned  to  the  right 
into  the  approach,  Rostov  saw  the  familiar  cornice  with  the  broken 
plaster  overhead,  the  steps,  the  lamp-post.  He  jumped  out  of  the  sledge 
while  it  was  moving  and  ran  into  the  porch.  The  house  stood  so  inhos¬ 
pitably,  as  though  it  were  no  concern  of  its  who  had  come  into  it.  There 
was  no  one  in  the  porch.  ‘My  God!  is  everything  all  right?’  wondered 
Rostov,  stopping  for  a  moment  with  a  sinking  heart,  and  then  running 

272 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


2  73 

on  again  along  the  porch  and  up  the  familiar,  crooked  steps.  Still  the  same 
door  handle,  the  dirtiness  of  which  so  often  angered  the  countess,  turned 
in  the  same  halting  fashion.  In  the  hall  there  was  a  single  tallow  candle 
burning. 

Old  Mihailo  was  asleep  on  his  perch. 

Prokofy,  the  footman,  a  man  so  strong  that  he  had  lifted  up  a  car¬ 
riage,  was  sitting  there  in  his  list  shoes.  He  glanced  towards  the  opening 
door  and  his  expression  of  sleepy  indifference  was  suddenly  transformed 
into  one  of  frightened  ecstasy. 

‘Merciful  Pleavens!  The  young  count!  ’  he  cried,  recognising  his  young 
master.  ‘Can  it  be?  my  darling?’  And  Prokofy,  shaking  with  emotion, 
made  a  dash  towards  the  drawing-room  door,  probably  with  the  view  of 
announcing  him;  but  apparently  he  changed  his  mind,  for  he  came  back 
and  fell  on  his  young  master’s  shoulder. 

‘All  well?’  asked  Rostov,  pulling  his  hand  away  from  him. 

‘Thank  God,  yes!  All,  thank  God!  Only  just  finished  supper!  Let  me 
have  a  look  at  you,  your  excellency!’ 

‘Everything  perfectly  all  right?’ 

‘Thank  God,  yes,  thank  God!’ 

Rostov,  completely  forgetting  Denisov,  flung  off  his  fur  coat  and, 
anxious  that  no  one  should  prepare  the  way  for  him,  he  ran  on  tip-toe 
into  the  big,  dark  reception-hall.  Everything  was  the  same,  the  same 
card-tables,  the  same  candelabra  with  a  cover  over  it,  but  some  one  had 
already  seen  the  young  master,  and  he  had  not  reached  the  drawing¬ 
room  when  from  a  side  door  something  swooped  headlong,  like  a  storm 
upon  him,  and  began  hugging  and  kissing  him.  A  second  and  a  third 
figure  dashed  in  at  a  second  door  and  at  a  third;  more  huggings,  more 
kisses,  more  outcries  and  tears  of  delight.  He  could  not  distinguish  where 
and  which  was  papa,  which  was  Natasha,  and  which  was  Petya.  All  were 
screaming  and  talking  and  kissing  him  at  the  same  moment.  Only  his 
mother  was  not  among  them,  that  he  remembered. 

‘And  I  never  knew  .  .  .  Nikolenka  .  .  .  my  darling!’ 

‘Here  he  is  .  .  .  our  boy  .  .  .  my  darling  Kolya.  .  .  Isn’t  he 
changed!  Where  are  the  candles?  Tea!’ 

‘Kiss  me  too! ’ 

‘Dearest  .  .  .  and  me  too.’ 

Sonya,  Natasha,  Petya,  Anna  Mihalovna,  Vera,  and  the  old  count  were 
all  hugging  him ;  and  the  servants  and  the  maids  flocked  into  the  room 
with  talk  and  outcries. 

Petya  hung  on  his  legs. 

‘Me  too!’  he  kept  shouting. 

Natasha,  after  pulling  him  down  to  her  and  kissing  his  face  all  over, 
skipped  back  from  him  and,  keeping  her  hold  of  his  jacket,  pranced  like 
a  goat  up  and  down  in  the  same  place,  uttering  shrill  shrieks  of  delight. 

All  round  him  were  loving  eyes  shining  with  tears  of  joy,  all  round  were 
lips  seeking  kisses. 

Sonya  too,  as  red  as  crimson  baize,  clung  to  his  arm  and  beamed  all 


274  WARANDPEACE 

over,  gazing  blissfully  at  his  eyes  for  which  she  had  so  long  been  waiting. 
Sonya  was  just  sixteen  and  she  was  very  pretty,  especially  at  this  moment 
of  happy,  eager  excitement.  She  gazed  at  him,  unable  to  take  her  eyes 
off  him,  smiling  and  holding  her  breath.  He  glanced  gratefully  at  her;  but- 
still  he  was  expectant  and  looking  for  some  one,  and  the  old  countess  had 
not  come  in  yet.  And  now  steps  were  heard  at  the  door.  The  steps  were 
so  rapid  that  they  could  hardly  be  his  mother’s  footsteps. 

But  she  it  was  in  a  new  dress  that  he  did  not  know,  made  during  his 
absence.  All  of  them  let  him  go,  and  he  ran  to  her.  When  they  came 
together,  she  sank  on  his  bosom,  sobbing.  She  could  not  lift  up  her  face, 
and  only  pressed  it  to  the  cold  braiding  of  his  hussar’s  jacket.  Denisov, 
who  had  come  into  the  room  unnoticed  by  any  one,  stood  still  looking  at 
them  and  rubbing  his  eyes. 

‘Vassily  Denisov,  your  son’s  friend,’  he  said,  introducing  himself  to 
the  count,  who  looked  inquiringly  at  him. 

‘Very  welcome.  I  know  you,  I  know  you,’  said  the  count,  kissing  and 
embracing  Denisov.  ‘Nikolenka  wrote  to  us  .  .  .  Natasha,  Vera,  here 
he  is,  Denisov.’ 

The  same  happy,  ecstatic  faces  turned  to  the  towzled  figure  of  Denisov 
and  surrounded  him. 

‘Darling  Denisov,’  squealed  Natasha,  and,  beside  herself  with  delight, 
she  darted  up  to  him,  hugging  and  kissing  him.  Every  one  was  discon¬ 
certed  by  Natasha’s  behaviour.  Denisov  too  reddened,  but  he  smiled, 
took  Natasha’s  hand  and  kissed  it. 

Denisov  was  conducted  to  the  room  assigned  him,  while  the  Rostovs 
all  gathered  about  Nikolenka  in  the  divan-room. 

The  old  countess  sat  beside  him,  keeping  tight  hold  of  his  hand,  which 
she  was  every  minute  kissing.  The  others  thronged  round  them,  gloating 
over  gvery  movement,  every  glance,  every  word  he  uttered,  and  never 
taking  their  enthusiastic  and  loving  eyes  off  him.  His  brother  and  sisters 
quarrelled  and  snatched  from  one  another  the  place  nearest  him  and  dis¬ 
puted  over  which  was  to  bring  him  tea,  a  handkerchief,  a  pipe. 

Rostov  was  very  happy  in  the  love  they  showed  him.  But  the  first 
minute  of  meeting  them  had  been  so  blissful  that  his  happiness  now 
seemed  a  little  thing,  and  he  kept  expecting  something  more  and  more 
and  more. 

Next  morning  after  his  journey  he  slept  on  till  ten  o’clock. 

The  adjoining  room  was  littered  with  swords,  bags,  sabretaches,  open 
trunks,  and  dirty  boots.  Two  pairs  of  cleaned  boots  with  spurs  had  just 
been  stood  against  the  wall.  The  servants  brought  in  wash-hand  basins, 
hot  water  for  shaving,  and  their  clothes  well  brushed.  The  room  was  full 
of  a  masculine  odour  and  reeked  of  tobacco. 

‘Hi,  Grishka,  a  pipe!’  shouted  the  husky  voice  of  Vaska  Denisov. 
‘Rostov,  get  up! ’ 

Rostov,  rubbing  his  eyelids  that  seemed  glued  together,  lifted  his 
towzled  head  from  the  warm  pillow. 

‘Why,  is  it  late?’ 


2 


War  and  peace 

‘It  is  late,  nearly, ten,’  answered  Natasha’s  voice,  and  in  the  next  room 
they  heard  the  rustle  of  starched  skirts  and  girlish  laughter.  The  door  was 
opened  a  crack,  and  there  was  a  glimpse  of  something  blue,  of  ribbons, 
black  hair  and  merry  faces.  Natasha  with  Sonya  and  Petya  had  come 
to  see  if  he  were  not  getting  up. 

‘Nikolenka,  get  up!’  Natasha’s  voice  was  heard  again  at  the  door. 

‘At  once!’  Meanwhile  in  the  outer  room  Petya  had  caught  sight  of  the 
swords  and  seized  upon  them  with  the  rapture  small  boys  feel  at  the 
sight  of  a  soldier  brother,  and  regardless  of  its  not  being  the  proper 
thing  for  his  sisters  to  see  the  young  men  undressed,  he  opened  the 
bedroom  door. 

‘Is  this  your  sword?’  he  shouted. 

The  girls  skipped  away.  Denisov  hid  his  hairy  legs  under  the  bed¬ 
clothes,  looking  with  a  scared  face  to  his  comrade  for  assistance.  The 
door  admitted  Petya  and  closed  after  him.  A  giggle  was  heard  from 
outside. 

‘Nikolenka,  come  out  in  your  dressing-gown,’  cried  Natasha’s  voice. 

‘Is  this  your  sword?’  asked  Petya,  ‘or  is  it  yours?’  he  turned  with 
deferential  respect  to  the  swarthy,  whiskered  Denisov. 

Rostov  made  haste  to  get  on  his  shoes  and  stockings,  put  on  his  dress¬ 
ing-gown  and  went  out.  Natasha  had  put  on  one  spurred  boot  and  was 
just  getting  into  the  other.  Sonya  was  ‘making  cheeses,’  and  had  just 
whirled  her  skirt  into  a  balloon  and  was  duckine  do.wn,  when  he  came  in. 
They  were  dressed  alike  in  new  blue  frocks,  both  fresh,  rosy,  and  good- 
humoured.  Sonya  ran  away,  but  Natasha,  taking  her  brother’s  arm,  led 
him  into  the  divan-room,  and  a  conversation  began  between  them.  They 
had  not  time  to  ask  and  answer  all  the  questions  about  the  thousand 
trifling  matters  which  could  only  be  of  interest  to  them.  Natasha  laughed 
at  every  word  he  said  and  at  every  word  she  said,  not  because  w'hat  they 
said  was  amusing,  but  because  she  was  in  high  spirits  and  unable  to 
contain  her  joy,  which  brimmed  over  in  laughter. 

‘Ah,  isn’t  it  nice,  isn’t  it  splendid!’  she  kept  saying  every  moment. 
Under  the  influence  of  the  warm  sunshine  of  love,  Rostov  felt  that  for 
the  first  time  for  a  year  and  a  half  his  soul  and  his  face  were  expanding 
in  that  childish  smile,  he  had  not  once  smiled  since  he  left  home. 

‘No,  I  say,’  she  said,  ‘you’re  quite  a  man  now,  eh?  I’m  awfully  glad 
you’re  my  brother.’  She  touched  his  moustache.  ‘I  do  want  to  know  wfliat 
sort  of  creatures  you  men  are.  Just  like  us?  No.’ 

‘Why  did  Sonya  run  away?’  asked  Rostov. 

‘Oh,  there’s  a  lot  to  say  about  that!  How  are  you  going  to  speak  to 
Sonya?  Shall  you  call  her  “thou”  or  “you”?’ 

‘As  it  happens,’  said  Rostov. 

‘Call  her  “you,”  please;  I’ll  tell  you  why  afterwards.’ 

‘But  why?’ 

‘Well,  I’ll  tell  you  now.  You  know  that  Sonya’s  my  friend,  such  a 
friend  that  I  burnt  my  arm  for  her  sake.  Here,  look.’  She  pulled  up  her 
muslin  sleeve  and  showed  him  on  her  long,  thin,  soft  arm  above  the  elbow 


-276  WAR  AND  PEACE 

near  the  shoulder  (on  the  part  which  is  covered  evm  in  a  ball-dress)  a 
red  mark. 

‘I  burnt  that  to  show  her  my  love.  I  simply  heated  a  ruler  in  the  fire  and 
pressed  it  on  it.’ 

Sitting  in  his  old  schoolroom  on  the  sofa  with  little  cushions  on  the 
arms,  and  looking  into  Natasha’s  wildly  eager  eyes,  Rostov  was  carried 
back  into  that  world  of  home  and  childhood  which  had  no  meaning  for 
any  one  else  but  gave  him  some  of  the  greatest  pleasures  in  his  life.  And 
burning  one’s  arm  with  a  ruler  as  a  proof  of  love  did  not  strike  him  as 
pointless;  he  understood  it,  and  was  not  surprised  at  it. 

‘Well,  is  that  all?’  he  asked. 

‘Well,  we  are  such  friends,  such  great  friends!  That’s  nonsense— the 
ruler;  but  we  are  friends  for  ever.  If  she  once  loves  any  one,  it’s  for  ever; 
I  don’t  understand  that,  I  forget  so  quickly.’ 

‘Well,  what  then?’ 

‘Yes,  so  she  loves  me  and  you.’  Natasha  suddenly  flushed.  ‘Well,  you 
remember  before  you  went  away  .  .  .  She  says  you  are  to  forget  it  all 
.  .  .  She  said,  I  shall  always  love  him,  but  let  him  be  free.  That  really  is 
splendid,  noble!  Yes,  yes;  very  noble?  Yes?’  Natasha  asked  with  such 
seriousness  and  emotion  that  it  was  clear  that  what  she  was  saying  now 
she  had  talked  of  before  with  tears.  Rostov  thought  a  little. 

‘I  never  take  back  my  word,’  he  said.  ‘And  besides,  Sonya’s  so  charm¬ 
ing  that  who  would  Joe  such  a  fool  as  to  renounce  his  own  happiness?’ 

‘No,  no,’  cried  Natasha.  ‘She  and  I  have  talked  about  that  already. 
We  knew  that  you’d  say  that.  But  that  won’t  do,  because,  don’t  you 
see,  if  you  say  that — if  you  consider  yourself  bound  by  your  word, 
then  it  makes  it  as  though  she  had  said  that  on  purpose.  It  makes 
it  as  though  you  were,  after  all,  obliged  to  marry  her,  and  it  makes  it 
all  wrong.’ 

Rostov  saw  that  it  had  all  been  well  thought  over  by  them.  On  the 
previous  day,  Sonya  had  struck  him  by  her  beauty;  in  the  glimpse  he 
had  caught  of  her  to-day,  she  seemed  even  prettier.  She  was  a  charming 
girl  of  sixteen,  obviously  passionately  in  love  with  him  (of  that  he  could 
not  doubt  for  an  instant).  ‘Why  should  he  not  love  her  now,  even  if  he 
did  not  marry  her,’  mused  Rostov,  ‘but  .  .  .  just  now  he  had  so  many 
other  joys  and  interests!’ 

‘Yes,  that’s  a  very  good  conclusion  on  their  part,’  he  thought;  ‘I  must 
remain  free.’ 

‘Well,  that’s  all  right,  then,’  he  said;  ‘we'll  talk  about  it  later  on.  Ah, 
how  glad  I  am  to  be  back  with  you!’  he  added.  ‘Come,  tell  me,  you’ve 
not  been  false  to  Boris?’ 

‘That’s  nonsense!’  cried  Natasha,  laughing.  ‘I  never  think  of  him  nor 
of  any  one  else,  and  don’t  want  to.’ 

‘Oh,  you  don’t,  don’t  you!  Then  what  do  you  want?’ 

‘I?’  Natasha  queried,  and  her  face  beamed  with  a  happy  smile.  ‘Have 
you  seen  Duport?’ 

‘No.’ 


WARANDPEACE  277 

‘Not  seen  Duport,  the  celebrated  dancer?  Oh,  well  then,  you  won’t 
understand.  I — that’s  what  I  am.’  Curving  her  arms,  Natasha  held  out 
her  skirt,  as  dancers  do,  ran  back  a  few  steps,  whirled  round,  executed 
a  pirouette,  bringing  her  little  feet  together  and  standing  on  the  very  tips 
of  her  toes,  moved  a  few  steps  forward, 

‘You  see  how  I  stand?  there,  like  this,’  she  kept  saying;  but  she  could 
not  keep  on  her  toes.  ‘So  that’s  what  I’m  going  to  be!  I’m  never  going  to 
be  married  to  any  one;  I’m  going  to  be  a  dancer.  Only,  don’t  tell 
anybody.’ 

Rostov  laughed  so  loudly  and  merrily  that  Denisov  in  his  room  felt 
envious,  and  Natasha  could  not  help  laughing  with  him. 

‘No,  isn’t  it  all  right?’  she  kept  saying, 

‘Oh,  quite.  So  you  don’t  want  to  marry  Boris  now?’ 

Natasha  got  hot. 

‘I  don’t  want  to  marry  any  one.  I’ll  tell  him  so  myself  when  I  see  him.’ 

‘Oh,  will  you?’  said  Rostov. 

‘But  that’s  all  nonsense,  Natasha  prattled  on.  ‘And,  I  say,  is  Denisov 
nice?’  she  asked. 

‘Yes,  he’s  nice.’ 

‘Well,  good-bye,  go  and  dress  Is  he  a  dreadful  person — Denisov?’ 

‘How,  dreadful?’  asked  Nikolay.  ‘No,  Vaska’s  jolly.’ 

‘You  call  him  Vaska?  *  .  that’s  funny.  Well,  is  he  very  nice?’ 

‘Very  nice.’ 

‘Make  haste  and  come  to  tea,  then.  We  are  all  going  to  have  it 
together.’ 

And  Natasha  rose  on  to  her  toes  and  stepped  out  of  the  room,  as 
dancers  do,  out  smiling  as  only  happy  girls  of  fifteen  can  smile.  Rostov 
reddened  on  meeting  Sonya  in  the  drawing-room.  He  did  not  know  how¬ 
to  behave  with  her.  Yesterday  they  had  kissed  in  the  first  moment  of  joy 
at  meeting,  but  to-day  they  felt  that  out  of  the  question.  He  felt  that 
every  one,  his  mother  and  his  sisters,  were  looking  inquiringly  at  him, 
and  wondering  how  he  would  behave  with  her.  He  kissed  her  hand,  and 
called  her  you  and  Sonya.  But  their  eyes  when  they  met  spoke  more 
fondly  and  kissed  tenderly.  Her  eyes  asked  his  forgiveness  for  having 
dared,  by  Natasha’s  mediation,  to  remind  him  of  his  promise,  and  thanked 
him  for  his  love.  His  eyes  thanked  her  for  offering  him  his  freedom,  and 
told  her  that  whether  so,  or  otherwise,  he  should  never  cease  to  love  her, 
because  it  was  impossible  not  to  love  her. 

‘How  queer  it  is,  though,’  said  Vera,  selecting  a  moment  of  general 
silence,  ‘that  Sonya  and  Nikolenka  meet  now  and  speak  like  strangers.’ 

Vera’s  observation  was  true,  as  were  all  her  observations;  but  like 
most  of  her  observations  it  made  every  one  uncomfortable — not  Sonya, 
Nikolay,  and  Natasha  only  crimsoned ;  the  countess,  too,  who  was  afraid 
of  her  son’s  love  for  Sonya  as  a  possible  obstacle  to  his  making  a  brilliant 
marriage,  blushed  like  a  girl. 

To  Rostov’s  surprise,  Denisov  in  his  new  uniform,  pomaded  and  per¬ 
fumed,  was  quite  as  dashing  a  figure  in  a  drawing-room  as  on  the  field  of 


27S  WAR  AND  PEACE 

battle,  and  was  polite  to  the  ladies  and  gentlemen  as  Rostov  had  never 
expected  to  see  him. 

II 

On  his  return  to  Moscow  from  the  army,  Nikolay  Rostov  was  received 
by  his  family  as  a  hero,  as  the  best  of  sons,  their  idolised  Nikolenka;  by 
his  relations,  as  a  charming,  agreeable,  and  polite  young  man;  by  his 
acquaintances  as  a  handsome  lieutenant  of  hussars,  a  good  dancer,  and 
one  of  the  best  matches  in  Moscow. 

All  Moscow  was  acquainted  with  the  Rostovs;  the  old  count  had 
plenty  of  money  that  year,  because  all  his  estates  had  been  mortgaged, 
and  so  Nikolenka,  who  kept  his  own  racehorse,  and  wore  the  most  fash¬ 
ionable  riding-breeches  of  a  special  cut,  unlike  any  yet  seen  in  Moscow, 
and  the  most  fashionable  boots,  with  extremely  pointed  toes,  and  little 
silver  spurs,  was  able  to  pass  his  time  very  agreeably.  After  the  first 
brief  interval  of  adapting  himself  to  the  old  conditions  of  life,  Rostov 
felt  very  happy  at  being  home  again.  He  felt  that  he  had  grown  up  and 
become  a  man.  His  despair  at  failing  in  a  Scripture  examination,  his 
borrowing  money  from  Gavrilo  for  his  sledge-drivers,  his  stolen  kisses 
with  Sonya — all  that  he  looked  back  upon  as  childishness  from  which  he 
was  now  immeasurably  remote.  Now  he  was  a  lieutenant  of  hussars  with 
a  silver-braided  jacket,  and  a  soldier’s  cross  of  St.  George,  he  had  a 
horse  in  training  for  a  race,  and  kept  company  with  well-known  racing 
men,  elderly  and  respected  persons.  He  had  struck  up  an  acquaintance, 
too,  wuth  a  lady  living  in  a  boulevard,  whom  he  used  to  visit  in  the 
evening.  He  led  the  mazurka  at  the  Arharovs’  balls,  talked  to  Field- 
Marshal  Kamensky  about  the  war,  and  used  familiar  forms  of  address  to 
a  colonel  of  forty,  to  whom  he  had  been  introduced  by  Denisov. 

His  passion  for  the  Tsar  flagged  a  little  in  Moscow,  as  he  did  not  see 
him,  and  had  no  chance  of  seeing  him  all  that  time.  But  still  he  often  used 
to  talk  about  the  Emperor  and  his  love  for  him,  always  with  a  sug¬ 
gestion  in  his  tone  that  he  was  not  saying  all  that  there  was  in  his  feeling 
for  the  Emperor,  something  that  every  one  could  not  understand;  and 
with  his  whole  heart  he  shared  the  general  feeling  in  Moscow  of  adoration 
for  the  Emperor  Alexander  Pavlovitch,  who  was  spoken  of  at  that  time 
in  Moscow  by  the  designation  of  the  'angel  incarnate.’ 

During  this  brief  stay  in  Moscow,  before  his  return  to  the  army, 
Rostov  did  not  come  nearer  to  Sonya,  but  on  the  contrary  drifted  further 
away  from  her.  She  was  very  pretty  and  charming,  and  it  was  obvious  that 
she  was  passionately  in  love  with  him.  But  he  was  at  that  stage  of  youth 
when  there  seems  so  much  to  do,  that  one  has  not  time  to  pay  attention  to 
love,  and  a  young  man  dreads  being  bound,  and  prizes  his  liberty,  which 
he  wants  for  so  much  else.  When  he  thought  about  Sonya  during  this  stay 
at  Moscow,  he  said  to  himself:  ‘Ah!  there  are  many,  many  more  like  her 
to  come,  and  there  are  many  of  them  somewhere  now,  though  I  don’t 
know  them  yet.  There’s  plenty  of  time  before  me  to  think  about  love 


WAR  AND  PEACE  279 

when  I  want  to,  but  I  have  not  the  time  now.’  Moreover,  it  seemed  to 
him  that  feminine  society  was  somehow  beneath  his  manly  dignity.  He 
went  to  balls,  and  into  ladies’  society  with  an  affectation  of  doing  so 
against  his  will.  Races,  the  English  club,  carousals  with  Denisov,  and  the 
nocturnal  visits  that  followed — all  that  was  different,  all  that  was  the 
correct  thing  for  a  dashing  young  hussar. 

At  the  beginning  of  March  the  old  count,  Ilya  Andreivitch  Rostov, 
was  very  busily  engaged  in  arranging  a  dinner  at  the  English  Club,  to  be 
given  in  honour  of  Prince  Bagration. 

The  count,  in  his  dressing-gown,  was  continually  walking  up  and  down 
in  the  big  hall,  seeing  the  club  manager,  the  celebrated  Feoktista,  and 
the  head  cook,  and  giving  them  instructions  relative  to  asparagus,  fresh 
cucumbers,  strawberries,  veal,  and  fish,  for  Prince  Bagration’s  dinner. 
From  the  day  of  its  foundation,  the  count  had  been  a  member  of  the 
club,  and  was  its  steward.  He  had  been  entrusted  with  the  organisation 
of  the  banquet  to  Bagration  by  the  club,  because  it  would  have  been  hard 
to  find  any  one  so  well  able  to  organise  a  banquet  on  a  large  and  hospitable 
scale,  and  still  more  hard  to  find  any  one  so  able  and  willing  to  advance 
his  own  money,  if  funds  were  needed,  for  the  organisation  of  the  fete. 
The  cook  and  the  club  manager  listened  to  the  count’s  orders  with  good- 
humoured  faces,  because  they  knew  that  with  no  one  better  than  with 
him  could  one  make  a  handsome  profit  out  of  a  dinner  costing  several 
thousands. 

‘Well,  then,  mind  there  are  scallops,  scallops  in  pie-crust,  you  know  ’ 

‘Cold  entrees,  I  suppose — three?  .  .  .’  questioned  the  cook. 

The  count  pondered. 

‘Couldn’t  do  with  less,  three  .  .  .  mayonnaise,  one,’  he  said,  crooking 
his  finger. 

‘Then  it’s  your  excellency’s  order  to  take  the  big  sturgeons?’  asked 
the  manager. 

‘Yes;  it  can’t  be  helped,  we  must  take  them,  if  they  won’t  knock  the 
price  down.  Ah,  mercy  on  us,  I  was  forgetting.  Of  course  we  must  have 
another  entree  on  the  table.  Ah,  good  heavens!’  he  clutched  at  his  head. 
‘And  who’s  going  to  get  me  the  flowers?  Mitenka!  Hey,  Mitenka!  You 
gallop,  Mitenka,’  he  said  to  the  steward  who  came  in  at  his  call,  ‘you 
gallop  off  to  the  Podmoskovny  estate’  (the  count’s  property  in  the 
environs  of  Moscow),  ‘and  tell  Maksimka  the  gardener  to  set  the  serfs 
to  work  to  get  decorations  from  the  greenhouses.  Tell  him  everything 
from  his  conservatories  is  to  be  brought  here,  and  is  to  be  packed  in  felt. 
And  that  I’m  to  have  two  hundred  pots  here  by  Friday.’ 

After  giving  further  and  yet  further  directions  of  all  sorts,  he  was  just 
going  off  to  the  countess  to  rest  from  his  labours,  but  he  recollected 
something  else,  turned  back  himself,  brought  the  cook  and  manager  back, 
and  began  giving  orders  again.  They  heard  in  the  doorway  a  light,  manly 
tread  and  a  jingling  of  spurs,  and  the  young  count  came  in,  handsome 
and  rosy,  with  his  darkening  moustache,  visibly  sleeker  and  in  better 
trim  for  his  easy  life  in  Moscow. 


28o 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Ah,  my  boy!  my  head’s  in  a  whirl,’  said  the  old  gentleman,  with  a 
somewhat  shamefaced  smile  at  his  son.  ‘You  might  come  to  my  aid!  We 
have  still  the  singers  to  get,  you  see.  The  music  is  all  settled,  but 
shouldn’t  we  order  some  gypsy  singers?  You  military  gentlemen  are  fond 
of  that  sort  of  thing.’ 

‘Upon  my  word,  papa,  I  do  believe  that  Prince  Bagration  made  less 
fuss  over  getting  ready  for  the  battle  of  Schongraben  than  you  are 
making  now,’  said  his  son,  smiling. 

The  old  count  pretended  to  be  angry. 

‘Well,  you  talk,  you  try!’  And  the  count  turned  to  the  cook,  who  w7ith 
a  shrewd  and  respectful  £ace  looked  observantly  and  sympathetically 
from  father  to  son. 

‘What  are  the  young  people  coming  to,  eh,  Feoktista?’  said  he;  ‘they 
laugh  at  us  old  fellows!’ 

‘To  be  sure,  your  excellency,  all  they  have  to  do  is  to  eat  a  good  dinner, 
but  to  arrange  it  all  and  serve  it  up,  that’s  no  affair  of  theirs!  ’ 

‘True,  true!’  cried  the  count;  and  gaily  seizing  his  son  by  both  hands, 
he  cried:  ‘Do  you  know  now  I’ve  got  hold  of  you!  Take  a  sledge  and  pair 
this  minute  and  drive  off  to  Bezuhov,  and  say  that  Count  Ilya  Andrei- 
vitch  has  sent,  say,  to  ask  him  for  strawberries  and  fresh  pineapples. 
There’s  no  getting  them  from  any  one  else.  If  he’s  not  at  home  himself,  you 
go  in  and  give  the  message  to  the  princesses;  and,  I  say,  from  there  you 
drive  off  to  the  Gaiety — Ipatka  the  coachman  knows  the  place — and  look 
up  Ilyushka  there,  the  gypsy  who  danced  at  Count  Orlov’s,  do  you 
remember,  in  a  white  Cossack  dress,  and  bring  him  here  to  me.’ 

‘And  bring  his  gypsy  girls  here  with  him?’  asked  Nikolay,  laughing. 

‘Come,  come!  .  .  .’ 

At  this  moment  Anna  Mihalovna  stepped  noiselessly  into  the  room 
with  that  air  of  Christian  meekness,  mingled  with  practical  and  anxious 
preoccupation  that  never  left  her  face.  Although  Anna  Mihalovna  came 
upon  the  count  in  his  dressing-gown  every  day,  he  was  invariably  discon¬ 
certed  at  her  doing  so,  and  apologised  for  his  costume. 

‘Don’t  mention  it,  my  dear  count,’  she  said,  closing  her  eyes  meekly. 
‘I  am  just  going  to  see  Bezuhov,’  she  said.  ‘Young  Bezuhov  has  arrived, 
and  now  we  shall  get  all  we  want,  count,  from  his  greenhouses.  I  was 
wanting  to  see  him  on  my  own  account,  too.  He  has  forwarded  me  a 
letter  from  Boris.  Thank  God,  Boris  is  now  on  the  staff.’ 

The  count  was  overjoyed  at  Anna  Mihalovna’s  undertaking  one  part 
of  his  commissions,  and  gave  orders  for  the  carriage  to  be  brought 
round  for  her. 

‘Tell  Bezuhov  to  come.  I’ll  put  his  name  down.  Brought  his  wife  with 
him?’  he  asked. 

Anna  Mihalovna  turned  up  her  eyes,  and  an  expression  of  profound 
sadness  came  into  her  face. 

‘Ah,  my  dear,  he’s  very  unhappy,’  she  said.  ‘If  it’s  true  what  we  have 
been  hearing,  it’s  awful.  How  little  did  we  think  of  this  when  we  were 
rejoicing  in  his  happiness!  and  such  a  lofty,  angelic  nature,  that  young 


28i 


WAR  AND  PEACE 
Bezuhov!  Yes,  I  pity  him  from  my  soul,  and  will  do  my  utmost  to  give 
him  any  consolation  in  my  power.’ 

‘Why,  what  is  the  matter?’  inquired  both  the  Rostovs,  young  and  old 
together. 

Anna  Mihalovna  heaved  a  deep  sigh. 

‘Dolohov,  Marya  Ivanovna’s  son,’  she  said  in  a  mysterious  whisper, 
‘has,  they  say,  utterly  compromised  her.  He  brought  him  forward,  invited 
him  to  his  house  in  Petersburg,  and  now  this!  .  .  .  She  has  come  here, 
and  that  scapegrace  has  come  after  her,’  said  Anna  Mihalovna.  She 
wished  to  express  nothing  but  sympathy  with  Pierre,  but  in  her  involun¬ 
tary  intonations  and  half  smile,  she  betrayed  her  sympathy  with  the 
scapegrace,  as  she  called  Dolohov.  ‘Pierre  himself,  they  say,  is  utterly 
crushed  by  his  trouble.’ 

‘Well,  any  way,  tell  him  to  come  to  the  club — it  will  divert  his  mind. 
It  will  be  a  banquet  on  a  grand  scale.’ 

On  the  next  day,  the  3rd  of  March,  at  about  two  in  the  afternoon,  the 
two  hundred  and  fifty  members  of  the  English  Club  and  fifty  of  their 
guests  were  awaiting  the  arrival  of  their  honoured  guest,  the  hero  of  the 
Austrian  campaign,  Prince  Bagration. 

On  receiving  the  news  of  the  defeat  of  Austerlitz,  all  Moscow  had  at 
first  been  thrown  into  bewilderment.  At  that  period  the  Russians  were  so 
used  to  victories,  that  on  receiving  news  of  a  defeat,  some  people  were 
simply  incredulous,  while  others  sought  an  explanation  of  so  strange  an 
event  in  exceptional  circumstances  of  some  kind.  At  the  English  Club, 
where  every  one  of  note,  every  one  who  had  authentic  information  and 
weight  gathered  together,  during  December,  when  the  news  began  to 
arrive,  not  a  word  was  said  about  the  war  and  about  the  last  defeat;  it 
was  as  though  all  were  in  a  conspiracy  of  silence.  The  men  who  took  the 
lead  in  conversation  at  the  club,  such  as  Count  Rostoptchin,  Prince  Yury 
Vladimirovitch  Dolgoruky,  Valuev,  Count  Markov,  and  Prince  Vyazem¬ 
sky,  did  not  put  in  an  appearance  at  the  club,  but  met  together  in  their 
intimate  circles  at  each  other’s  houses. 

That  section  of  Moscow  society  which  took  its  opinions  from  others 
(to  which,  indeed,  Count  Ilya  Andreivitch  Rostov  belonged)  remained  for 
a  short  time  without  leaders  and  without  definite  views  upon  the  progress 
of  the  war.  People  felt  in  Moscow  that  something  was  wrong,  and  that  it 
was  difficult  to  know  what  to  think  of  the  bad  news,  and  so  better  to  be 
silent.  But  a  little  later,  like  jurymen  coming  out  of  their  consultation 
room,  the  leaders  reappeared  to  give  their  opinion  in  the  club,  and  a 
clear  and  definite  formula  was  found.  Causes  had  been  discovered  to 
account  for  the  fact — so  incredible,  unheard-of,  and  impossible— that 
the  Russians  had  been  beaten,  and  all  became  clear,  and  the  same  version 
was  repeated  from  one  end  of  Moscow  to  the  other.  These  causes  were: 
the  treachery  of  the  Austrians;  the  defective  commissariat;  the  treachery 
of  the  Pole  Przhebyshevsky  and  the  Frenchman  Langeron;  the  inca¬ 
pacity  of  Kutuzov;  and  (this  was  murmured  in  subdued  tones)  the 
youth  and  inexperience  of  the  Emperor,  who  had  put  faith  in  men  of  no 


2S2 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

character  and  ability.  But  the  army,  the  Russian  army,  said  every  one, 
had  been  extraordinary,  and  had  performed  miracles  of  valour.  The 
soldiers,  the  officers,  the  generals — all  were  heroes.  But  the  hero  among 
heroes  was  Prince  Bagration,  who  had  distinguished  himself  in  his  Schon- 
graben  engagement  and  in  the  retreat  from  Austerlitz,  where  he  alone  had 
withdrawn  his  column  in  good  order,  and  had  succeeded  in  repelling 
during  the  whole  day  an  enemy  twice  as  numerous.  What  contributed  to 
Bagration’s  being  chosen  for  the  popular  hero  at  Moscow  was  the  fact 
that  he  was  an  outsider,  that  he  had  no  connections  in  Moscow.  In  his 
person  they  could  do  honour  to  the  simple  fighting  Russian  soldier,  un¬ 
supported  by  connections  and  intrigues,  and  still  associated  by  memories 
of  the  Italian  campaign  with  the  name  of  Suvorov.  And  besides,  bestow¬ 
ing  upon  him  such  honours  was  the  best  possible  way  of  showing  their 
dislike  and  disapproval  of  Kutuzov. 

‘If  there  had  been  no  Bagration,  somebody  would  have  to  invent 
him,’  said  the  wit,  Shinshin,  parodying  the  words  of  Voltaire. 

Of  Kutuzov  people  did  not  speak  at  all,  or  whispered  abuse  of  him, 
calling  him  the  court  weathercock  and  the  old  satyr. 

All  Moscow  was  repeating  the  words  of  Prince  Dolgorukov:  ‘Chop 
down  trees  enough  and  you’re  bound  to  cut  your  finger/  which  in  our 
defeat  suggested  a  consolatory  reminder  of  former  victories,  and  the 
saying  of  Rostoptchin,  that  French  soldiers  have  to  be  excited  to  battle 
by  high-sounding  phrases;  that  Germans  must  have  it  logically  proved 
to  them  that  it  is  more  dangerous  to  run  away  than  to  go  forward;  but 
that  all  Russian  soldiers  need  is  to  be  held  back  and  urged  not  to  be  too 
reckless!  New  anecdotes  were  continually  to  be  heard  on  every  side  of 
individual  feats  of  gallantry  performed  by  our  officers  and  men  at 
Austerlitz.  Here  a  man  had  saved  a  flag,  another  had  killed  five  French¬ 
men,  another  had  kept  five  cannons  loaded  single-handed.  The  story  was 
told  of  Berg,  by  those  who  did  not  know  him,  that  wounded  in  his  right 
hand,  he  had  taken  his  sword  in  his  left  and  charged  on  the  enemy. 
Nothing  was  said  about  Bolkonsky,  and  only  those  who  had  known  him 
intimately  regretted  that  he  had  died  so  young,  leaving  a  wife  with  child, 
and  his  queer  old  father. 


Ill 

On  the  3rd  of  March  all  the  rooms  of  the  English  Club  were  full  of  the 
hum  of  voices,  and  the  members  and  guests  of  the  club,  in  uniforms  and 
frock-coats,  some  even  in  powder  and  Russian  kaftans,  were  standing 
meeting,  parting,  and  running  to  and  fro  like  bees  swarming  in  spring 
Powdered  footmen  in  livery,  wearing  slippers  and  stockings,  stood  ai 
every  door,  anxiously  trying  to  follow  every  movement  of  the  guests  anc 
club  members,  so  as  to  proffer  their  services.  The  majority  of  those 
present  were  elderly  and  respected  persons,  with  broad,  self-confiden; 
faces,  fat  fingers,  and  resolute  gestures  and  voices.  Guests  and  memben 
of  this  class  sat  in  certain  habitual  places,  and  met  together  in  certain 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


283 


habitual  circles.  A  small  proportion  of  those  present  were  casual  guests 
— chiefly  young  men,  among  them  Denisov,  Rostov,  and  Dolohov,  who 
was  now  an  officer  in  the  Semyonovsky  regiment  again.  The  faces  of  the 
younger  men,  especially  the  officers,  wore  that  expression  of  condescend¬ 
ing  deference  to  their  elders  which  seems  to  say  to  the  older  generation, 
‘Respect  and  deference  we  are  prepared  to  give  you,  but  remember  all 
the  same  the  future  is  for  us.’  Nesvitsky,  an  old  member  of  the  club,  was 
there  too.  Pierre,  who  at  his  wife’s  command  had  let  his  hair  grow  and 
left  off  spectacles,  was  walking  about  the  rooms  dressed  in  the  height  of 
the  fashion,  but  looking  melancholy  and  depressed.  Here,  as  everywhere, 
he  was  surrounded  by  the  atmosphere  of  people  paying  homage  to  his 
wealth,  and  he  behaved  to  them  with  the  careless,  contemptuous  air  of 
sovereignty  that  had  become  habitual  with  him. 

In  years,  he  belonged  to  the  younger  generation,  but  by  his  wealth  and 
connections  he  was  a  member  of  the  older  circles,  and  so  he  passed  from 
one  set  to  the  other.  The  most  distinguished  of  the  elder  members  formed 
the  centres  of  circles,  which  even  strangers  respectfully  approached  to 
listen  to  the  words  of  well-known  men.  The  larger  groups  were  formed 
round  Count  Rostoptchin,  Valuev,  and  Naryshkin.  Rostoptchin  was 
describing  how  the  Russians  had  been  trampled  underfoot  by  the  fleeing 
Austrians,  and  had  had  to  force  a  way  -with  the  bayonet  through  the 
fugitives.  Valuev  was  confidentially  informing  his  circle  that  Uvarov  had 
been  sent  from  Petersburg  to  ascertain  the  state  of  opinion  in  Moscow' 
in  regard  to  Austerlitz. 

In  the  third  group  Naryshkin  was  repeating  the  tale  of  the  meeting 
of  the  Austrian  council  of  war,  at  which,  in  reply  to  the  stupidity  of  the 
Austrian  general,  Suvorov  crowed  like  a  cock.  Shinshin,  who  stood  near, 
tried  to  make  a  joke,  saying  that  Kutuzov,  it  seemed,  had  not  even  been 
able  to  learn  from  Suvorov  that  not  very  difficult  art — of  crowing  like  a 
cock— but  the  elder  club  members  looked  sternly  at  the  wdt,  giving  him 
thereby  to  understand  that  even  such  a  reference  to  Kutuzov  was  out  of 
olace  on  that  day. 

Count  Ilya  Andreitch  Rostov  kept  anxiously  hurrying  in  his  soft  boots 
;o  and  fro  from  the  dining-room  to  the  drawing-room,  giving  hasty 
greetings  to  important  and  unimportant  persons,  all  of  whom  he  knew, 
ind  all  of  whom  he  treated  alike,  on  an  equal  footing.  Now  and  then  his 
eyes  sought  out  the  graceful,  dashing  figure  of  his  young  son,  rested 
fleefully  on  him,  and  winked  to  him.  Young  Rostov  was  standing  at  the 
vindow  with  Dolohov,  whose  acquaintance  he  had  lately  made,  and 
greatly  prized.  The  old  count  went  up  to  them,  and  shook  hands  with 
Dolohov. 

‘I  beg  you  will  come  and  see  us;  so  you’re  a  friend  of  my  youngster’s 
I  .  .  been  together,  playing  the  hero  together  out  there.  .  .  .Ah!  Vassily 
gnatitch  ...  a  good  day  to  you,  old  man,’  he  turned  to  an  old  gentle¬ 
man  who  had  just  come  in,  but  before  he  had  time  to  finish  his  greetings 
0  him  there  was  a  general  stir,  and  a  footman  running  in  with  an 
larmed  countenance,  announced:  ‘He  has  arrived!’ 


2S4  WARANDPEACE 

Bells  rang;  the  stewards  rushed  forward;  the  guests,  scattered  about 
the  different  rooms,  gathered  together  in  one  mass,  like  rye  shaken  to¬ 
gether  in  a  shovel,  and  waited  at  the  door  of  the  great  drawing-room. 

At  the  door  of  the  ante-room  appeared  the  figure  of  Bagration,  without 
his  hat  or  sword,  which,  in  accordance  with  the  club  custom,  he  had  left 
with  the  hall  porter.  He  was  not  wearing  an  Astrachan  cap,  and  had  not 
a  riding-whip  over  his  shoulder,  as  Rostov  had  seen  him  on  the  night 
before  the  battle  of  Austerlitz,  but  wore  a  tight  new  uniform  with  Russian 
and  foreign  orders  and  the  star  of  St.  George  on  the  left  side  of  his  chest. 
He  had,  obviously  with  a  view  to  the  banquet,  just  had  his  hair  cut  and 
his  whiskers  clipped,  which  changed  his  appearance  for  the  worse.  He 
had  a  sort  of  naively  festive  air,  which,  in  conjunction  with  his  deter¬ 
mined,  manly  features,  gave  an  expression  positively  rather  comic  to  his 
face.  Bekleshov  and  Fyodor  Petrovitch  Uvarov,  who  had  come  with  him, 
stood  still  in  the  doorway  trying  to  make  him,  as  the  guest  of  most 
importance,  precede  them.  Bagration  was  embarrassed,  and  unwilling  to 
avail  himself  of  their  courtesy;  there  was  a  hitch  in  the  proceedings  at  the 
door,  but  finally  Bagration  did,  after  all,  enter  first.  Fie  walked  shyly 
and  awkwardly  over  the  parquet  of  the  reception-room,  not  knowing  what 
to  do  with  his  hands.  He  would  have  been  more  at  home  and  at  his  ease 
walking  over  a  ploughed  field  .under  fire,  as  he  had  walked  at  the  head 
of  the  Kursk  regiment  at  Schongraben.  The  stewards  met  him  at  the 
first  door,  and  saying  a  few  words  of  their  pleasure  at  seeing  such  an 
honoured  guest,  they  surrounded  him  without  waiting  for  an  answer, 
and,  as  it  were,  taking  possession  of  him,  led  him  off  to  the  drawing¬ 
room.  There  was  no  possibility  of  getting  in  at  the  drawing-room  door 
from  the  crowds  of  members  and  guests,  who  were  crushing  one  another 
in  their  efforts  to  get  a  look  over  each  other’s  shoulders  at  Bagration,  as 
if  he  were  some  rare  sort  of  beast.  Count  Ilya  Andreitch  laughed  more 
vigorously  than  any  one,  and  continually  repeating,  ‘Make  way  for  him, 
my  dear  boy,  make  way,  make  way,’  shoved  the  crowd  aside,  led  the 
guests  into  the  drawing-room,  and  seated  them  on  the  sofa  in  the  middle 
of  it.  The  great  men,  and  the  more  honoured  members  of  the  club,  sur¬ 
rounded  the  newly  arrived  guests.  Count  Ilya  Andreitch,  shoving  his  way 
again  through  the  crowd,  went  out  of  the  drawing-room,  and  reappeared  I 
a  minute  later  with  another  steward  carrying  a  great  silver  dish,  which  he  I 
held  out  to  Prince  Bagration.  On  the  dish  lay  a  poem,  composed  and 
printed  in  the  hero’s  honour.  Bagration,  on  seeing  the  dish,  looked  about 
him  in  dismay,  as  though  seeking  assistance.  But  in  all  eyes  he  saw  the 
expectation  that  he  would  submit.  Feeling  himself  in  their  power, j 
Bagration  resolutely  took  the  dish  in  both  hands,  and  looked  angrily  and 
reproachfully  at  the  count,  who  had  brought  it.  Some  one  officiously  took  , 
the  dish  from  Bagration  (or  he  would,  it  seemed,  have  held  it  so  till  i 
nightfall,  and  have  carried  it  with  him  to  the  table),  and  drew  his  atten¬ 
tion  to  the  poem.  ‘Well,  I’ll  read  it  then,’  Bagration  seemed  to  say,  and 
fixing  his  weary  eyes  on  the  paper,  he  began  reading  it  with  a  serious  and 


WARANDPEACE  285 

concentrated  expression.  The  author  of  the  verses  took  them,  and  began 
to  read  them  aloud  himself.  Prince  Bagration  bowed  his  head  and  listened. 

‘Be  thou  the  pride  of  Alexander’s  reign ! 

And  save  for  us  our  Titus  on  the  throne! 

Be  thou  our  champion  and  our  country’s  stay! 

A  noble  heart,  a  Csesar  in  the  fray ! 

Napoleon  in  the  zenith  of  his  fame 

Learns  to  his  cost  to  fear  Bagration’s  name, 

Nor  dares  provoke  a  Russian  foe  again,’  etc.  etc. 

But  he  had  not  finished  the  poem,  when  the  butler  boomed  out  sono¬ 
rously:  ‘Dinner  is  ready!’  The  door  opened,  from  the  dining-room  thun¬ 
dered  the  strains  of  the  Polonaise:  ‘Raise  the  shout  of  victory,  valiant 
Russian,  festive  sing,’  and  Count  Ilya  Andreitch,  looking  angrily  at  the 
author,  who  still  went  on  reading  his  verses,  bowed  to  Bagration  as  a 
signal  to  go  in.  All  the  company  rose,  feeling  the  dinner  of  more  im¬ 
portance  than  the  poem,  and  Bagration,  again  preceding  all  the  rest,  went 
in  to  dinner.  In  the  place  of  honour  between  two  Alexanders — Bekleshov 
and  Naryshkin — (this,  too,  was  intentional,  in  allusion  to  the  name  of 
the  Tsar)  they  put  Bagration:  three  hundred  persons  were  ranged  about 
the  tables  according  to  their  rank  and  importance,  those  of  greater  conse¬ 
quence,  nearer  to  the  distinguished  guest — as  naturally  as  water  flows  to 
find  its  own  level. 

Just  before  dinner,  Count  Ilya  Andreitch  presented  his  son  to  the 
prince.  Bagration  recognised  him,  and  uttered  a  few  words,  awkward  and 
incoherent,  as  were  indeed  all  he  spoke  that  day.  Count  Ilya  Andreitch 
looked  about  at  every  one  in  gleeful  pride  while  Bagration  was  speaking 
to  his  son. 

'  Nikolay  Rostov,  with  Denisov  and  his  new  acquaintance  Dolohov,  sat 
together  almost  in  the  middle  of  the  table.  Facing  them  sat  Pierre  with 
Prince  Nesvitsky.  Count  Ilya  Andreitch  was  sitting  with  the  other 
stewards  facing  Bagration,  and,  the  very  impersonation  of  Moscow  hos¬ 
pitality,  did  his  utmost  to  regale  the  prince. 

Flis  labours  had  not  been  in  vain.  All  the  banquet — the  meat  dishes 
and  the  Lenten  fare  alike — was  sumptuous,  but  still  he  could  not  be  per¬ 
fectly  at  ease  till  the  end  of  dinner.  He  made  signs  to  the  carver,  gave 
whispered  directions  to  the  footmen,  and  not  without  emotion  awaited  the 
arrival  of  each  anticipated  dish.  Everything  was  capital.  At  the  second 
course,  with  the  gigantic  sturgeon  (at  the  sight  of  which  Ilya  Andreitch 
flushed  with  shamefaced  delight),  the  footman  began  popping  corks  and 
pouring  out  champagne.  After  the  fish,  which  made  a  certain  sensation, 
Count  Ilya  Andreitch  exchanged  glances  with  the  other  stewards.  ‘There 
will  be  a  great  many  toasts,  it’s  time  to  begin!’  he  whispered,  and,  glass 
in  hand,  he  got  up.  All  were  silent,  waiting  for  what  he  would  say. 

‘To  the  health  of  our  sovereign,  the  Emperor!’  he  shouted,  and  at  the 
moment  his  kindly  eyes  grew  moist  with  tears  of  pleasure  and  enthusi¬ 
asm.  At  that  instant  they  began  playing:  ‘Raise  the  shout  of  victory!’ 
All  rose  from  their  seats  and  shouted  ‘Hurrah!’  And  Bagration  shouted 


286 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Hurrah!’  in  the  same  voice  in  which  he  had  shouted  it  in  the  field  at 
Schongraben.  The  enthusiastic  voice  of  young  Rostov  could  be  heard 
above  the  three  hundred  other  voices.  He  was  on  the  very  point  of  tears. 
‘The  health  of  our  sovereign,  the  Emperor,’  he  roared,  ‘hurrah!’  Empty¬ 
ing  his  glass  at  one  gulp,  he  flung  it  on  the  floor.  Many  followed  his 
example.  And  the  loud  shouts  lasted  for  a  long  while.  When  the  uproar 
subsided,  the  footmen  cleared  away  the  broken  glass,  and  all  began 
settling  themselves  again ;  and  smiling  at  the  noise  they  had  made,  began 
talking.  Count  Ilya  Andreitch  rose  once  more,  glanced  at  a  note  that  lay  ; 
beside  his  plate,  and  proposed  a  toast  to  the  health  of  the  hero  of  our  last 
campaign,  Prince  Pyotr  Ivanovitch  Bagration,  and  again  the  count’s 
blue  eyes  were  dimmed  with  tears.  ‘Hurrah!’  was  shouted  again  by  the 
three  hundred  voices  of  the  guests,  and  instead  of  music  this  time  a 
chorus  of  singers  began  to  sing  a  cantata  composed  by  Pavel  Ivanovitch 
Kutuzov: 

‘No  hindrance  bars  a  Russian’s  way, 

Valour’s  the  pledge  of  victory, 

We  have  our  Bagrations, 

Our  foes  will  all  be  at  our  feet,’  etc.  etc. 

As  soon  as  the  singers  had  finished,  more  and  more  toasts  followed,  at  l 
which  Count  Ilya  Andreitch  became  more  and  more  moved,  and  more  ' 
glass  was  broken  and  even  more  uproar  was  made.  They  drank  to  the 
health  of  Bekleshov,  of  Naryshkin,  of  Uvarov,  of  Dolgorukov,  of 
Apraxin,  of  Valuev,  to  the  health  of  the  stewards,  to  the  health  of  the 
committee,  to  the  health  of  all  the  club  members,  to  the  health  of  all  the  I 
guests  of  the  club,  and  finally  and  separately  to  the  health  of  the  organ-  [ 
iser  of  the  banquet,  Count  Ilya  Andreitch.  At  that  toast  the  count  took 
out  his  handkerchief  and,  hiding  his  face  in  it,  fairly  broke  down. 


IV 

Pierre  was  sitting  opposite  Dolohov  and  Nikolay  Rostov.  He  ate 
greedily  and  drank  heavily,  as  he  always  did.  But  those  who  knew  him 
slightly  could  see  that  some  great  change  was  taking  place  in  him  that 
day.  He  was  silent  all  through  dinner,  and  blinking  and  screwing  up  his  I 
eyes,  looked  about  him,  or  letting  his  eyes  rest  on  something  with  an  air 
of  complete  absent-mindedness,  rubbed  the  bridge  of  his  nose  with  his 
finger.  His  face  was  depressed  and  gloomy.  He  seemed  not  to  be  seeing 
or  hearing  what  was  passing  about  him  and  to  be  thinking  of  some  one 
thing,  something  painful  and  unsettled. 

This  unsettled  question  that  worried  him  was  due  to  the  hints  dropped  J 
by  the  princess,  his  cousin,  at  Moscow  in  regard  to  Dolohov ’s  close  J 
intimacy  with  his  wife,  and  to  an  anonymous  letter  he  had  received  that  I 
morning,  which,  with  the  vile  jocoseness  peculiar  to  all  anonymous  letters, 
had  said  that  he  didn’t  seem  to  see  clearly  through  his  spectacles,  and 
that  his  wife’s  connection  with  Dolohov  was  a  secret  from  no  one  but 


WAR  AND  PEACE  287 

himself.  Pierre  did  not  absolutely  believe  either  the  princess’s  hints,  or 
the  anonymous  letter,  but  he  was  afraid  now  to  look  at  Dolohov,  who  sat 
opposite  him.  Every  time  his  glance  casually  met  Dolohov’s  handsome, 
insolent  eyes,  Pierre  felt  as  though  something  awful,  hideous  was  rising 
up  in  his  soul,  and  he  made  haste  to  turn  away.  Involuntarily  recalling 
all  his  wife’s  past  and  her  attitude  to  Dolohov,  Pierre  saw  clearly  that 
what  was  said  in  the  letter  might  well  be  true,  might  at  least  appear  to  be 
the  truth,  if  only  it  had  not  related  to  his  wife.  Pierre  could  not  help 
recalling  how  Dolohov,  who  had  been  completely  reinstated,  had  re¬ 
turned  to  Petersburg  and  come  to  see  him.  Dolohov  had  taken  advantage 
of  his  friendly  relations  with  Pierre  in  their  old  rowdy  days,  had  come 
straight  to  his  house,  and  Pierre  had  established  him  in  it  and  lent  him 
money.  Pierre  recalled  how  Ellen,  smiling,  had  expressed  her  dissatisfac¬ 
tion  at  Dolohov’s  staying  in  their  house,  and  how  cynically  Dolohov  had 
praised  his  wife’s  beauty  to  him,  and  how  he  had  never  since  left  them 
up  to  the  time  of  their  coming  to  Moscow. 

‘Yes,  he  is  very  handsome,’  thought  Pierre,  ‘and  I  know  him.  There 
would  be  a  particular  charm  for  him  in  disgracing  my  name  and  turning 
me  into  ridicule,  just  because  I  have  exerted  myself  in  his  behalf,  have 
befriended  him  and  helped  him.  I  know,  I  understand  what  zest  that 
would  be  sure  to  give  to  his  betrayal  of  me,  if  it  were  true.  Yes,  if  it  were 
true,  but  I  don’t  believe  it.  I  have  no  right  to  and  I  can’t  believe  it.’  He 
recalled  the  expression  on  Dolohov’s  face  in  his  moments  of  cruelty, 
such  as  when  he  was  tying  the  police  officer  on  to  the  bear  and  dropping 
him  into  the  water,  or  when  he  had  utterly  without  provocation  chal¬ 
lenged  a  man  to  a  duel  or  killed  a  sledge-driver’s  horse  with  a  shot  from 
his  pistol.  That  expression  often  came  into  Dolohov’s  face  when  he  was 
looking  at  him.  ‘Yes,  he’s  a  duelling  bully,’  thought  Pierre;  ‘to  him  it 
means  nothing  to  kill  a  man,  it  must  seem  to  him  that  every  one’s  afraid 
of  him.  He  must  like  it.  He  must  think  I  am  afraid  of  him.  And,  in  fact, 
I  really  am  afraid  of  him,’  Pierre  mused;  and  again  at  these  thoughts 
he  felt  as  though  something  terrible  and  hideous  were  rising  up  in  his  soul. 
Dolohov,  Denisov,  and  Rostov  were  sitting  facing  Pierre  and  seemed  to 
be  greatly  enjoying  themselves.  Rostov  talked  away  merrily  to  his  two 
friends,  of  whom  one  was  a  dashing  hussar,  the  other  a  notorious  duellist 
and  scapegrace,  and  now  and  then  cast  ironical  glances  at  Pierre,  whose 
appearance  at  the  dinner  was  a  striking  one,  with  his  preoccupied,  absent- 
minded,  massive  figure.  Rostov  looked  with  disfavour  upon  Pierre.  In  the 
first  place,  because  Pierre,  in  the  eyes  of  the  smart  hussar,  was  a  rich 
civilian,  and  husband  of  a  beauty,  was  altogether,  in  fact,  an  old  woman, 
And  secondly,  because  Pierre  in  his  preoccupation  and  absent-mindedness 
had  not  recognised  Rostov  and  had  failed  to  respond  to  his  bow.  When 
they  got  up  to  drink  the  health  of  the  Tsar,  Pierre,  plunged  in  thought, 
did  not  rise  nor  take  up  his  glass. 

‘What  are  you  about?’  Rostov  shouted  to  him,  looking  at  him  with 
enthusiastic  and  exasperated  eyes.  ‘Don’t  you  hear:  the  health  of  our 
sovereign  the  Emperor!’ 


2SS 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

Pierre  with  a  sigh  obeyed,  got  up,  emptied  his  glass,  and  waiting  till  all 
were  seated  again,  he  turned  with  his  kindly  smile  to  Rostov.  ‘Why,  I 
didn’t  recognise  you,’  he  said.  But  Rostov  had  no  thoughts  for  him,  he 
was  shouting  ‘Hurrah!’ 

‘Why  don’t  you  renew'  the  acquaintance?’  said  Dolohov  to  Rostov. 

‘Oh,  bother  him,  he’s  a  fool,’  said  Rostov. 

‘One  has  to  be  sweet  to  the  husbands  of  pretty  women,’  said  Denisov. 
Pierre  did  not  hear  what  they  were  saying,  but  he  knew  they  were  talking 
of  him.  He  flushed  and  turned  away.  ‘Well,  now  to  the  health  of  pretty 
women,’  said  Dolohov,  and  with  a  serious  expression,  though  a  smile 
lurked  in  the  corners  of  his  mouth,  he  turned  to  Pierre. 

‘To  the  health  of  pretty  women,  Petrusha,  and  their  lovers  too,’  he  said. 

Pierre,  with  downcast  eyes,  sipped  his  glass,  without  looking  at 
Dolohov  or  answering  him.  The  footman,  distributing  copies  of  Kutuzov’s 
cantata,  laid  a  copy  by  Pierre,  as  one  of  the  more  honoured  guests.  He 
would  have  taken  it,  but  Dolohov  bent  forward,  snatched  the  paper  out 
of  his  hands  and  began  reading  it.  Pierre  glanced  at  Dolohov,  and  his 
eyes  dropped;  something  terrible  and  hideous,  that  had  been  torturing 
him  all  through  the  dinner,  rose  up  and  took  possession  of  him.  He  bent 
the  whole  of  his  ungainly  person  across  the  table.  ‘Don’t  you  dare  to 
take  it!  ’  he  shouted. 

Hearing  that  shout  and  seeing  to  whom  it  was  addressed,  Nesvitsky 
and  his  neighbour  on  the  right  side  turned  in  haste  and  alarm  to  Bezuhov. 

‘Hush,  hush,  what  are  you  about?’  whispered  panic-stricken  voices, 
Dolohov  looked  at  Pierre  with  his  clear,  mirthful,  cruel  eyes,  still  with 
the  same  smile,  as  though  he  were  saying:  ‘Come  now,  this  is  what  I  like.' 

‘I  won’t  give  it  up,’  he  said  distinctly. 

Pale  and  with  quivering  lips,  Pierre  snatched  the  copy. 

‘You  .  .  .  you  .  .  .  blackguard!  ...  I  challenge  you,’  he  said,  and 
moving  back  his  chair,  he  got  up  from  the  table.  At  the  second  Pierre  did 
this  and  uttered  these  words  he  felt  that  the  question  of  his  wife’s  guilt, 
that  had  been  torturing  him  for  the  last  four  and  twenty  hours,  was 
finally  and  incontestably  answered  in  the  affirmative.  He  hated  her  and 
■was  severed  from  her  for  ever.  In  spite  of  Denisov’s  entreaties  that  Rostov 
would  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  affair,  Rostov  agreed  to  be  Dolohov’s 
second,  and  after  dinner  he  discussed  with  Nesvitsky,  Bezuhov’s  second, 
the  arrangements  for  the  duel.  Pierre  had  gone  home,  but  Rostov  with 
Dolohov  and  Denisov  stayed  on  at  the  club  listening  to  the  gypsies  and 
the  singers  till  late  in  the  evening. 

‘So  good-bye  till  to-morrow,  at  Sokolniky,’  said  Dolohov,  as  he  parted 
from  Rostov  at  the  club  steps. 

‘And  do  you  feel  quite  calm?’  asked  Rostov. 

Dolohov  stopped. 

‘Well,  do  you  see,  in  a  couple  of  words  I’ll  let  you  into  the  whole  secret  1 
of  duelling.  If,  when  you  go  to  a  duel,  you  make  your  will  and  write  long  | 
letters  to  your  parents,  if  you  think  that  you  may  be  killed,  you’re  a  fool 
and  certain  to  be  done  for.  But  go  with  the  firm  intention  of  killing  your 


WARANDPEACE  289 

man,  as  quickly  and  as  surely  as  may  be,  then  everything  will  be  all 
right.  As  our  bear-killer  from  Kostroma  used  to  say  to  me:  “A  bear,”  he’d 
say,  “why,  who’s  not  afraid  of  one?  but  come  to  see  one  and  your  fear’s 
all  gone,  all  you  hope  is  he  won’t  get  away!”  Well,  that’s  just  how  I 
feel.  A  demain,  mon  cher.’ 

Next  day  at  eight  o’clock  in  the  morning,  Pierre  and  Nesvitsky 
reached  the  Sokolniky  copse,  and  found  Dolohov,  Denisov,  and  Rostov 
already  there.  Pierre  had  the  air  of  a  man  absorbed  in  reflections  in  no 
way  connected  with  the  matter  in  hand.  His  face  looked  hollow  and 
yellow.  He  had  not  slept  all  night.  He  looked  about  him  absent-mindedly, 
and  screwed  up  his  eyes,  as  though  in  glaring  sunshine.  He  was  exclusively 
absorbed  by  two  considerations:  the  guilt  of  his  wife,  of  which  after  a 
sleepless  night  he  had  not  a  vestige  of  doubt,  and  the  guiltlessness  of 
Dolohov,  who  was  in  no  way  bound  to  guard  the  honour  of  a  man,  who 
,  was  nothing  to  him.  ‘Maybe  I  should  have  done  the  same  in  his  place,’ 
thought  Pierre.  ‘For  certain,  indeed,  I  should  have  done  the  same;  then 
why  this  duel,  this  murder?  Either  I  shall  kill  him,  or  he  will  shoot  me  in 
the  head,  in  the  elbow,  or  the  knee.  To  get  away  from  here,  to  run,  to 
bury  myself  somewhere,’  was  the  longing  that  came  into  his  mind.  But 
precisely  at  the  moments  when  such  ideas  were  in  his  mind,  he  would  turn 
with  a  peculiarly  calm  and  unconcerned  face,  which  inspired  respect  in 
the  seconds  looking  at  him,  and  ask:  ‘Will  it  be  soon?’  or  ‘Aren’t  we 
ready?’ 

When  everything  was  ready,  the  swords  stuck  in  the  snow  to  mark 
the  barrier,  and  the  pistols  loaded,  Nesvitsky  went  up  to  Pierre. 

‘I  should  not  be  doing  my  duty,  count,’  he  said  in  a  timid  voice,  ‘nor 
justifying  the  confidence  and  the  honour  you  have  done  me  in  choosing 
me  for  your  second,  if  at  this  grave  moment,  this  very  grave  moment,  I 
did  not  speak  the  whole  truth  to  you.  I  consider  that  the  quarrel  has  not 
sufficient  grounds  and  is  not  worth  shedding  blood  over.  .  .  .  You  were 
not  right,  not  quite  in  the  right;  you  lost  your  temper.  .  . 

‘Oh,  yes,  it  was  awfully  stupid,’  said  Pierre. 

‘Then  allow  me  to  express  your  regret,  and  I  am  convinced  that  our 
opponents  will  agree  to  accept  your  apology,’  said  Nesvitsky  (who,  like 
the  others  assisting  in  the  affair,  and  every  one  at  such  affairs,  was  unable 
to  believe  that  the  quarrel  would  come  to  an  actual  duel).  ‘You  know, 
count,  it  is  far  nobler  to  acknowledge  one’s  mistake  than  to  push  things 
to  the  irrevocable.  There  was  no  great  offence  on  either  side.  Permit  me 
to  convey  .  .  .’ 

‘No,  what  are  you  talking  about?’  said  Pierre;  ‘it  doesn’t  matter.  .  .  . 
Ready  then?’  he  added.  ‘Only  tell  me  how  and  where  I  am  to  go,  and 
what  to  shoot  at?’  he  said  with  a  smile  unnaturally  gentle.  He  took  up  a 
pistol,  and  began  inquiring  how  to  let  it  off,  as  he  had  never  had  a  pistol 
in  his  hand  before,  a  fact  he  did  not  care  to  confess.  ‘Oh,  yes,  of  course, 
I  know,  I  had  only  forgotten,’  he  said. 

‘No  apologies,  absolutely  nothing,’  Dolohov  was  saying  to  Denisov, 


200  WARANDPEACE 

who  for  his  part  was  also  making  an  attempt  at  reconciliation,  and  he 
too  went  up  to  the  appointed  spot. 

The  place  chosen  for  the  duel  was  some  eighty  paces  from  the  road, 
on  which  their  sledges  had  been  left,  in  a  small  clearing  in  the  pine  wood, 
covered  with  snow  that  had  thawed  in  the  warmer  weather  of  the  last 
few  days.  The  antagonists  stood  forty  paces  from  each  other  at  the  fur¬ 
ther  edge  of  the  clearing.  The  seconds,  in  measuring  the  paces,  left  tracks 
in  the  deep,  wet  snow  from  the  spot  where  they  had  been  standing  to  the 
swords  of  Nesvitsky  and  Denisov,  which  had  been  thrust  in  the  ground 
ten  paces  from  one  another  to  mark  the  barrier.  The  thaw  and  mist 
persisted;  forty  paces  away  nothing  could  be  seen.  In  three  minutes 
everything  was  ready,  but  still  they  delayed  beginning.  Every  one  was 
silent. 


V 


‘Well,  let  us  begin,’  said  Dolohov. 

‘To  be  sure,’  said  Pierre,  still  with  the  same  smile. 

A  feeling  of  dread  was  in  the  air.  It  was  obvious  that  the  affair  that 
had  begun  so  lightly  could  not  now  be  in  any  way  turned  back,  that  it 
was  going  forward  of  itself,  independently  of  men’s  will,  and  must  run 
its  course.  Denisov  was  the  first  to  come  forward  to  the  barrier  and  pro¬ 
nounce  the  words: 

‘Since  the  antagonists  refuse  all  reconciliation,  would  it  not  be  as 
well  to  begin?  Take  your  pistols,  and  at  the  word  “three”  begin  to  advance 
together.  O  .  .  .  one!  Two!  Three!  .  .  .’  Denisov  shouted  angrily,  and 
he  walked  away  from  the  barrier.  Both  walked  along  the  trodden  tracks 
closer  and  closer  together,  beginning  to  recognise  one  another  in  the  mist. 
The  combatants  had  the  right  to  fire  when  they  chose  as  they  approached 
the  barrier.  Dolohov  walked  slowly,  not  lifting  his  pistol,  and  looking 
intently  with  his  clear,  shining  blue  eyes  into  the  face  of  his  antagonist. 
His  mouth  wore,  as  always,  the  semblance  of  a  smile. 

‘So  when  I  like,  I  can  fire,’  said  Pierre,  and  at  the  word  three,  he  walked 
with  rapid  steps  forward,  straying  off  the  beaten  track  and  stepping 
over  the  untrodden  snow.  Pierre  held  his  pistol  at  full  length  in  his  right 
hand,  obviously  afraid  of  killing  himself  with  that  pistol.  His  left  arm  I 
he  studiously  held  behind  him,  because  he  felt  inclined  to  use  it  to  ' 
support  his  right  arm,  and  he  knew  that  was  not  allowed.  After  advancing 
six  paces,  and  getting  off  the  track  into  the  snow,  Pierre  looked  about 
under  his  feet,  glanced  rapidly  again  at  Dolohov,  and  stretching  out  his 
finger,  as  he  had  been  shown,  fired.  Not  at  all  expecting  so  loud  a  report, 
Pierre  started  at  his  own  shot,  then  smiled  at  his  own  sensation  and 
stood  still.  The  smoke,  which  was  made  thicker  by  the  fog,  hindered 
him  from  seeing  for  the  first  moment;  but  the  other  shot  that  he  was 
expecting  did  not  follow.  All  that  could  be  heard  were  Dolohov’s  rapid 
footsteps,  and  his  figure  came  into  view  through  the  smoke.  With  one 
hand  he  was  clutching  at  his  left  side,  the  other  was  clenched  on  the  lower  j 


WAR  AND  PEACE  291 

pistol.  His  face  was  pale.  Rostov  was  running  up  and  saying  something  to 
him. 

‘N  .  .  .  no/  Dolohov  muttered  through  his  teeth,  ‘no,  it’s  not  over’; 
and  struggling  on  a  few  sinking,  staggering  steps  up  to  the  sword,  he 
sank  on  to  the  snow  beside  it.  His  left  hand  was  covered  with  blood,  he 
rubbed  it  on  his  coat  and  leaned  upon  it.  His  face  was  pale,  frowning  and 
trembling. 

‘Co  .  .  Dolohov  began,  but  he  could  not  at  once  articulate  the 
words:  ‘come  up,’  he  said,  with  an  effort.  Pierre,  hardly  able  to  restrain 
his  sobs,  ran  towards  Dolohov,  and  would  have  crossed  the  space  that 
separated  the  barriers,  when  Dolohov  cried:  ‘To  the  barrier!’  and  Pierre, 
grasping  what  was  wanted,  stood  still  just  at  the  sword.  Only  ten  paces 
divided  them.  Dolohov  putting  his  head  down,  greedily  bit  at  the  snow, 
lifted  his  head  again,  sat  up,  tried  to  get  on  his  legs  and  sat  down,  trying 
to  find  a  secure  centre  of  gravity.  He  took  a  mouthful  of  the  cold  snow7, 
and  sucked  it;  his  lips  quivered,  but  still  he  smiled;  his  eyes  glittered 
with  the  strain  and  the  exasperation  of  the  struggle  with  his  failing  forces. 
He  raised  the  pistol  and  began  taking  aim. 

‘Sideways,  don’t  expose  yourself  to  the  pistol,’  said  Nesvitsky. 

‘Don’t  face  it!’  Denisov  could  not  help  shouting,  though  it  was  to  an 
antagonist. 

With  his  gentle  smile  of  sympathy  and  remorse,  Pierre  stood  with  his 
legs  and  arms  straddling  helplessly,  and  his  broad  chest  directly  facing 
Dolohov,  and  looked  at  him  mournfully.  Denisov,  Rostov,  and  Nesvitsky 
screwed  up  their  eyes.  At  the  same  instant  they  heard  a  shot  and  Dolohov ’s 
wrathful  cry. 

‘Missed!  ’  shouted  Dolohov,  and  he  dropped  helplessly,  face  downwards, 
in  the  snow.  Pierre  clutched  at  his  head,  and  turning  back,  walked  into 
the  wood,  off  the  path  in  the  snow,  muttering  aloud  incoherent  words. 

‘Stupid  .  .  .  stupid!  Death  .  .  .  lies  .  .  .’  he  kept  repeating,  scowl¬ 
ing.  Nesvitsky  stopped  him  and  took  him  home. 

Rostov  and  Denisov  got  the  wounded  Dolohov  away. 

Dolohov  lay  in  the  sledge  with  closed  eyes,  in  silence,  and  uttered 
not  a  word  in  reply  to  questions  addressed  to  him.  But  as  they  were 
driving  into  Moscow,  he  suddenly  came  to  himself,  and  lifting  his  head 
with  an  effort,  he  took  the  hand  of  Rostov,  who  was  sitting  near  him. 
Rostov  was  struck  by  the  utterly  transformed  and  unexpectedly  passion¬ 
ately  tender  expression  on  Dolohov’s  face. 

‘Well?  How  do  you  feel?’  asked  Rostov. 

‘Bad!  but  that’s  not  the  point.  My  friend,’  said  Dolohov,  in  a  breaking 
voice,  ‘where  are  we?  We  are  in  Moscow,  I  know.  I  don’t  matter,  but 
I  have  killed  her,  killed  her.  .  .  .  She  won’t  get  over  this.  She  can’t 
bear  .  .  .’ 

‘Who?’  asked  Rostov. 

‘My  mother.  My  mother,  my  angel,  my  adored  angel,  my  mother,’ 
and  squeezing  Rostov’s  hand,  Dolohov  burst  into  tears.  When  he  was  a 
little  calmer,  he  explained  to  Rostov  that  he  was  living  with  his  mother, 


202 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

that  if  his  mother  were  to  see  him  dying,  she  would  not  get  over  the 
shock.  He  besought  Rostov  to  go  to  her  and  prepare  her. 

Rostov  drove  on  ahead  to  carry  out  his  wish,  and  to  his  immense 
astonishment  he  learned  that  Dolohov,  this  bully,  this  noted  duellist 
Dolohov,  lived  at  Moscow  with  his  old  mother  and  a  hunchback  sister, 
and  was  the  tenderest  son  and  brother. 


VI 

Pierre  had  of  late  rarely  seen  his  wife  alone.  Both  at  Petersburg  and 
at  Moscow  their  house  had  been  constantly  full  of  guests.  On  the  night 
following  the  duel  he  did  not  go  to  his  bedroom,  but  spent  the  night, 
as  he  often  did,  in  his  huge  study,  formerly  his  father’s  room,  the  very 
room  indeed  in  which  Count  Bezuhov  had  died. 

He  lay  down  on  the  couch  and  tried  to  go  to  sleep,  so  as  to  forget  all 
that  had  happened  to  him,  but  he  could  not  do  so.  Such  a  tempest  of 
feelings,  thoughts,  and  reminiscences  suddenly  arose  in  his  soul,  that,  far 
from  going  to  sleep,  he  could  not  even  sit  still  in  one  place,  and  was 
forced  to  leap  up  from  the  couch  and  pace  with  rapid  steps  about  the 
room.  At  one  moment  he  had  a  vision  of  his  wife,  as  she  was  in  the  first 
days  after  their  marriage,  with  her  bare  shoulders,  and  languid,  passion¬ 
ate  eyes;  and  then  immediately  by  her  side  he  saw  the  handsome,  im¬ 
pudent,  hard,  and  ironical  face  of  Dolohov,  as  he  had  seen  it  at  the 
banquet,  and  again  the  same  face  of  Dolohov,  pale,  quivering,  in  agony, 
as  it  had  been  when  he  turned  and  sank  in  the  snow. 

‘What  has  happened?’  he  asked  himself;  ‘I  have  killed  her  lover; 
yes,  killed  the  lover  of  my  wife.  Yes,  that  has  happened.  Why  was  it? 
How  have  I  come  to  this?’  ‘Because  you  married  her,’  answered  an  inner 
voice. 

‘But  how  am  I  to  blame?’  he  asked.  ‘For  marrying  without  loving  her, 
for  deceiving  yourself  and  her.’  And  vividly  he  recalled  that  minute  after 
supper  at  Prince  Vassily’s  when  he  had  said  those  words  he  found  so 
difficult  to  utter:  ‘I  love  you.’  ‘It  has  all  come  from  that.  Even  then  I  felt 
it,’  he  thought;  ‘I  felt  at  the  time  that  it  wasn’t  the  right  thing,  that  I  had 
no  right  to  do  it.  And  so  it  has  turned  out.’  He  recalled  the  honeymoon, 
and  blushed  at  the  recollection  of  it.  Particularly  vivid,  humiliating,  and 
shameful  was  the  memory  of  how  one  day  soon  after  his  marriage  he  had 
come  in  his  silk  dressing-gown  out  of  his  bedroom  into  his  study  at  twelve 
o’clock  in  the  day,  and  in  his  study  had  found  his  head  steward,  who 
had  bowed  deferentially,  and  looking  at  Pierre’s  face  and  his  dressing- 
gown,  had  faintly  smiled,  as  though  to  express  by  that  smile  his  respectful 
sympathy  with  his  patron’s  happiness.  ‘And  how  often  I  have  been  proud 
of  her,  proud  of  her  majestic  beauty,  her  social  tact,’  he  thought;  ‘proud 
of  my  house,  in  which  she  received  all  Petersburg,  proud  of  her  unap- 
proachability  and  beauty.  So  this  was  what  I  prided  myself  on.  I  used  to 
think  then  that  I  did  not  understand  her.  How  often,  reflecting  on  her 


WARANDPEACE  293 

character,  I  have  told  myself  that  I  was  to  blame,  that  I  did  not  under¬ 
stand  her,  did  not  understand  that  everlasting  composure  and  com¬ 
placency,  and  the  absence  of  all  preferences  and  desires,  and  the  solution 
of  the  whole  riddle  lay  in  that  fearful  word,  that  she  is  a  dissolute  woman ; 
I  have  found  that  fearful  word,  and  all  has  become  clear. 

‘Anatole  used  to  come  to  borrow  money  of  her,  and  used  to  kiss  her 
on  her  bare  shoulders.  She  didn’t  give  him  money;  but  she  let  herself  be 
kissed.  Her  father  used  to  try  in  joke  to  rouse  her  jealousy;  with  a  serene 
smile  she  used  to  say  she  was  not  fool  enough  to  be  jealous.  Let  him  do 
as  he  likes,  she  used  to  say  about  me.  I  asked  her  once  if  she  felt  no 
symptoms  of  pregnancy.  She  laughed  contemptuously,  and  said  she  was 
not  such  a  fool  as  to  want  children,  and  that  she  would  never  have  a 
child  by  me.’ 

Then  he  thought  of  the  coarseness,  the  bluntness  of  her  ideas,  and  the 
vulgarity  of  the  expressions  that  were  characteristic  of  her,  although  she 
had  been  brought  up  in  the  highest  aristocratic  circles.  ‘Not  quite  such  a 
fool  .  .  .  you  just  try  it  on  .  .  .  you  clear  out  of  this,’  she  would  say. 
Often,  watching  the  favourable  impression  she  made  on  young  and  old, 
on  men  and  women,  Pierre  could  not  understand  why  it  was  he  did  not 
love  her.  ‘Yes;  I  never  loved  her,’  Pierre  said  to  himself;  ‘I  knew  she  was 
a  dissolute  woman,’  he  repeated  to  himself;  ‘but  I  did  not  dare  own  it  to 
myself. 

‘And  now  Dolohov:  there  he  sits  in  the  snow  and  forces  himself  to 
smile;  and  dies  with  maybe  some  swaggering  affectation  on  his  lips  in 
answer  to  my  remorse.’ 

Pierre  was  one  of  those  people  who  in  spite  of  external  weakness  of 
character — so-called — do  not  seek  a  confidant  for  their  sorrows.  He 
worked  through  his  trouble  alone. 

‘She,  she  alone  is  to  blame  for  everything,’  he  said  to  himself;  ‘but 
what  of  that?  Why  did  I  bind  myself  to  her;  why  did  I  say  to  her  that 
“I  love  you,”  which  was  a  lie,  and  worse  than  a  lie,’  he  said  to  himself ; 
‘I  am  to  blame,  and  ought  to  bear  .  .  .  What?  The  disgrace  to  my 
name,  the  misery  of  my  life?  Oh,  that’s  all  rubbish,’  he  thought,  ‘disgrace 
to  one’s  name  and  honour,  all  that’s  relative,  all  that’s  apart  from  myself. 

‘Louis  xvi  was  executed  because  they  said  he  was  dishonourable  and 
a  criminal’  (the  idea  crossed  Pierre’s  mind),  ‘and  they  were  right  from 
their  point  of  view  just  as  those  were  right  too  who  died  a  martyr’s 
death  for  his  sake,  and  canonised  him  as  a  saint.  Then  Robespierre  was 
executed  for  being  a  tyrant.  Who  is  right,  who  is  wrong?  No  one.  But 
live  while  you  live,  to-morrow  you  die,  as  I  might  have  died  an  hour 
ago.  And  is  it  worth  worrying  oneself,  when  life  is  only  one  second  in 
comparison  with  eternity?’  But  at  the  moment  when  he  believed  himself 
soothed  by  reflections  of  that  sort,  he  suddenly  had  a  vision  of  her,  and 
of  her  at  those  moments  when  he  had  most  violently  expressed  his  most 
insincere  love  to  her,  and  he  felt  a  rush  of  blood  to  his  heart,  and  had  to 
jump  up  again,  and  move  about  and  break  and  tear  to  pieces  anything 
that  his  hands  came  across.  ‘Why  did  I  say  to  her  “I  love  you’’?’  he 


294  WARANDPEACE 

kept  repeating  to  himself.  And  as  he  repeated  the  question  for  the  tenth 
time  the  saying  of  Moliere  came  into  his  head:  ‘But  what  the  devil  was 
he  doing  in  that  galley?’  and  he  laughed  at  himself. 

In  the  night  he  called  for  his  valet  and  bade  him  pack  up  to  go  to 
Petersburg.  He  could  not  conceive  how  he  was  going  to  'speak  to  her  now. 
He  resolved  that  next  day  he  would  go  away,  leaving  her  a  letter,  in 
which  he  would  announce  his  intention  of  parting  from  her  for  ever. 

In  the  morning  when  the  valet  came  into  the  study  with  his  coffee, 
Pierre  was  lying  on  an  ottoman  asleep  with  an  open  book  in  his  hand. 

He  woke  up  and  looked  about  him  for  a  long  while  in  alarm,  unable 
to  grasp  where  he  was. 

‘The  countess  sent  to  inquire  if  your  excellency  were  at  home,’  said  the 
valet. 

But  before  Pierre  had  time  to  make  up  his  mind  what  answer  he 
would  send,  the  countess  herself  walked  calmly  and  majestically  into  the 
room.  She  was  wearing  a  white  satin  dressing-gown  embroidered  with 
silver,  and  had  her  hair  in  two  immense  coils  wound  like  a  coronet  round 
her  exquisite  head.  In  spite  of  her  calm,  there  was  a  wrathful  line  on 
her  rather  prominent,  marble  brow.  With  her  accustomed  self-control 
and  composure  she  did  not  begin  to  speak  till  the  valet  had  left  the  room. 
She  knew  of  the  duel  and  had  come  to  talk  of  it.  She  waited  till  the  valet 
had  set  the  coffee  and  gone  out.  Pierre  looked  timidly  at  her  over  his 
spectacles,  and  as  the  hare,  hemmed  in  by  dogs,  goes  on  lying  with  its 
ears  back  in  sight  of  its  foes,  so  he  tried  to  go  on  reading.  But  he  felt 
that  this  was  senseless  and  impossible,  and  again  he  glanced  timidly  at 
her.  She  did  not  sit  down,  but  stood  looking  at  him  with  a  disdainful 
smile,  waiting  for  the  valet  to  be  gone. 

‘What’s  this  about  now?  What  have  you  been  up  to?  I’m  asking  you,’ 
she  said  sternly. 

‘I?  I?  what?’  said  Pierre. 

‘You  going  in  for  deeds  of  valour!  Now,  answer  me,  what  does  this 
duel  mean?. What  did  you  want  to  prove  by  it?  Eh!  I  ask  you  the  ques¬ 
tion.’  Pierre  turned  heavily  on  the  sofa,  opened  his  mouth  but  could  not 
answer. 

‘If  you  won’t  answer,  I’ll  tell  you  .  .  .’  Ellen  went  on.  ‘You  believe 
everything  you’re  told.  You  were  told  .  .  .’  Ellen  laughed, ‘that  Dolohov 
was  my  lover,’  she  said  in  French,  with  her  coarse  plainness  of  speech, 
uttering  the  word  ‘ amant ’  like  any  other  word,  ‘and  you  believed  it!  But 
what  have  you  proved  by  this?  What  have  you  proved  by  this  duel? 
That  you’re  a  fool;  but  every  one  knew  that  as  it  was.  What  does  it  lead 
to?  Why,  that  I’m  made  a  laughing-stock  to  all  Moscow;  that  every  one’s 
saying  that  when  you  were  drunk  and  didn’t  know  what  you  were  doing, 
you  challenged  a  man  of  whom  you  were  jealous  without  grounds,’  Ellen 
raised  her  voice  and  grew  more  and  more  passionate;  ‘who’s  a  better  man 
than  you  in  every  respect.  .  .  .’ 

‘Hem  .  .  .  hem  .  .  .’  Pierre  growled,  wrinkling  up  his  face,  and 
neither  looking  at  her  nor  stirring  a  muscle. 


WAR  AND  PEACE  295 

‘And  how  came  you  to  believe  that  he’s  my  lover?  ...  Eh?  Because 
I  like  his  society?  If  you  were  cleverer  and  more  agreeable,  I  should  prefer 
yours.’ 

‘Don’t  speak  to  me  ...  I  beseech  you,’  Pierre  muttered  huskily. 

‘Why  shouldn’t  I  speak?  I  can  speak  as  I  like,  and  I  tell  you  boldly 
that  it’s  not  many  a  wife  who  with  a  husband  like  you  wouldn’t  have 
taken  a  lover,  but  I  haven’t  done  it,’  she  said.  Pierre  tried  to  say  some¬ 
thing,  glanced  at  her  with  strange  eyes,  whose  meaning  she  did  not  com¬ 
prehend,  and  lay  down  again.  He  was  in  physical  agony  at  that  moment; 
he  felt  a  weight  on  his  chest  so  that  he  could  not  breathe.  He  knew  that 
he  must  do  something  to  put  an  end  tot  this  agony  but  what  he  wanted 
to  do  was  too  horrible. 

‘We  had  better  part,’  he  articulated  huskily. 

‘Part,  by  all  means,  only  if  you  give  me  a  fortune,’  said  Ellen.  .  .  . 
‘Part — that’s  a  threat  to  frighten  me!’ 

Pierre  leaped  up  from  the  couch  and  rushed  staggering  towards  her. 

‘I’ll  kill  you!’  he  shouted,  and  snatching  up  a  marble  slab  from  a 
table  with  a  strength  he  had  not  known  in  himself  till  then,  he  made  a 
step  towards  her  and  waved  it  at  her. 

Ellen’s  face  was  terrible  to  see;  she  shrieked  and  darted  away  from 
him.  His  father’s  nature  showed  itself  in  him.  Pierre  felt  the  abandon¬ 
ment  and  the  fascination  of  frenzy.  He  Hung  down  the  slab,  shivering  it 
into  fragments,  and  with  open  arms  swooping  down  upon  Ellen,  screamed 
‘Go!’  in  a  voice  so  terrible  that  they  heard  it  all  over  the  house  with 
horror.  God  knows  what  Pierre  would  have  done  at  that  moment  if  Ellen 
had  not  run  out  of  the  room. 

A  week  later  Pierre  had  made  over  to  his  wife  the  revenue  from  all  his 
estates  in  Great  Russia,  which  made  up  the  lasger  half  of  his  property, 
and  had  gone  away  alone  to  Petersburg. 


VII 

Two  months  had  passed  since  the  news  of  the  defeat  of  Austerlitz  and 
the  loss  of  Prince  Andrey  had  reached  Bleak  Hills.  In  spite  of  all  re¬ 
searches  and  letters  through  the  Russian  embassy,  his  body  had  not  been 
found,  nor  was  he  among  the  prisoners.  What  made  it  worst  of  all  for  his 
father  and  sister  was  the  fact  that  there  was  still  hope  that  he  might 
have  been  picked  up  on  the  battlefield  by  the  people  of  the  country,  and 
might  perhaps  be  lying,  recovering,  or  dying  somewhere  alone,  among 
strangers,  incapable  of  giving  any  account  of  himself.  The  newspapers, 
from  which  the  old  prince  had  first  heard  of  the  defeat  at  Austerlitz,  had, 
as  always,  given  very  brief  and  vague  accounts  of  how  the  Russians  had 
been  obliged  after  brilliant  victories  to  retreat  and  had  made  their  with¬ 
drawal  in  perfect  order.  The  old  prince  saw  from  this  official  account 
that  our  army  had  been  defeated.  A  week  after  the  newspaper  that  had 


296  WARANDPEACE 

brought  news  of  the  defeat  of  Austerlitz,  came  a  letter  from  Kutuzov, 
who  described  to  the  old  prince  the  part  taken  in  it  by  his  son. 

‘Before  my  eyes,’  wrote  Kutuzov,  ‘your  son  with  the  flag  in  his  hands, 
at  the  head  of  a  regiment,  fell  like  a  hero,  worthy  of  his  father  and  his 
fatherland.  To  my  regret  and  the  general  regret  of  the  whole  army  it  has 
not  been  ascertained  up  to  now  whether  he  is  alive  or  dead.  I  comfort 
myself  and  you  with  the  hope  that  your  son  is  living,  as,  otherwise,  he 
would  have  been  mentioned  among  the  officers  found  on  the  field  of  battle, 
a  list  of  whom  has  been  given  me  under  flag  of  truce.’ 

After  receiving  this  letter,  late  in  the  evening  when  he  was  alone  in 
his  study,  the  old  prince  went  for  his  morning  walk  as  usual  next  day. 
But  he  was  silent  with  the  bailiff,  the  gardener,  and  the  architect,  and 
though  he  looked  wrathful,  said  nothing  to  them.  When  Princess  Marya 
went  in  to  him  at  the  usual  hour,  he  was  standing  at  the  lathe  and  went 
on  turning  as  usual,  without  looking  round  at  her.  ‘Ah?  Princess  Marya!’ 
he  said  suddenly  in  an  unnatural  voice,  and  he  let  the  lathe  go.  (The  wheel 
swung  round  from  the  impetus.  Long  after,  Princess  Marya  remembered 
the  dying  creak  of  the  wheel,  which  was  associated  for  her  with  what 
followed.) 

Princess  Marya  went  up  to  him;  she  caught  sight  of  his  face,  and 
something  seemed  suddenly  to  give  way  within  her.  Her  eyes  could  not 
see  clearly.  From  her  father’s  face — not  sad  nor  crushed,  but  vindictive 
and  full  of  unnatural  conflict — she  saw  that  there  was  hanging  over  her, 
coming  to  crush  her,  a  terrible  calamity,  the  worst  in  life,  a  calamity 
she  had  not  known  till  then,  a  calamity  irrevocable,  irremediable,  the 
death  of  one  beloved. 

‘Father!  Andrey?  .  .  .’  said  the  ungainly,  awkward  princess  with  such 
unutterable  beauty  of  sorrow  and  self-forgetfulness  that  her  father  could 
not  bear  to  meet  her  eyes  and  turned  away  sobbing. 

‘I  have  had  news.  Not  among  the  prisoners,  not  among  the  killed, 
Kutuzov  writes,’  he  screamed  shrilly,  as  though  he  would  drive  his  daugh¬ 
ter  away  with  that  shriek.  ‘Killed!’ 

The  princess  did  not  swoon,  she  did  not  fall  into  a  faint.  She  was  pale, 
but  when  she  heard  those  words  her  face  was  transformed,  and  there  was 
a  radiance  of  something  in  her  beautiful,  luminous  eyes.  Something  like 
joy,  an  exalted  joy,  apart  from  the  sorrows  and  joys  of  this  world,  flooded 
the  bitter  grief  she  felt  within  her.  She  forgot  all  her  terror  of  her 
father,  went  up  to  him,  took  him  by  the  hand,  drew  him  to  her,  and  put 
her  arm  about  his  withered,  sinewy  neck. 

‘Father,’  she  said,  ‘do  not  turn  away  from  me,  let  us  weep  for  him 
together.’ 

‘Blackguards,  scoundrels!’  screamed  the  old  man,  turning  his  face 
away  from  her.  ‘Destroying  the  army,  destroying  men!  What  for?  Go, 
gb  and  tell  Liza.’ 

Princess  Marya  sank  helplessly  into  an  armchair  beside  her  father 
and  burst  into  tears.  She  could  see  her  brother  now  at  the  moment  when 
he  parted  from  her  and  from  Liza  with  his  tender  and  at  the  same  time 


WARANDPEACE  297 

haughty  expression.  She  saw  him  at  the  moment  when  tenderly  and 
ironically  he  had  put  the  image  on.  ‘Did  he  believe  now?  Had  he  repented 
of  his  unbelief?  Was  he  there  now?  There  in  the  realm  of  eternal  peace 
and  blessedness?’  she  wondered.  ‘Father,  tell  me  how  it  was,’  she  asked 
through  her  tears. 

‘Go  away,  go, — killed  in  a  defeat  into  which  they  led  the  best  men  of 
Russia  and  the  glory  of  Russia  to  ruin.  Go  away,  Princess  Marya.  Go 
and  tell  Liza.  I  will  come.’  When  Princess  Marya  went  back  from  her 
father,  the  little  princess  was  sitting  at  her  work,  and  she  looked  up  with 
that  special  inward  look  of  happy  calm  that  is  peculiar  to  women  with 
child.  It  was  clear  that  her  eyes  were  not  seeing  Princess  Marya,  but 
looking  deep  within  herself,  at  some  happy  mystery  that  was  being 
accomplished  within  her. 

‘Marie,’  she  said,  moving  away  from  the  embroidery  frame  and  leaning 
back,  ‘give  me  your  hand.’  She  took  her  sister-in-law’s  hand  and  laid  it 
below  her  waist.  Her  eyes  smiled,  expectant,  her  little  dewy  lip  was 
lifted  and  stayed  so  in  childlike  rapture.  Princess  Marya  knelt  down 
before  her,  and  hid  her  face  in  the  folds  of  her  sister-in-law’s  dress.  ‘There 
— there — do  you  feel  it?  I  feel  so  strange.  And  do  you  know,  Marie,  I  am 
going  to  love  him  very  much,’  said  Liza,  looking  at  her  sister-in-law  with 
shining,  happy  eyes.  Princess  Marya  could  not  lift  her  head;  she  was 
crying. 

‘What’s  the  matter  with  you,  Marie?’ 

‘Nothing  .  .  .  only  I  felt  sad  .  .  .  sad  about  Andrey,’  she  said,  brush¬ 
ing  away  the  tears  on  the  folds  of  her  sister-in-law’s  dress.  Several  times 
in  the  course  of  the  morning  Princess  Marya  began  trying  to  prepare 
her  sister-in-law’s  mind,  and  every  time  she  began  to  weep.  These  tears, 
which  the  little  princess  could  not  account  for,  agitated  her,  little  as  she 
was  observant  in  general.  She  said  nothing,  but  looked  about  her  uneasily, 
as  though  seeking  for  something.  Before  dinner  the  old  prince,  of  whom 
she  was  always  afraid,  came  into  her  room,  with  a  particularly  restless 
and  malignant  expression,  and  went  out  without  uttering  a  word.  She 
looked  at  Princess  Marya  with  that  expression  of  attention  concentrated 
within  herself  that  is  only  seen  in  women  with  child,  and  suddenly  she 
burst  into  tears. 

‘Have  you  heard  news  from  Andrey?’  she  said. 

‘No;  you  know  news  could  not  come  yet;  but  father  is  uneasy,  and 
I  feel  frightened.’ 

‘Then  you  have  heard  nothing?’ 

‘Nothing,’  said  Princess  Marya,  looking  resolutely  at  her  with  her 
luminous  eyes.  She  had  made  up  her  mind  not  to  tell  her,  and  had  per¬ 
suaded  her  father  to  conceal  the  dreadful  news  from  her  till  her  confine¬ 
ment,  which  was  expected  before  many  days.  Princess  Marya  and  the  old 
prince,  in  their  different  ways,  bore  and  hid  their  grief.  The  old  prince 
refused  to  hope;  he  made  up  his  mind  that  Prince  Andrey  had  been  killed, 
and  though  he  sent  a  clerk  to  Austria  to  seek  for  traces  of  his  son,  he 
ordered  a  monument  for  him  in  Moscow  and  intended  to  put  it  up  in  his 


29S  WAR  AND  PEACE 

garden,  and  he  told  every  one  that  his  son  was  dead.  He  tried  to  keep 
up  his  old  manner  of  life  unchanged,  but  his  strength  was  failing  him: 
he  walked  less,  ate  less,  slept  less,  and  every  day  he  grew  weaker.  Princess 
Marya  went  on  hoping.  She  prayed  for  her  brother,  as  living,  and  every 
moment  she  expected  news  of  his  return. 


VIII 

‘Ala  bonne  amic,’  said  the  little  princess,  after  breakfast,  on  the  morning 
of  the  19th  of  March,  and  her  little  downy  lip  was  lifted  as  of  old;  but  1 
as  in  that  house  since  the  terrible  news  had  come,  smiles,  tones  of  voice, 
movements  even  bore  the  stamp  of  mourning,  so  now  the  smile  of  the 
little  princess,  who  was  influenced  by  the  general  temper  without  know¬ 
ing  its  cause,  was  such  that  more  than  all  else  it  was  eloquent  of  the 
common  burden  of  sorrow. 

‘My  dear,  I  am  afraid  that  this  morning’s  jrnschtique  (as  Foka  calls  it) 
has  disagreed  with  me.’ 

‘What  is  the  matter  with  you,  my  darling?  You  look  pale.  Oh,  you 
are  very  pale,’  said  Princess  Marya  in  alarm,  running  with  her  soft, 
ponderous  tread  up  to  her  sister-in-law. 

‘Shouldn’t  we  send  for  Marya  Bogdanovna,  your  excellency?’  said 
one  of  the  maids  who  was  present.  Marya  Bogdanovna  was  a  midwife 
from  a  district  town,  who  had  been  for  the  last  fortnight  at  Bleak  Hills. 

‘Yes,  truly,’  assented  Princess  Marya,  ‘perhaps  it  is  really  that.  I’ll 
go  and  get  her.  Courage,  my  angel.’  She  kissed  Liza  and  was  going  out 
of  the  room. 

‘Oh,  no,  no!’  And  besides  her  pallor,  the  face  of  the  little  princess  ex¬ 
pressed  a  childish  terror  at  the  inevitable  physical  suffering  before  her. 

‘No,  it  is  indigestion,  say  it  is  indigestion,  say  so,  Marie,  say  so!’  And 
the  little  princess  began  to  cry,  wringing  her  little  hands  with  childish 
misery  and  capriciousness  and  affected  exaggeration  too.  Princess  Marya  ( 
ran  out  of  the  room  to  fetch  Marya  Bogdanovna. 

‘Alon  Dieul  mon  Dieu!  Oh!’  she  heard  behind  her.  The  midwife  was  ; 
already  on  her  way  to  meet  her,  rubbing  her  plump,  small,  white  hands,  ' 
with  a  face  of  significant  composure. 

‘Marya  Bogdanovna!  I  think  it  has  begun,’  said  Princess  Marya,  look¬ 
ing  with  wide-open,  frightened  eyes  at  the  midwife. 

‘Well,  I  thank  God  for  it,’  said  Marya  Bogdanovna,  not  hastening  her 
step.  ‘You  young  ladies  have  no  need  to  know  anything  about  it.’ 

‘But  how  is  it  the  doctor  has  not  come  from  Moscow  yet?’  said  the 
princess.  (In  accordance  with  the  wishes  of  Liza  and  Prince  Andrey,  they 
had  sent  to  Moscow  for  a  doctor,  and  were  expecting  him  every  minute.) 

‘It’s  no  matter,  princess,  don’t  be  uneasy,’  said  Marya  Bogdanovna;  1 
‘we  shall  do  very  well  without  the  doctor.’ 

Five  minutes  later  the  princess  from  her  room  heard  something  heavy 
being  carried  by.  She  peeped  out;  the  footmen  were  for  some  reason 


299 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

moving  into  the  bedroom  the  leather  sofa  which  stood  in  Prince  Andrey’s 
study.  There  was  a  solemn  and  subdued  look  on  the  men’s  faces. 

Princess  Marya  sat  alone  in  her  room,  listening  toi  the  sounds  of  the 
house,  now  and  then  opening  the  door  when  any  one  passed  by  and 
looking  at  what  was  taking  place  in  the  corridor.  Several  women  passed 
to  and  fro  treading  softly;  they  glanced  at  the  princess  and  turned  away 
from  her.  She  did  not  venture  to  ask  questions,  and  going  back  to  her 
room  closed  the  door  and  sat  still  in  an  armchair,  or  took  up  her  prayer- 
book,  or  knelt  down  before  the  shrine.  To  her  distress  and  astonishment 
she  felt  that  prayer  did  not  soothe  her  emotion.  All  at  once  the  door  of 
her  room  was  softly  opened,  and  she  saw  on  the  threshold  her  old  nurse, 
Praskovya  Savvishna,  with  a  kerchief  over  her  head.  The  old  woman 
hardly  ever,  owing  to  the  old  prince’s  prohibition,  came  into  her  room. 

‘I’ve  come  to  sit  a  bit  with  thee,  Mashenka,’  said  the  nurse;  ‘and  here 
I’ve  brought  the  prince’s  wedding  candles  to  light  before  his  saint,  my 
angel,’  she  said,  sighing. 

‘Ah,  how  glad  I  am,  nurse!’ 

‘God  is  merciful,  my  darling.’  The  nurse  lighted  the  gilt  candles  before 
the  shrine,  and  sat  down  with  her  stocking  near  the  door.  Princess  Marya 
took  a  book  and  began  reading.  Only  when  they  heard  steps  or  voices, 
the  princess  and  the  nurse  looked  at  one  another,  one  with  alarmed 
inquiry,  the  other  with  soothing  reassurance  in  her  face.  The  feeling  that 
Princess  Marya  was  experiencing  as  she  sat  in  her  room  had  overpowered 
the  whole  house  and  taken  possession  of  every  one.  Owing  to  the  belief 
that  the  fewer  people  know  of  the  sufferings  of  a  woman  in  labour,  the 
less  she  suffers,  every  one  tried  to  affect  to  know  nothing  of  it ;  no  one 
talked  about  it,  but  over  and  above  the  habitual  staidness  and  respectful¬ 
ness  of  good  manners  that  always  reigned  in  the  prince’s  household,  there 
was  apparent  in  all  a  sort  of  anxiety,  a  softening  of  the  heart,  and  a  con¬ 
sciousness  of  some  great,  unfathomable  mystery  being  accomplished  at 
that  moment.  There  was  no  sound  of  laughter  in  the  big  room  where  the 
maids  sat.  In  the  waiting-room  the  men  all  sat  in  silence,  as  it  were  on 
the  alert.  Torches  and  candles  were  burning  in  the  serfs’  quarters,  and  no 
one  slept.  The  old  prince  walked  about  his  study,  treading  on  his  heels, 
and  sent  Tihon  to  Marya  Bogdanovna  to  ask  what  news. 

‘Only  say:  the  prince  has  sent  to  ask,  what  news  and  come  and  tell 
me  what  she  says.’ 

‘Inform  the  prince  that  the  labour  has  commenced,’  said  Marya  Bog¬ 
danovna,  looking  significantly  at  the  messenger.  Tihon  went  and  gave 
the  prince  that  information. 

‘Very  good,’  said  the  prince,  closing  the  door  behind  him,  and  Tihon 
heard  not  the  slightest  sound  in  the  study  after  that.  After  a  short  interval 
Tihon  went  into  the  study,  as  though  to  attend  to  the  candles.  Seeing 
the  prince  lying  on  the  couch,  Tihon  looked  at  him,  looked  at  his  per¬ 
turbed  face,  shook  his  head,  went  up  to  him  dumbly  and  kissed  him  on 
the  shoulder,  then  went  out  without  touching  the  candles  or  saying  why 
he  had  come.  The  most  solemn  mystery  in  the  world  was  being  accom- 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

piished.  Evening  passed,  night  came  on.  And  the  feeling  of  suspense 
and  softening  of  the  heart  before  the  unfathomable  did  not  wane,  but 
grew  more  intense.  Xo  one  slept. 

It  was  one  of  those  March  nights  when  winter  seems  to  regain  its 
sway,  and  flings  its  last  snows  and  storms  with  malignant  desperation. 
A  relay  of  horses  had  been  sent  to  the  high-road  for  the  German  doctor 
who  was  expected  even'  minute,  and  men  were  despatched  on  horseback 
with  lanterns  to  the  turning  at  the  cross-roads  to  guide  him  over  the  holes 
arid  treacherous  places  in  tire  ice. 

Princess  Mary  a  had  long  abandoned  her  book;  she  sat  in  silence,  her 
luminous  eyes  fixed  on  the  wrinkled  face  of  her  old  nurse  (.so  familiar 
to  her  in  the  minutest  detail ) ,  on  the  lock  of  grey  hair  that  had  escaped 
from  the  kerchief,  on  the  baggy  looseness  of  the  skin  under  her  elfin. 

The  old  nurse,  with  her  stocking  in  her  hand,  talked  away  in  a  soft 
voice,  not  hearing  it  herself  nor  following  tire  meaning  of  her  own  words; 
telling,  as  she  had  told  hundreds  of  times  before,  how  the  late  princess 
had  been  brought  to  bed  of  Princess  Mary  a  at  Kisliinyov,  and  had  only  a 
(Moldavian  peasant  woman  instead  of  a  midwife. 

‘God  is  merciful,  doctors  are  never  wanted,’  she  said. 

Suddenly  a  gust  of  wind  blew  on  one  of  the  window-frames  (by  the 
prince's  decree  tire  double  frames  were  always  taken  out  of  ever}'  window 
when  the  larks  returned ) .  and  flinging  open  a  badly  fastened  window  bolt, 
set  the  stuff  curtain  fluttering;  and  tire  chill,  snowy  draught  blew  out  the 
candle.  Princess  Mary  a  shuddered;  the  nurse,  putting  down  her  stocking, 
went  to  the  window,  and  putting  her  head  out  tried  to  catch  the  open 
frame.  The  cold  wind  flapped  tire  ends  of  her  kerchief  and  the  grey  locks 
of  her  hair. 

‘Princess,  my  dearie,  there's  some  one  driving  up  the  avenue!’  she 
said,  holding  tire  window-frame  and  not  closing  it.  ‘With  lanterns;  it 
must  be  the  doctor.  .  . 

‘.Ah.  my  God!  Thank  God!'  said  the  Princess  Marya.  T  must  go  and 
meet  him;  he  does  not  know  Russian.' 

Priircess  Marya  flung  on  a  shawl  and  ran  to  meet  the  stranger.  As  she 
passed  through  the  ante-room,  she  saw  through  the  window  a  carriage 
and  lanterns  standing  at  the  entrance.  She  wrnt  out  on  to  the  stairs.  At 
the  post  of  the  balustrade  stood  a  tallow-candle  guttering  in  tire  draught. 
The  footman  Filipp,  looking  scared,  stood  below  on  the  first  landing  of 
the  staircase,  with  another  candle  in  his  hand.  Still  lower  down,  at  the 
turn  of  the  winding  stairs,  steps  in  thick  overshoes  could  be  heard  coming 
up.  And  a  voice — familiar  it  seemed  to  Princess  Marya — was  saying 
something. 

'Thank  God.”  said  the  voice.  'And  father?’ 

'He  has  gone  to  bed,’  answered  the  voice  of  the  butler,  Denryan,  who 
was  below. 

Then  the  voice  said  something  more,  Demyan  answered  something, 


WAR  AND  PEACE  3°i 

and  the  steps  in  thick  overshoes  began  approaching  more  rapidly  up  the 
unseen  part  of  the  staircase. 

‘It  is  Andrey!’  thought  Princess  Marya.  ‘Xo,  it  cannot  be,  it  would  be 
too  extraordinary/  she  thought ;  and  at  the  very  instant  she  was  thinking 
so,  on  the  landing  where  the  footman  stood  with  a  candle,  there  came 
into  sight  the  face  and  figure  of  Prince  Andrey,  in  a  fur  coat,  with  a  deep 
collar  covered  with  snow.  Yes,  it  was  he,  but  pale  and  thin,  and  ■with  a 
transformed,  strangely  softened,  agitated  expression  on  his  face.  He  went 
up  the  stairs  and  embraced  his  sister. 

‘You  did  not  get  my  letter,  then?’  he  asked;  and  not  waiting  for  an 
answer,  which  he  would  not  have  received,  for  the  princess  could  not 
speak,  he  turned  back,  and  with  the  doctor  who  was  behind  him  (they 
had  met  at  the  last  station),  he  ran  again  rapidly  upstairs  and  again 
embraced  his  sister. 

‘What  a  strange  fate!’  he  said,  ‘Masha,  darling!’  And  flinging  off  his 
fur  coat  and  overboots,  he  wTent  towards  the  little  princess’s  room. 


IX 

The  little  princess  was  lying  on  the  pillows  in  her  white  nightcap  (the 
agony  had  only  a  moment  left  her).  Her  black  hair  lay  in  curls  about  her 
swollen  and  perspiring  cheeks;  her  rosy,  charming  little  mouth,  with 
the  downy  lip,  was  open,  and  she  was  smiling  joyfully.  Prince  Andrey 
went  into  the  room,  and  stood  facing  her  at  the  foot  of  the  bed  on  which 
she  lay.  The  glittering  eyes,  staring  in  childish  terror  and  excitement, 
rested  on  him  with  no  change  in  their  expression.  ‘I  love  you  all,  I  have 
done  no  one  any  harm;  why  am  I  suffering?  help  me,’  her  f2ce  seemed 
to  say.  She  saw  her  husband,  but  she  did  not  take  in  the  meaning  of  his 
appearance  now  before  her.  Prince  Andrey  went  round  the  bed  and  kissed 
her  on  the  forehead. 

‘My  precious,’  he  said,  a  word  he  had  never  used  speaking  to  her  before. 
‘God  is  merciful.  .  .  .’  She  stared  at  him  with  a  face  of  inquiry,  of  child¬ 
ish  reproach. 

‘I  hoped  for  help  from  you,  and  nothing,  nothing,  you  too!’  her  eyes 
said.  She  was  not  surprised  at  his  having  come;  she  did  not  understand 
that  he  had  come.  His  coming  had  nothing  to  do  with  her  agony  and  its 
alleviation.  The  pains  began  again,  and  Marya  Bogdanovna  advised 
Prince  Andrey  to  go  out  of  the  room. 

The  doctor  went  into  the  room.  Prince  Andrey  came  out,  and,  meeting 
Princess  Marya,  -went  to  her  again.  They  talked  in  whispers,  but  every’ 
moment  their  talk  was  hushed.  They  were  waiting  and  listening. 

‘Go,  mon  ami  ’  said  Princess  Marya.  Prince  Andrey  went  again  to  his 
wife  and  sat  down  in  the  adjoining  room,  waiting.  A  woman  ran  out  of 
the  bedroom  with  a  frightened  face,  and  was  disconcerted  on  seeing  Prince 
Andrey.  He  hid  his  face  in  his  hands  and  sat  so  for  some  miniftes.  Piteous, 
helpless,  animal  groans  came  from  the  next  room.  Prince  Andrey  got  up, 


302  WARANDPEACE 

went  to  the  door,  and  would  have  opened  it.  Some  one  was  holding  the 
door. 

‘Can't  come  in,  can’t!’  a  frightened  voice  said  from  within.  He  began 
walking  about  the  room.  The  screams  ceased;  several  seconds  passed. 
Suddenly  a  fearful  scream — not  her  scream,  could  she  scream  like  that? — 
came  from  the  room.  Prince  Andrey  ran  to  the  door;  the  scream  ceased; 
he  heard  the  cry  of  a  baby. 

‘What  have  they  taken  a  baby  in  there  for?’  Prince  Andrey  wondered 
for  the  first  second. ‘A  baby?  What  baby?  .  .  .  Why  a  baby  there?  Or  is 
the  baby  born?’ 

When  he  suddenly  realised  all  the  joyful  significance  of  that  cry,  tears 
choked  him,  and  leaning  both  elbows  on  the  window-sill  he  cried,  sobbing 
as  children  cry.  The  door  opened.  The  doctor  with  his  shirt  sleeves  tucked 
up,  and  no  coat  on,  came  out  of  the  room,  pale,  and  his  lower  jaw  twitch¬ 
ing.  Prince  Andrey  addressed  him,  but  the  doctor,  looking  at  him  in  a 
distracted  way,  passed  by  without  uttering  a  word.  A  woman  ran  out, 
and,  seeing  Prince  Andrey,  stopped  hesitating  in  the  door.  He  went  into 
his  wife’s  room.  She  was  lying  dead  in  the  same  position  in  which  he 
had  seen  her  five  minutes  before,  and  in  spite  of  the  fixed  gaze  and  white 
cheeks,  there  was  the  same  expression  still  on  the  charming  childish  face 
with  the  little  lip  covered  with  fine  dark  hair.  ‘I  love  you  all,  and  have 
done  no  harm  to  any  one,  and  what  have  you  done  to  me?’  said  her 
charming,  piteous,  dead  face.  In  a  corner  of  the  room  was  something  red 
and  tiny,  squealing  and  grunting  in  the  trembling  white  hands  of  Marya 
Bogdanovna. 

Two  hours  later  Prince  Andrey  went  with  soft  steps  into  his  father’s 
room.  The  old  man  knew  everything  already.  He  was  standing  near  the 
door,  and,  as  soon  as  it  opened,  his  rough  old  arms  closed  like  a  vice 
round  his  son’s  neck,  and  without  a  word  he  burst  into  sobs  like  a  child. 

Three  days  afterwards  the  little  princess  was  buried,  and  Prince  Andrey 
went  to  the  steps  of  the  tomb  to  take  his  last  farewell  of  her.  Even  in  the 
coffin  the  face  was  the  same,  though  the  eyes  were  closed.  ‘Ah,  what 
have  you  done  to  me?’  it  still  seemed  to  say;  and  Prince  Andrey  felt  that 
something  was  being  torn  out  of  his  soul,  that  he  was  guilty  of  a  crime 
that  he  could  never  set  right  nor  forget.  He  could  not  weep.  The  old  man, 
too,  went  in  and  kissed  the  little  waxen  hand  that  lay  so  peacefully 
crossed  over  the  other,  and  to  him,  too,  her  face  said:  ‘Ah,  what  have 
you  done  to  me,  and  why?’  And  the  old  man  turned  angrily  away,  when 
he  caught  sight  of  the  face. 

In  another  five  days  there  followed  the  christening  of  the  young  prince, 
Nikolay  Andreitch.  The  nurse  held  the  swaddling  clothes  up  to  her  chin, 
while  the  priest  with  a  goose  feather  anointed  the  baby’s  red,  wrinkled 
hands  and  feet. 

His  grandfather,  who  -was  his  godfather,  trembling  and  afraid  of  drop¬ 
ping  the  baby,  carried  him  round  the  battered  tin  font,  and  handed  him 


WARANDPEACE  303 

over  to  the  godmother,  Princess  Marya.  Faint  with  terror  that  they  would 
let  the  baby  drown  in  the  font,  Prince  Andrey  sat  in  an  adjoining  room, 
waiting  for  the  conclusion  of  the  ceremony.  He  looked  joyfully  at  the 
baby  when  the  nurse  brought  him  out,  and  nodded  approvingly  when  the 
nurse  told  him  that  a  bit  of  wax  with  the  baby’s  hairs  in  it,  thrown  into 
the  font,  had  not  sunk  in  the  water  but  floated  on  the  surface. 


X 


Rostov’s  share  in  the  duel  between  Dolohov  and  Bezuhov  had  been 
hushed  up  by  the  efforts  of  the  old  count,  and  instead  of  being  degraded 
to  the  ranks,  as  Nikolay  had  expected,  he  had  been  appointed  an  adjutant 
to  the  governor  of  Moscow.  In  consequence  of  this,  he  could  not  go  to 
the  country  with  the  rest  of  the  family,  but  was  kept  by  his  new  duties 
all  the  summer  in  Moscow.  Dolohov  recovered,  and  Rostov  became  par¬ 
ticularly  friendly  with  him  during  his  convalescence.  Dolohov  lay  ill  in 
the  house  of  his  mother,  who  was  tenderly  and  passionately  devoted  to 
him.  Marya  Ivanovna,  who  had  taken  a  fancy  to  Rostov,  seeing  his  at¬ 
tachment  to  her  Fedya,  often  talked  to  him  about  her  son. 

‘Yes,  count,  he  is  too  noble,  too  pure-hearted,’  she  would  say,  ‘for  the 
corrupt  society  of  our  day.  Virtue  is  in  favour  with  no  one;  it  is  apt  to 
be  a  reproach  to  everybody.  Come,  tell  me,  count,  was  it  right,  was  it 
honourable  on  Bezuhov’s  part?  Fedya  in  his  noble-hearted  way  loved 
him,  and  even  now  he  never  says  a  word  against  him.  In  Petersburg  those 
pranks  with  the  police  constables,  those  practical  jokes  they  played 
there,  didn’t  they  do  everything  together?  And  Bezuhov  got  nothing  for 
it,  while  Fedya  took  all  the  blame  on  his  shoulders.  What  he  has  had 
to  go  through!  He  has  been  reinstated,  I  know,  but  how  could  they  help 
reinstating  him?  I  don’t  suppose  there  were  many  such  gallant,  true 
sons  of  their  fatherland  out  there!  And  now,  what? — this  duel!  Is  there 
any  feeling,  any  honour  left  in  men?  Knowing  he  was  the  only  son,  to 
call  him  out  and  aim  so  straight  at  him!  We  may  be  thankful  God  has 
been  merciful  to  us.  And  what  was  it  all  for?  Why,  who  hasn’t  intrigues 
nowadays?  Why,  if  he  were  so  jealous — I  can  understand  it — he  ought 
to  have  let  it  be  seen  long  before,  you  know,  and  it  had  been  going  on  for 
a  year.  And  then  to  call  him  out,  reckoning  on  Fedya’s  not  fighting  him 
because  he  was  indebted  to  him.  What  baseness!  What  vileness!  I  know 
you  understand  Fedya,  my  dear  count,  and  that’s  why  I  love  you,  believe 
me,  from  my  heart.  Few  do  understand  him.  His  is  such  a  lofty,  heavenly 
nature!  ’ 

Dolohov  himself,  during  his  convalescence,  often  said  to  Rostov  things 
which  could  never  have  been  expected  from  him. 

‘People  think  me  a  wicked  man,  I  know,’  he  would  say;  ‘and  they’re 
welcome  to  think  so.  I  don’t  care  to  know  any  one  except  those  whom  I 
love.  But  those  I  do  love,  I  love  in  such  a  way  that  I  would  give  my  life 
for  them,  and  all  the  rest  I  will  crush  if  they  get  in  my  way.  I  have  a 


304  WAR  AND  PEACE 

precious  and  adored  mother,  and  two  or  three  friends,  you  among  them ; 
and  as  to  the  rest,  I  only  pay  attention  to  them  in  so  far  as  they  are  useful 
or  mischievous.  And  almost  all  are  mischievous,  especially  the  women. 
Yes,  my  dear,’  he- went  on,  ‘men  I  have  met  who  were  loving,  noble,  and 
lofty-minded.  But  women  that  were  not  cattle  for  sale — countesses  and 
cooks,  they’re  all  alike — I  have  not  come  across  yet.  I  have  not  yet  met 
the  angelic  purity  and  devotion  which  I  look  for  in  woman.  If  I  could 
find  such  a  woman,  I  would  give  my  life  for  her!  But  these  creatures!  .  .  .’ 
He  made  a  gesture  of  contempt.  ‘But  believe  me,  if  I  still  care  for  life, 
I  care  for  it  because  I  still  hope  to  meet  such  a  heavenly  creature,  who 
would  regenerate  and  purify  and  elevate  me.  But  you  don’t  understand 
that.’ 

‘Yes,  I  quite  understand,’  answered  Rostov,  who  was  very  much  under 
the  influence  of  his  new  friend. 

In  the  autumn  the  Rostov  family  returned  to  Moscow.  At  the  beginning 
of  the  winter  Denisov  too  came  back  and  stayed  again  with  the  Rostovs. 
The  early  part  of  the  winter  of  1806,  spent  by  Nikolay  Rostov  in  Moscow, 
was  one  of  the  happiest  and  liveliest  periods  for  him  and  all  the  family. 
Nikolay  brought  a  lot  of  young  men  about  him  into  his  parents’  house. 
Vera  was  a  handsome  girl  of  twenty;  Sonya,  a  girl  of  sixteen,  with  all 
the  charm  of  an  opening  flower;  Natasha,  half  grown  up,  half  a  child, 
at  one  time  childishly  absurd,  and  at  another  fascinating  with  the  charm 
of  a  young  girl. 

The  Rostovs’  house  was  at  that  time  full  of  a  sort  of  peculiar  atmosphere 
of  love-making,  as  commonly  happens  in  a  household  where  there  are 
very  young  and  very  charming  girls.  Among  those  young  girls’  faces, 
impressionable  and  always  smiling  (probably  at  thdr  own  happiness),  in 
that  whirl  of  eager  bustle,  amid  that  young  feminine  chatter,  so  incon¬ 
sequent,  but  so  friendly  to  every  one,  so  ready  for  anything,  so  full  of 
hope,  and  the  inconsequent  sound  of  singing  and  of  music,  any  young 
man  who  came  into  the  house  felt  the  same  sensation  of  readiness  to  fall 
in  love  and  longing  for  happiness,  that  the  younger  members  of  the 
Rostov  household  were  feeling  themselves. 

Among  the  young  men  Rostov  brought  to  the  house,  one  of  the  foremost 
was  Dolohov,  who  was  liked  by  every  one  in  the  house  except  Natasha. 
She  almost  had  a  quarrel  with  her  brother  over  Dolohov.  She  persisted 
that  he  was  a  spiteful  man;  that  in  the  duel  with  Bezuhov,  Pierre  had 
been  in  the  right  and  Dolohov  in  the  wrong,  and  that  he  was  horrid  and 
not  natural. 

‘I  know  nothing  about  it,  indeed,’  Natasha  would  cry  with  self-willed 
obstinacy;  ‘he’s  spiteful  and  heartless.  Your  Denisov  now,  you  see,  I  like; 
he’s  a  rake,  and  all  that,  but  still  I  like  him,  so  I  do  understand. 
I  don’t  know  how  to  tell  you;  with  him  everything  is  done  on  a  plan,  and 
I  don’t  like  that.  Denisov,  now  .  .  .’ 

‘Oh,  Denisov’s  another  matter,’  answered  Nikolay,  in  a  tone  that 
implied  that  in  comparison  with  Dolohov  even  Denisov  was  not  of  much 


WARANDPEACE  305 

account.  ‘One  must  understand  what  soul  there  is  in  that  Dolohov;  one 
must  see  him  with  his  mother;  such  a  noble  heart!’ 

‘I  know  nothing  about  that,  but  I  don’t  feel  at  home  with  him.  And 
do  you  know  he’s  falling  in  love  with  Sonya?’ 

‘What  nonsense!  ’ 

‘I  am  sure,  you  will  see  he  is.’ 

Natasha’s  prediction  was  fulfilled.  Dolohov,  who  did  not  as  a  rule 
care  for  ladies,  began  to  come  often  to  the  house;  and  the  question,  for 
whose  sake  he  came,  was  soon  (though  no  one  spoke  of  it)  decided — it 
was  on  Sonya’s  account.  And  though  Sonya  would  never  have  ventured  to 
say  so,  she  knew  it,  and  blushed  scarlet  every  time  Dolohov  made  his 
appearance. 

Dolohov  often  dined  at  the  Rostovs’,  never  missed  a  performance  at 
which  they  were  to  be  present,  and  attended  Iogel’s  balls  ‘for  the  boys 
and  girls,’  at  which  the  Rostovs  were  always  to  be  found.  He  showed 
marked  attention  to  Sonya,  and  looked  at  her  with  such  an  expression  in 
his  eyes  that  Sonya  could  not  bear  his  eyes  on  her  without  turning 
crimson,  and  even  the  old  countess  and  Natasha  blushed  when  they  saw 
that  look. 

It  was  evident  that  this  strong,  strange  man  could  not  shake  off  the 
impression  made  on  him  by  the  dark,  graceful  young  girl,  who  was  in 
love  with  another  man. 

Rostov  noticed  something  new  between  Dolohov  and  Sonya,  but  he 
did  not  define  to  himself  precisely  what  that  new  attitude  was.  ‘They  are 
all  in  love  with  some  one,’  he  thought  of  Sonya  and  Natasha.  But  he  did 
not  feel  quite  at  his  ease  as  before  with  Sonya  and  Dolohov,  and  he  began 
to  be  less  often  at  home. 

In  the  autumn  of  1806  every  one  was  beginning  to  talk  again  of  war 
with  Napoleon,  and  with  even  greater  fervour  than  in  the  previous  year. 
A  levy  was  decreed,  not  only  of  ten  recruits  for  active  service,  but  of  nine 
militiamen  for  the  reserve  as  well,  from  every  thousand  of  the  population. 
Everywhere  Bonaparte  was  anathematised,  and  the  only  thing  talked 
of  in  Moscow  was  the  impending  war.  To  the  Rostov  family  the  interest 
of  these  preparations  for  war  was  entirely  centered  in  the  fact  that 
Nikolushka  refused  to  remain  longer  in  Moscow,  and  was  only  waiting 
for  the  end  of  Denisov’s  leave  to  rejoin  his  regiment  with  him  after  the 
holidays.  His  approaching  departure,  far  from  hindering  him  from  en¬ 
joying  himself,  gave  an  added  zest  to  his  pleasures.  The  greater  part  of 
his  time  he  spent  away  from  home,  at  dinners,  parties,  and  balls. 


XI 

On  the  third  day  after  Christmas  Nikolay  dined  at  home,  which  he  had 
rarely  done  of  late.  This  was  a  farewell  dinner  in  Nikolay’s  honour,  as 
he  was  to  set  off  with  Denisov  after  the  baptism  festival  to  rejoin  his 


306  WAR  AND  PEACE 

regiment.  Twenty  persons  were  dining,  among  them  Dolohov  and 
Denisov. 

Never  had  the  love  in  the  air  of  the  Rostovs’  house,  never  had  the 
atmosphere  of  being  in  love,  made  itself  so  strongly  felt  as  during  those 
Christmas  holidays.  ‘Seize  the  moment  of  happiness,  love  and  be  loved! 
That  is  the  only  thing  real  in  the  world;  the  rest  is  all  nonsense.  And 
that  is  the  one  thing  we  are  interested  in  here,’  was  the  sentiment  that 
atmosphere  was  eloquent  of. 

After  exhausting  two  pairs  of  horses,  as  he  did  every  day  without  hav¬ 
ing  been  everywhere  he  ought  to  have  been,  and  everywhere  he  had  been 
invited,  Nikolay  reached  home  just  at  dinner-time.  As  soon  as  he  went 
in  he  felt  that  intense  atmosphere  of  love  in  the  house,  but  in  addition  to 
that  he  became  conscious  of  a  strange  embarrassment  that  seemed  to 
prevail  between  certain  persons  in  the  company.  Sonya  seemed  par¬ 
ticularly  disturbed,  so  did  Dolohov  and  the  old  countess,  and  in  a  lesser 
degree  Natasha.  Nikolay  saw  that  something  must  have  passed  before 
dinner  between  Sonya  and  Dolohov,  and  with  the  delicate  instinct  char¬ 
acteristic  of  him,  he  was  very  sympathetic  and  wary  with  both  of  them 
during  dinner.  On  that  evening  there  was  to  be  one  of  the  dances  given 
by  Iogel,  the  dancing-master,  during  the  holidays  to  his  pupils. 

‘Nikolenka,  are  you  going  to  Iogel’s?  Please,  do  go,’  said  Natasha;  ‘he 
particularly  begged  you  to,  and  Vassily  Dmitritch’  (this  was  Denisov) 

‘is  going.’ 

‘Where  would  I  not  go  at  the  countess’s  commands!’  said  Denisov, 
who  had  jestingly  taken  up  the  role  of  Natasha’s  knight  in  the  Rostov 
household.  ‘I  am  ready  to  dance  the  pas  de  chale.’ 

‘If  I  have  time!  I  promised  the  Arharovs;  they  have  a  party,’  said 
Nikolay. 

‘And  you?  .  .  .’  he  turned  to  Dolohov.  And  as  soon  as  he  had  asked 
the  question,  he  saw  that  he  should  not  have  asked  it. 

‘Yes,  possibly  .  .  .’  Dolohov  answered  coldly  and-  angrily,  glancing 
at  Sonya;  and  he  glanced  again,  scowling  at  Nikolay  with  exactly  the  ; 
same  look  with  which  he  had  looked  at  Pierre  at  the  club  dinner. 

‘There’s  something  wrong,’  thought  Nikolay;  and  he  was  still  more 
confirmed  in  that  surmise,  when  immediately  after  dinner  Dolohov  went 
away.  He  beckoned  Natasha,  and  asked  her  what  had  happened. 

‘I  was  looking  for  you,’  said  Natasha,  running  out  to  him.  ‘I  told  you 
so,  and  still  you  wouldn’t  believe  me,’  she  said  triumphantly;  ‘he  has 
made  Sonya  an  offer.’ 

Little  as  Nikolay  had  been  thinking  of  Sonya  of  late,  he  felt  as  if 
something  were  being  torn  from  him  when  he  heard  this.  Dolohov  was 
a  good,  and  in  some  respects  a  brilliant,  match  for  the  portionless  orphan 
Sonya.  From  the  point  of  view  of  the  countess  and  of  society  it  was  out  of  ( 
the  question  for  her  to  refuse  him.  Amd  so  Nikolay’s  first  feeling  when  he 
heard  of  it  was  one  of  exasperation  against  Sonya.  He  braced  himself  up 
to  say,  ‘And  a  capital  thing,  too;  of  course  she  must  forget  her  childish 


WAR  AND  PEACE  3°7 

promises  and  accept  the  offer’ ;  but  he  had  not  succeeded  in  saying  this 
when  Natasha  said: 

‘Only  fancy!  she  has  refused  him,  absolutely  refused  him!  She  says 
she  loves  some  one  else,’  she  added  after  a  brief  pause. 

‘Yes,  my  Sonya  could  not  do  otherwise!  ’  thought  Nikolay. 

‘Mamma  begged  her  ever  so  many  times  not  to,  but  she  refused;  and 
I  know  she  won’t  change,  if  she  has  said  a  thing.  .  . 

‘And  mamma  begged  her  not  to! ’  Nikolay  said  reproachfully. 

‘Yes,’  said  Natasha.  ‘Do  you  know,  Nikolenka — don’t  be  angry — but 
I  know  you  won’t  marry  her.  I  know — I  don’t  know  why — but  I  know 
for  certain  that  you  won’t  marry  her.’ 

‘Well,  you  can’t  know  that,’  said  Nikolay;  ‘but  I  want  to  talk  to  her. 
How  charming  Sonya  is!’  he  added,  smiling. 

‘Yes,  she  is  so  charming!  I’ll  send  her  in  to  you.’  And  Natasha  kissed 
her  brother  and  ran  away. 

A  minute  later  Sonya  came  in,  looking  frightened,  distraught,  and 
guilty.  Nikolay  went  up  to  her  and  kissed  her  hand.  It  was  the  first  time 
since  his  return  that  they  had  talked  alone  and  of  their  love. 

‘Sophie,’  he  said  to  her,  at  first  timidly,  but  more  and  more  boldly 
as  he  went  on,  ‘if  you  were  simply  refusing  a  brilliant,  an  advantageous 
match — but  he’s  a  splendid,  noble  fellow  .  .  .  he’s  my  friend  .  .  .’ 

Sonya  interrupted  him. 

‘I  have  refused  him,’  she  said  hastily. 

‘If  you  are  refusing  him  for  my  sake,  I  am  afraid  that  I  .  .  .’ 

Sonya  again  cut  him  short.  With  frightened,  imploring  eyes  she  looked 
at  him. 

‘Nikolenka,  don’t  say  that  to  me,’  she  said. 

‘No,  I  must.  Perhaps  it’s  suffisance  on  my  part,  but  still  it’s  better  to 
say  it.  If  you  are  refusing  him  on  my  account,  I  ought  to  tell  you  the 
whole  truth.  I  love  you,  I  believe,  more  than  any  one  .  .  .’ 

‘That’s  enough  for  me,’  said  Sonya,  flushing  crimson. 

‘No;  but  I  have  been  in  love  a  thousand  times,  and  I  shall  fall  in  love 
again,  though  such  a  feeling  of  affection,  confidence  and  love  I  have  for 
no  one  as  for  you.  Then  I  am  young.  Mamma  does  not  wish  it.  Well — in 
fact — I  can  make  no  promise.  And  I  beg  you  to  consider  the  offer  of 
Dolohov,’  he  said,  with  an  effort  articulating  the  name  of  his  friend. 

‘Don’t  speak  to  me  of  it.  I  want  nothing.  I  love  you  as  a  brother,  and 
shall  always  love  you,  and  I  want  nothing  more.’ 

‘You  are  an  angel;  I’m  not  wrorthy  of  you,  but  I  am  only  afraid  of 
deceiving  you.’ 

Nikolay  kissed  her  hand  once  more. 


XII 

Ioc.el’s  were  the  most  enjoyable  balls  in  Moscow.  So  the  mammas  said 
as  they  looked  at  their  boys  and  girls  executing  the  steps  they  had  only 


3oS  WAR  AND  PEACE 

lately  learnt.  So  too  said  the  boys  and  girls  themselves,  who  danced  till 
they  were  ready  to  drop ;  so  too  said  the  grown-up  girls  and  young  men, 
who  came  to  those  dances  in  a  spirit  of  condescension,  and  found  in  them 
the  greatest  enjoyment.  That  year  two  matches  had  been  made  at  those 
dances.  The  two  pretty  young  princesses  Gortchakov  had  found  suitors 
there,  and  had  been  married,  and  this  had  given  the  dances  even  greater 
vogue  than  before.  What  distinguished  these  dances  from  others  was  the 
absence  of  host  and  hostess,  and  the  presence  of  the  good-humoured 
Iogel,  who  had  sold  tickets  for  lessons  to  all  his  guests,  and  fluttered  about 
like  a  feather,  bowing  and  scraping  in  accordance  with  the  rules  of  his 
art.  Another  point  of  difference,  too,  was  that  none  came  to  these  dances 
but  those  who  really  wanted  to  dance  and  enjoy  themselves,  in  the  way 
that  girls  of  thirteen  and  fourteen  do,  putting  on  long  dresses  for  the 
first  time.  All  with  rare  exceptions  were  or  looked  pretty,  so  ecstatically 
they  smiled  and  so  rapturously  their  eyes  sparkled.  The  pas  de  chale 
even  was  sometimes  danced  by  the  best  pupils,  among  whom  Natasha  was 
the  best  of  all,  and  conspicuous  for  her  gracefulness.  But  at  this  last  ball 
they  only  danced  ecossaises,  anglaises,  and  a  mazurka  that  was  just 
coming  into  fashion.  A  great  hall  had  been  taken  by  Iogel  in  the  house 
of  Bezuhov,  and  the  ball,  as  every  one  said,  was  a  great  success.  There 
were  many  pretty  girls,  and  the  Rostov  girls  were  among  the  prettiest. 
They  were  both  particularly  happy  and  gay.  That  evening  Sonya,  elated 
by  Dolohov’s  offer,  her  refusal,  and  her  interview  with  Nikolay,  had 
kept  whirling  round  at  home,  not  letting  her  maid  have  a  chance  of  doing 
her  hair,  and  now  at  the  dance  she  was  transparently  radiant  with  im¬ 
pulsive  happiness. 

Natasha,  no  less  elated  at  being  for  the  first  time  at  a  real  ball  in  a 
long  skirt,  was  even  happier.  Both  the  girls  wore  white  muslin  dresses 
with  pink  ribbons. 

Natasha  fell  in  love  the  moment  she  walked  into  the  ballroom.  She  was 
not  in  love  with  any  one  in  particular,  but  in  love  with  every  one. 
Whomever  she  looked  at,  for  the  moment  that  she  was  looking  at  him, 
she  was  in  love  with. 

‘Oh,  how  nice  it  is!’  she  kept  saying,  running  up  to  Sonya. 

Nikolay  and  Denisov  walked  about  the  room  and  looked  with  friendly 
patronage  at  the  dancers. 

‘How  sweet  she  is;  she  will  be  a  beauty,’  said  Denisov. 

‘Who?’ 

‘Countess  Natasha,’  answered  Denisov. 

‘And  how  she  dances;  what  grace!’  he  said  again,  after  a  short  pause. 

‘Of  whom  are  you  speaking?’ 

‘Why,  of  your  sister,’  cried  Denisov  angrily. 

Rostov  laughed. 

‘My  dear  count,  you  are  one  of  my  best  pupils,  you  must  dance,’  said 
little  Iogel,  coming  up  to  Nikolay.  ‘Look  at  all  these  pretty  young  ladies!  ’ 
He  turned  with  the  same  request  to  Denisov,  who  had  also  at  one  time 
been  his  pupil. 


WARANDPEACE  309 

‘No,  my  dear  fellow,  I  will  be  a  wallflower,’  said  Denisov.  ‘Don’t  you 
remember  how  little  credit  I  did  to  your  teaching?’ 

‘Oh  no!’  said  Iogel,  hastening  to  reassure  him.  ‘You  were  only  inat¬ 
tentive,  but  you  had  talent,  you  had  talent.’ 

They  began  to  play  the  new  mazurka.  Nikolay  could  not  refuse  Iogel, 
and  asked  Sonya  to  dance.  Denisov  sat  down  by  the  elderly  ladies,  and 
leaning  his  elbow  on  his  sword,  and  beating  time  with  his  foot,  he  began 
telling  something  amusing  and  making  the  old  ladies  laugh,  while  he 
watched  the  young  ones  dancing.  Iogel  was  dancing  in  the  first  couple 
with  Natasha,  his  best  pupil  and  his  pride.  With  soft  and  delicate  move¬ 
ments  of  his  little  slippered  feet,  Iogel  first  flew  across  the  room  with 
Natasha— shy,  but  conscientiously  executing  her  steps.  Denisov  did  not 
take  his  eyes  off  her,  and  beat  time  with  his  sword  with  an  air  that  be¬ 
trayed,  that  if  he  were  not  dancing  it  was  because  he  would  not,  and  not 
because  he  could  not,  dance.  In  the  middle  of  a  figure  he  beckoned 
Rostov  to  him. 

‘That’s  not  the  right  thing  a  bit,’  he  said.  ‘Is  that  the  Polish  mazurka? 
But  she  does  dance  splendidly.’ 

Knowing  that  Denisov  had  been  renowned  even  in  Poland  for  his  fine 
dancing  of  the  Polish  mazurka,  Nikolay  ran  up  to  Natasha. 

‘Go  and  choose  Denisov.  He  does  dance.  It’s  a  marvel!  ’  he  said. 

When  it  was  Natasha’s  turn  again,  she  got  up,  and  tripping  rapidly 
in  her  ribbon-trimmed  dancing-shoes,  she  timidly  ran  alone  across  the 
room  to  the  corner  where  Denisov  was  sitting.  She  saw  that  every  one 
was  looking  at  her,  waiting  to  see  what  she  would  do.  Nikolay  saw  that 
Denisov  and  Natasha  were  carrying  on  a  smiling  dispute,  and  that  Denisov 
was  refusing,  though  his  face  wore  a  delighted  smile.  He  ran  up. 

‘Please  do,  Vassily  Dmitritch,’  Natasha  was  saying;  ‘come  please.’ 

‘Oh,  have  mercy  on  me,  countess,’  Denisov  was  saying  jocosely. 

‘Come  now,  nonsense,  Vaska,’  said  Nikolay. 

‘They  coax  me  like  the  pussy-cat  Vaska,’  said  Denisov  good- 
humouredly. 

‘I’ll  sing  to  you  a  whole  evening,’  said  Natasha. 

‘The  little  witch,  she  can  do  anything  with  me!’  said  Denisov;  and  he 
unhooked  his  sword.  He  came  out  from  behind  the  chairs,  clasped  his 
partner  firmly  by  the  hand,  raised  his  head  and  stood  with  one  foot 
behind  the  other,  waiting  for  the  time.  It  was  only  on  horseback  and  in 
the  mazurka  that  Denisov’s  low  stature  was  not  noticeable,  and  that  he 
looked  the  dashing  hero  he  felt  himself  to  be.  At  the  right  bar  in  the  time 
he  glanced  sideways  with  ■&  triumphant  and  amused  air  at  his  partner, 
and  making  an  unexpected  tap  with  one  foot  he  bounded  springily  like  a 
ball  from  the  floor  and  flew  round,  whirling  his  partner  round  with  him. 
He  flew  inaudibly  across  the  hall  with  one  leg  forward,  and  seemed  not 
to  see  the  chairs  standing  before  him,  darting  straight  at  them;  but  all  at 
l  once  with  a  clink  of  his  spurs  and  a  flourish  of  his  foot  he  stopped  short 
■,on  his  heels,  stood  so  a  second,  with  a  clanking  of  spurs  stamped  with 
both  feet,  whirled  rapidly  round,  and  clapping  the  left  foot  against  the 


3io 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

right,  again  he  flew  round.  Natasha’s  instinct  told  her  what  he  was  going 
to  do,  and  without  herself  knowing  how  she  did  it,  she  followed  his  lead, 
abandoning  herself  to  him.  At  one  moment  he  spun  her  round,  first  on  his 
right  arm,  then  on  his  left  arm,  then  falling  on  one  knee,  twirled  her  round 
him  and  again  galloped,  dashing  forward  with  such  vehemence  that  he 
seemed  to  intend  to  race  through  the  whole  suite  of  rooms  without  taking 
breath.  Then  he  stopped  suddenly  again  and  executed  new  and  unex¬ 
pected  steps  in  the  dance.  When  after  spinning  his  partner  round  before 
her  seat  he  drew  up  smartly  with  a  clink  of  his  spurs,  bowing  to  her, 
Natasha  did  not  even  make  him  a  curtsey.  She  looked  at  him  smiling 
with  a  puzzled  face,  as  th’ough  she  did  not  recognise  him. 

‘What  does  it  mean?’  she  said. 

Although  Iogel -would  not  acknowledge  this  mazurka  as  the  real  one, 
every  one  v/as  enchanted  with  Denisov’s  dancing  of  it,  and  he  was  con¬ 
tinually  being  chosen  as  partner;  while  the  old  gentlemen,  smiling, 
talked  about  Poland  and  the  good  old  days.  Denisov,  flushed  with  his 
exertions  and  mopping  his  face  with  his  handkerchief,  sat  by  Natasha 
and  would  not  leave  her  side  all  the  rest  of  the  ball. 


XIII 


For  two  days  after  the  dance,  Rostov  had  not  seen  Dolohov  at  his 
people’s  house  nor  found  him  at  home;  on  the  third  day  he  received  a 
note  from  him. 

‘As  I  do  not  intend  to  be  at  your  house  again  owing  to  causes  of  which 
you  are  aware,  and  am  going  to  rejoin  the  regiment,  I  am  giving  a  fare¬ 
well  supper  to  my  friends — come  to  the  English  Hotel.’  On  the  day 
fixed  Rostov  went  at  about  ten  o’clock,  from  the  theatre  where  he  had 
been  with  his  family  and  Denisov,  to  the  English  Hotel.  He  was  at  once 
conducted  to  the  best  room  in  the  hotel,  which  Dolohov  had  taken  for 
the  occasion. 

Some  twenty  men  were  gathered  about  a  table  before  which  Dolohov 
was  sitting  between  two  candles.  On  the  table  lay  money  and  notes,  and 
Dolohov  was  keeping  the  bank.  Nikolay  had  not  seen  him  again  since 
his  offer  and  Sonya’s  refusal,  and  he  felt  uneasy  at  the  thought  of 
meeting  him. 

Dolohov’s  clear,  cold  glance  met  Rostov  in  the  doorway  as  though  he 
had  been  expecting  him  a  long  while. 

‘It’s  a  long  while  since  we’ve  met,’  said  he;  ‘thanks  for  coming.  I’ll  just 
finish  dealing  here,  and  Ilyushka  will  make  his  appearance  with  his 
chorus.’ 

‘I  did  go  to  see  you,’  said  Rostov,  flushing. 

Dolohov  made  him  no  reply. 

‘You  might  put  down  a  stake,’  he  said. 

Rostov  recalled  at  that  instant  a  strange  conversation  he  once  had 
with  Dolohov.  ‘None  but  fools  trust  to  luck  in  play,’  Dolohov  had  said 


WARANDPEACE  311 

then.  ‘Or  are  you  afraid  to  play  with  me?’  Dolohov  said  now,  as  though 
divining  Rostov’s  thought;  and  he  smiled.  Behind  his  smile  Rostov  saw 
in  him  that  mood  which  he  had  seen  in  him  at  the  club  dinner  and  at 
other  times,  when  Dolohov  seemed,  as  it  were,  weary  of  the  monotony  of 
daily  life,  and  felt  a  craving  to  escape  from  it  by  some  strange,  for  the 
most  part  cruel,  act. 

Rostov  felt  ill  at  ease;  he  racked  his  brain  and  could  not  find  in  it  a 
joke  in  which  to  reply  to  Dolohov’s  words.  But  before  h?  had  time  to  do 
so,  Dolohov,  looking  straight  into  Rostov’s  face,  said  to  him  slowly  and 
deliberately  so  that  all  could  hear:  ‘Do  you  remember,  I  was  talking  to 
you  about  play  .  .  .  he’s  a  fool  who  trusts  to  luck  in  play;  one  must  play 
a  sure  game,  and  I  want  to  try.’ 

‘Try  his  luck;  or  try  to  play  a  sure  game?’  wondered  Rostov. 

‘Indeed,  and  you’d  better  not  play,’  he  added;  and  throwing  down  a 
pack  he  had  just  torn  open,  he  said,  ‘Bank,  gentlemen!’ 

Moving  the  money  forward,  Dolohov  began  dealing. 

Rostov  sat  near  him,  and  at  first  he  did  not  play.  Dolohov  glanced 
at  him. 

‘Why  don’t  you  play?’  said  Dolohov.  And  strange  to  say,  Nikolay 
felt  that  he  could  not  help  taking  up  a  card,  staking  a  trifling  sum  on  it, 
and  beginning  to  play. 

‘I  have  no  money  with  me,’  said  Rostov. 

‘I’ll  trust  you!’ 

Rostov  staked  five  roubles  on  a  card  and  lost  it,  staked  again  and 
again  lost.  Dolohov  ‘killed,’  that  is,  beat  ten  cards  in  succession  from 
Rostov. 

‘Gentlemen,’  he  said,  after  dealing  again  for  a  little  while,  ‘I  beg  you  to 
put  the  money  on  the  cards  or  else  I  shall  get  muddled  over  the  reckoning.’ 

One  of  the  players  said  that  he  hoped  he  could  trust  him. 

‘I  can  trust  you,  but  I’m  afraid  of  making  mistakes;  I  beg  you  to  lay 
the  money  on  the  cards,’  answered  Dolohov.  ‘You  needn’t  worry,  we’ll 
settle  our  accounts,’  he  added  to  Rostov. 

The  play  went  on;  a  footman  never  ceased  carrying  round  champagne. 

All  Rostov’s  cards  were  beaten,  and  the  sum  of  eight  hundred  roubles 
was  scored  against  him.  He  wrote  on  a  card  eight  hundred  roubles,  but 
while  champagne  was  being  poured  out  for  him,  he  changed  his  mind 
and  again  wrote  down  the  usual  stake,  twenty  roubles. 

‘Leave  it,’  said  Dolohov,  though  he  did  not  seem  to  be  looking  at 
Rostov;  ‘you’ll  win  it  back  all  the  sooner.  I  lose  to  the  rest,  while  I  win 
from  you.  Or  perhaps  you  are  afraid  of  me,’  he  repeated. 

Rostov  excused  himself,  left  the  stake  of  eight  hundred  and  laid  down 
the  seven  of  hearts,  a  card  with  a  corner  torn,  which  he  had  picked  up 
from  the  ground.  Well  he  remembered  that  card  afterwards.  He  laid 
down  the  seven  of  hearts,  wrote  on  it  with  a  broken  piece  of  chalk  800 
in  bold  round  figures;  he  drank  the  glass  of  warmed  champagne  that  had 
been  given  him,  smiled  at  Dolohov’s  words,  and  with  a  sinking  at  his 
heart,  waiting  for  the  seven  of  hearts,  he  watched  Dolohov’s  hands  that 


312  WAR  AND  PEACE 

held  the  pack.  The  loss  or  gain  of  that  card  meant  a  great  deal  for  Rostov. 
On  the  previous  Sunday  Count  Ilya  Andreitch  had  given  his  son  two 
thousand  roubles,  and  though  he  never  liked  speaking  of  money  diffi¬ 
culties,  he  told  him  that  this  money  was  the  last  they  would  get  till  May, 
and  so  he  begged  him  to  be  a  little  more  careful.  Nikolay  said  that  that 
was  too  much  really  for  him,  and  that  he  would  give  him  his  word  of 
honour  not  to  come  for  more  before  May.  Now  there  was  only  twelve 
hundred  out  of  that  two  thousand  left.  So  that  on  the  seven  of  hearts 
there  hung  not  merely  the  loss  of  sixteen  hundred  roubles,  but  the  conse¬ 
quent  inevitable  betrayal  of  his  word.  With  a  sinking  heart  he  watched 
Dolohov’s  hands  and  thought:  ‘Well,  make  haste  and  deal  me  that  card, 
and  I’ll  take  my  cap  and  drive  home  to  supper  with  Denisov,  Natasha, 
and  Sonya,  and  I’m  sure  I’ll  never  take  a  card  in  my  hand  again.’  At  that 
moment  his  home  life,  his  jokes  with  Petya,  his  talks  with  Sonya,  his 
duets  with  Natasha,  his  game  of  picquet  with  his  father,  even  his  com¬ 
fortable  bed  in  the  house  in  Povarsky,  rose  before  his  imagination  with 
such  vividness,  such  brightness,  and  such  charm,  that  it  seemed  as  though 
it  were  all  some  long  past,  lost,  and  hitherto  unappreciated  happiness. 
He  could  not  conceive  that  a  stupid  chance,  leading  the  seven  to  the 
right  rather  than  to  the  left,  could  deprive  him  of  all  that  happiness  felt 
now  with  new  comprehension  and  seen  in  a  new  radiance,  could  hurl  him 
into  the  abyss  of  unknown  and  undefined  misery.  It  could  not  be;  but 
yet  it  was  with  a  thrill  of  dread  that  he  waited  for  the  movement  of 
Dolohov’s  hands.  Those  broad-boned,  reddish  hands,  with  hairs  visible 
under  the  shirt-cuffs,  laid  down  the  pack  of  cards  and  took  up  the  glass 
and  pipe  that  had  been  handed  him. 

‘So  you’re  not  afraid  to  play  with  me?’  repeated  Dolohov;  and  as 
though  he  were  about  to  tell  a  good  story,  he  laid  down  the  cards,  leaned 
back  in  his  chair,  and  began  deliberately  with  a  smile: 

‘Yes,  gentlemen,  I  have  been  told  there’s  a  story  going  about  Moscow 
that  I’m  too  sharp  with  cards,  so  I  advise  you  to  be  a  little  on  your 
guard  with  me.’ 

‘Come,  deal  away!’  said  Rostov. 

‘Ugh,  these  Moscow  gossips!’  said  Dolohov,  and  he  took  up  the  cards 
with  a  smile. 

‘Aaah!  ’  Rostov  almost  screamed,  putting  both  his  hands  up  to  his  hair. 
The  seven  he  needed  was  lying  uppermost,  the  first  card  in  the  pack.  He 
had  lost  more  than  he  could  pay. 

‘Don’t  swim  beyond  your  depth,  though,’  said  Dolohov,  with  a  passing 
glance  at  Rostov,  and  he  went  on. 


XIV 

Within  an  hour  and  a  half  the  greater  number  of  the  players  were  no 
longer  seriously  interested  in  their  own  play. 

The  whole  interest  of  the  game  was  concentrated  on  Rostov.  Instead 


WARANDPEACE  313 

of  a  mere  loss  of  sixteen  hundred  roubles  he  had  by  now  scored  against 
him  a  long  column  of  figures,  which  he  had  added  up  to  the  tenth  thou¬ 
sand,  though  he  vaguely  supposed  that  by  now  it  had  risen  to  fifteen 
thousand.  In  reality  the  score  already  exceeded  twenty  thousand  roubles. 
Dolohov  was  not  now  listening  to  stories,  or  telling  them,  he  followed 
every  movement  of  Rostov’s  hands,  and  from  time  to  time  took  a  cursory 
survey  of  his  score  with  him.  He  had  resolved  to  keep  the  play  up  till  that 
score  had  reached  forty-three  thousand.  He  had  fixed  on  that  number 
because  it  represented  the  sum  of  his  and  Sonya’s  ages.  Rostov  sat  with 
his  head  propped  in  both  hands,  before  the  wine-stained  table  scrawled 
over  with  scorings  and  littered  with  cards.  One  torturing  sensation  never 
left  him ;  those  broad-boned,  reddish  hands,  with  the  hairs  visible  under 
the  shirt-cuffs,  those  hands  which  he  loved  and  hated,  held  him  in  their 
power. 

‘Six  hundred  roubles,  ace,  corner,  nine;  winning  it  back’s  out  of  the 
question!  .  .  .  And  how  happy  I  should  be  at  home.  .  .  .  The  knave, 
double  or  quits,  it  can’t  be!  .  .  .  And  why  is  he  doing  this  to  me?  .  .  .’ 
Rostov  pondered  and  thought.  Sometimes  he  put  a  higher  stake  on  a 
card;  but  Dolohov  refused  it  and  fixed  the  stake  himself.  Nikolay  sub¬ 
mitted  to  him,  and  at  one  moment  he  was  praying  to  God,  as  he  had 
prayed  under  fire  on  the  bridge  of  Amschteten;  at  the  next  he  tried  his 
fortune  on  the  chance  that  the  card  that  he  would  first  pick  up  among 
the  heap  of  crumpled  ones  under  the  table  would  save  him;  then  he 
reckoned  up  the  rows  of  braidings  on  his  coat,  and  tried  staking  the 
whole  amount  of  his  losses  on  a  card  of  that  number,  then  he  looked 
round  for  help  to  the  others  playing,  or  stared  into  Dolohov’s  face,  which 
looked  quite  cold  now,  and  tried  to  penetrate  into  what  was  passing 
within  him. 

‘He  knows,  of  course,  what  this  loss  means  to  me.  Surely  he  can’t  want 
me  to  be  ruined?  Why,  he  was  my  friend.  I  loved  him.  .  .  .  But,  indeed, 
it’s  not  his  fault;  what’s  he  to  do,  if  he  has  all  the  luck?  And  it’s  not 
my  fault,’  he  kept  saying  to  himself.  ‘I  have  done  nothing  wrong.  I 
haven’t  murdered  or  hurt  any  one,  or  wished  any  one  harm,  have  I? 
What  is  this  awful  calamity  for?  And  when  did  it  begin?  Such  a  little 
while  ago  I  came  to  this  table  with  the  idea  of  winning  a  hundred  roubles, 
and  buying  mamma  that  little  casket  for  her  name-day,  and  going 
home.  I  was  so  happy,  so  free,  so  light-hearted.  And  I  didn’t  even  know 
then  how  happy  I  was.  When  did  all  that  end,  and  when  did  this  new 
awful  state  of  things  begin?  What  was  the  outward  token  of  that  change? 
I  still  went  on  sitting  in  the  same  place  at  this  table,  and  in  the  same  way 
picking  out  cards  and  putting  them  forward,  and  watching  those  deft, 
broad-boned  hands.  When  did  it  come  to  pass,  and  what  has  come  to 
pass?  I  am  strong  and  well,  and  still  the  same,  and  still  in  the  same  place. 
No;  it  cannot  be.  It  will  all  be  sure  to  end  in  nothing.’ 

He  was  all  red  and  in  a  sweat  though  the  room  was  not  hot.  And  his 
face  was  painful  and  piteous  to  see,  particularly  from  its  helpless  efforts 
to  seem  calm. 


314  WARANDPEACE 

The  score  reached  the  fateful  number  of  forty-three  thousand  roubles. 
Rostov  already  had  the  card  ready  which  he  meant  to  stake  for  double 
or  quits  on  the  three  thousand,  that  had  just  been  put  down  to  his  score, 
when  Dolohov  slapped  the  pack  of  cards  down  on  the  table,  pushed  it 
away,  and  taking  the  chalk  began  rapidly  in  his  clear,  strong  hand,  writ¬ 
ing  down  the  total  of  Rostov’s  losses,  breaking  the  chalk  as  he  did  so. 

‘Supper,  supper-time.  And  here  are  the  gypsies.’  And  some  swarthy 
men  and  women  did  in  fact  come  in  from  the  cold  outside,  saying  some¬ 
thing  with  their  gypsy  accent.  Nikolay  grasped  that  it  was  all  over;  but 
he  said  in  an  indifferent  voice: 

‘What,  won’t  you  go  on?  And  I  have  such  a  nice  little  card  all  ready.’ 
As  though  what  chiefly  interested  him  was  the  game  itself. 

‘It’s  all  over,  I’m  done  for,’  he  thought.  ‘Now  a  bullet  through  the 
head’s  the  only  thing  left  for  me,’  and  at  the  same  time  he  was  saying  in 
a  cheerful  voice: 

‘Come,  just  one  more  card.’ 

‘Very  good,’  answered  Dolohov,  finishing  his  addition.  ‘Very  good. 
Twenty-one  roubles  .  .  .  done,’  he  said,  pointing  to  the  figure  21,  over 
and  above  the  round  sum  of  forty-three  thousand,  and  taking  a  pack, 
he  made  ready  to  deal,  Rostov  submissively  turned  down  the  corner,  and 
instead  of  the  8000  he  had  meant  to  write,  noted  down  21. 

‘It’s  all  the  same  to  me,’  he  said;  ‘only  it’s  interesting  to  me  to  know 
whether  you  will  win  on  that  ten  or  let  me  have  it.’ 

Dolohov  began  seriously  dealing.  Oh,  how  Rostov  hated  at  that 
moment  those  reddish  hands,  with  their  short  fingers  and  the  hairs  visible 
under  the  shirt  sleeves,  those  hands  that  held  him  in  their  clutches.  .  .  . 
The  ten  was  not  beaten.  Forty-three  thousand  to  your  score,  count,’  said 
Dolohov,  and  he  got  up  from  the  table  stretching.  ‘One  does  get  tired 
sitting  so  long,’  he  said. 

‘Yes,  I’m  tired  too,’  said  Rostov. 

Dolohov  cut  him  short,  as  though  to  warn  him  it  was  not  for  him  to 
take  a  light  tone. 

‘When  am  I  to  receive  the  money,  count?’ 

Rostov  flushing  hotly  drew  Dolohov  away  into  the  other  room. 

‘I  can’t  pay  it  all  at  once,  you  must  take  an  I.O.U.,’  said  he. 

‘Listen,  Rostov,’  said  Dolohov,  smiling  brightly,  and  looking  straight 
into  Nikolay’s  eyes,  ‘you  know  the  saying:  “Lucky  in  love,  unlucky  at 
cards.”  You*-  cousin  is  in  love  with  you.  I  know  it.’ 

‘Oh!  this  is  awful  to  feel  oneself  in  this  man’s  power  like  this,’  thought 
Rostov.  He  knew  the  shock  the  news  of  this  loss  would  be  to  his  father 
and  mother;  he  knew  what  happiness  it  would  be  to  be  free  of  it  all,  and 
felt  that  Dolohov  knew  that  he  could  set  him  free  from  this  shame  and 
grief,  and  wanted  now  to  play  cat  and  mouse  with  him. 

‘Your  cousin  .  .  .’  Dolohov  would  have  said,  but  Nikolay  cut  him 
short. 

‘My  cousin  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  matter,  and  there  is  no  need  to 
mention  her!’  he  cried,  with  furv. 


WARANDPEACE  3*5 

‘Then,  when  am  I  to  receive  it?’  asked  Dolohov. 

‘To-morrow,’  said  Rostov,  and  went  out  of  the  room. 


XV 

To  say  ‘to-morrow,’  and  maintain  the  right  tone  was  not  difficult;  but  to 
arrive  home  alone,  to  see  his  sisters  and  brother,  his  mother  and  father, 
to  confess  and  beg  for  money  to  which  he  had  no  right  after  giving  his 
word  of  honour,  was  terrible. 

At  home  they  had  not  yet  gone  to  bed.  The  younger  members  of  the 
family  after  coming  home  from  the  theatre  had  had  supper,  and  were 
now  in  a  group  about  the  clavichord.  As  soon  as  Nikolay  entered  the  hall, 
he  felt  himself  enfolded  in  the  poetic  atmosphere  of  love  which  domi¬ 
nated  their  household  that  winter;  and  now,  since  Dolohov’s  proposal 
and  Iogel’s  ball,  seemed  to  have  grown  thicker  about  Sonya  and  Natasha, 
like  the  sir  before  a  storm.  Sonya  and  Natasha,  wearing  the  light  blue 
dresses  they  had  put  on  for  the  theatre,  stood  at  the  clavichord,  pretty, 
and  conscious  of  being  so,  happy  and  smiling.  Vera  was  playing  draughts 
with  Shinshin  in  the  drawing-room.  The  old  countess,  waiting  for  her  son 
and  her  husband  to  come  in,  was  playing  patience  writh  an  old  gentle¬ 
woman,  whfl  was  one  of  their  household.  Denisov,  with  shining  eyes  and 
ruffled  hair,  was  sitting  with  one  leg  behind  him  at  the  clavichord.  He  was 
striking  chords  with  his  short  fingers,  and  rolling  his  eyes,  as  he  sang  in 
his  small,  husky,  but  true  voice  a  poem  of  his  own  composition,  ‘The 
Enchantress,’  to  which  he  was  trying  to  fit  music. 

‘Enchantress,  say  what  hidden  fire 
Draws  me  to  my  forsaken  lyre? 

What  rapture  thrills  my  fingers  slow, 

What  passion  sets  my  heart  aglow?' 

he  sang  in  his  passionate  voice,  his  black,  agate  eyes  gleaming  at  the 
frightened  and  delighted  Natasha. 

‘Splendid,  capital!’  Natasha  cried.  ‘Another  couplet,’  she  said,  not 
noticing  Nikolay. 

‘Everything’s  just  the  same  with  them,’  thought  Nikolay,  peeping  into 
the  drawing-room,  where  he  saw  Vera  and  his  mother  and  the  old  lady 
playing  patience  with  her. 

‘Ah,  and  here’s  Nikolenka.’  Natasha  ran  up  to  him.  ‘Is  papa  at  home?’ 
he  asked. 

‘How  glad  I  am  that  you  have  come,’  said  Natasha,  not  answering  his 
question,  ‘we  are  having  such  fun.  Vassily  Dmitritch  is  staying  a  day 
longer  for  me,  do  you  know?’ 

‘No,  papa  has  not  come  in  yet,’  answered  Sonya. 

‘Kolya,  you  there?  Come  to  me,  darling,’  said  the  voice  of  the  countess 
from  the  drawing-room.  Nikolay  went  up  to  his  mother,  kissed  her  hand, 
and  sitting  down  by  her  table,  began  silently  watching  her  hands  as  they 


316  WARANDPEACE 

dealt  the  cards.  From  the  hall  he  kept  hearing  the  sound  of  laughter  and 
merry  voices,  persuading  Natasha  to  do  something. 

‘Oh,  very  well,  very  well!’  Denisov  cried;  ‘now  it’s  no  use  crying  off, 
it’s  your  turn  to  sing  the  barcarolle,  I  entreat  you.’ 

The  countess  looked  round  at  her  silent  son. 

‘What’s  the  matter?’  his  mother  asked  Nikolay. 

‘Oh,  nothing,’  he  said,  as  though  sick  of  being  continually  asked  the 
same  question:  ‘Will  papa  soon  be  in?’ 

‘I  expect  so.’ 

‘Everything’s  the  same  with  them.  They  know  nothing  about  it.  What 
am  I  to  do  with  myself?’  thought  Nikolay,  and  he  went  back  to  the  hall, 
where  the  clavichord  was. 

Sonya  was  sitting  at  the  clavichord,  playing  the  prelude  of  the  barcarolle 
that  Denisov  particularly  liked.  Natasha  was  preparing  to  sing.  Denisov 
was  watching  her  with  impassioned  eyes. 

Nikolay  began  walking  to  and  fro  in  the  room. 

‘What  can  induce  her  to  want  to  sing?  What  can  she  sing?  And  there’s 
nothing  to  be  so  happy  about  in  it,’  thought  Nikolay. 

Sonya  struck  the  first  chord  of  the  prelude.  ‘My  God,  I’m  ruined, 
I'm  a  dishonoured  man.  Bullet  through  my  head,  that’s  the  only  thing 
left  for  me,  and  not  singing,’  he  thought.  ‘Go  away?  But  where?  It 
makes  no  difference,  let  them  sing.’ 

Still  walking  about  the  room,  Nikolay  glanced  gloomily  at  Denisov 
and  the  girls,  avoiding  their  eyes. 

‘Nikolenka,  what’s  the  matter?’  Sonya’s  eyes  asked,  looking  intently 
at  him.  She  saw  at  once  that  something  had  happened  to  him. 

Nikolay  turned  away  from  her.  Natasha,  too,  with  her  quick  instinct 
instantly  detected  her  brother’s  state  of  mind.  She  noticed  him,  but  she 
was  herself  in  such  high  spirits  at  that  moment,  she  was  so  far  from  sorrow, 
from  sadness,  from  reproaches,  that  purposely  she  deceived  herself  (as 
young  people  so  often  do).  ‘No,  I’m  too  happy  just  now  to  spoil  my 
enjoyment  by  sympathy  with  any  one’s  sorrow,’  she  felt,  and  she  said  to 
herself:  ‘No,  I’m  most  likely  mistaken,  he  must  be  happy,  just  as  I  am.’ 

‘Come,  Sonya,’  she  said,  walking  into  the  very  middle  of  the  room, 
where  to  her  mind  the  resonance  was  best  of  all.  Holding  her  head  up, 
letting  her  arms  hang  lifelessly  as  dancers  do,  Natasha,  with  a  vigorous 
turn  from  her  heel  on  to  her  toe,  walked  over  to  the  middle  of  the  room 
and  stood  still. 

‘Behold  me,  here  I  am!  ’  she  seemed  to  say,  in  response  to  the  enthusi¬ 
astic  gaze  with  which  Denisov  followed  her.  ‘And  what  can  she  find  to 
be  so  pleased  at!  ’  Nikolay  wondered,  looking  at  his  sister.  ‘How  is  it  she 
isn’t  feeling  dull  and  ashamed!’  Natasha  took  the  first  note,  her  throat 
swelled,  her  bosom  heaved,  a  serious  expression  came  into  her  face.  She 
was  thinking  of  no  one  and  of  nothing  at  that  moment,  and  from  her 
smiling  mouth  poured  forth  notes,  those  notes  that  any  one  can  produce 
at  the  same  intervals,  and  hold  for  the  same  length  of  time,  yet  a  thou- 


WAR  AND  PEACE  317 

sand  times  they  leave  us  cold,  and  the  thousand  and  first  time  they  set 
us  thrilling  and  weeping. 

Natasha  had  for  the  first  time  begun  that  winter  to  take  singing  seri¬ 
ously,  especially  since  Denisov  had  been  so  enthusiastic  over  her  singing. 
She  did  not  now  sing  like  a  child ;  there  was  not  now  in  her  singing  that 
comical  childish  effort  which  used  to  be  perceptible  in  it.  But  she  did  not 
yet  sing  well,  said  the  musical  connoisseurs  who  heard  her.  ‘Not  trained: 
a  fine  voice,  it  must  be  trained,’  every  one  said.  But  this  was  usually 
said  a  good  while  after  her  voice  was  hushed.  While  that  untrained  voice, 
with  its  irregular  breathing  and  its  strained  transitions  sounded,  even 
connoisseurs  said  nothing,  and  simply  enjoyed  that  untrained  voice,  and 
simply  longed  to  hear  it  again.  Her  voice  had  a  virginal  purity,  an  ig¬ 
norance  of  its  capacities,  and  an  unlaboured  velvety  softness,  so  closely 
connected  with  its  lack  of  art  in  singing,  that  it  seemed  as  though  nothing 
could  be  changed  in  that  voice  without  spoiling  it. 

‘How  is  it?’  thought  Nikolay,  hearing  her  voice  and  opening  his  eyes 
wide ;  ‘what  has  happened  to  her?  How  she  is  singing  to-day!  ’  he  thought. 
And  all  at  once  the  whole  world  was  for  him  concentrated  into  anticipa¬ 
tions  of  the  next  note,  the  next  bar,  and  everything  in  the  world  seemed 
divided  up  into  three  motives:  ‘Oh,  mio  crudele  affetto  .  .  .  One,  two, 
three  .  .  .  one  .  .  .  Oh,  mio  crudele  affetto  .  .  .  One,  two,  three  .  .  , 
one.  Ugh,  this  senseless  life  of  ours!’  thought  Nikolay.  ‘All  that,  this 
calamity,  and  money,  and  Dolohov,  and  anger,  and  honour — it’s  all  non¬ 
sense  .  .  .  and  this  is  what’s  the  real  thing  .  .  .  Now,  Natasha!  now, 
darling!  now,  my  girl!  .  .  .  how  will  she  take  that  si?  taken  it!  thank 
God!’  and  without  being  conscious  that  he  was  singing,  he  himself  sung 
a  second  to  support  her  high  note.  ‘My  God!  how  fine!  Can  I  have  taken 
that  note?  how  glorious!’  he  thought. 

Oh,  how  that  note  had  thrilled,  and  how  something  better  that  was  in 
Rostov’s  soul  began  thrilling  too.  And  that  something  was  apart  from 
everything  in  the  world,  and  above  everything  in  the  world.  What  were 
losses,  and  Dolohovs,  and  honour  beside  it!  ...  All  nonsense!  One 
might  murder,  and  steal,  and  yet  be  happy.  .  .  . 


XVI 

It  was  long  since  Rostov  had  derived  such  enjoyment  from  music  as  on 
that  day.  But  as  soon  as  Natasha  had  finished  her  barcarolle,  the  reality 
forced  itself  upon  his  mind  again.  Saying  nothing,  he  went  out,  and  went 
down  stairs  to  his  own  room.  A  quarter  of  an  hour  later,  the  old  prince 
came  in,  good-humoured  and  satisfied  from  his  club.  Nikolay  heard  him 
come  in,  and  went  in  to  him. 

‘Well,  had  a  good  time?’  said  Ilya  Andreivitch,  smiling  proudly  and 
joyfully  to  his  son.  Nikolay  tried  to  say  ‘Yes,’  but  could  not;  he  was 
on  the  point  of  sobbing.  The  count  was  lighting  his  pipe,  and  did  not 
notice  his  son’s  condition. 


318  WAR  AND  PEACE 

'Ugh,  it’s  inevitable!’  thought  Nikolay,  for  the  first  and  last  time. 
And  all  at  once,  as  though  he  were  asking  for  the  carriage  to  drive  into 
town,  he  said  to  his  father  in  the  most  casual  tone,  that  made  him  feel 
vile  to  himself: 

‘Papa,  I  have  come  to  you  on- a  matter  of  business  I  was  almost  for¬ 
getting.  I  want  some  money.’ 

'You  don’t  say  so?’  said  his  father,  who  happened  to  be  in  particularly 
good  spirits.  ‘I  told  you  that  we  shouldn’t  be  having  any.  Do  you  want 
a  large  sum?’ 

‘Very  large,’  said  Nikolay,  flushing  and  smiling  a  stupid,  careless  smile, 
for  which  long  after  he  could  not  forgive  himself.  ‘I  have  lost  a  little  at 
cards,  that  is,  a  good  deal,  really,  a  great  deal,  forty-three  thousand.’ 

‘What!  To  whom?  .  .  .  You’re  joking!’  cried  the  count,  flushing,  as 
old  people  flush,  an  apoplectic  red  over  his  neck  and  the  back  of  his  head. 

‘I  have  promised  to  pay  it  to-morrow,’  said  Nikolay. 

‘Oh!’  .  .  .  said  the  count,  flinging  up  his  arms;  and  he  dropped  help¬ 
lessly  on  the  sofa. 

‘It  can’t  be  helped!  It  happens  to  every  one,’  said  his  son  in  a  free  and 
easy  tone,  while  in  his  heart  he  was  feeling  himself  a  low  scoundrel,  whose 
whole  life  could  not  atone  for  his  crime.  He  would  have  liked  to  kiss  his 
father’s  hands,  to  beg  his  forgiveness  on  his  knees,  while  carelessly,  rudely 
even,  he  was  telling  him  that  it  happened  to  every  one. 

Count  Ilya  Andreivitch  dropped  his  eyes  when  he  heard  those  words 
from  his  son,  and  began  moving  hurriedly,  as  though  looking  for  some¬ 
thing. 

‘Yes,  yes,’  he  brought  out,  ‘it  will  be  difficult,  I  fear,  difficult  to  raise 
.  .  .  happens  to  every  one!  yes,  it  happens  to  every  one  .  .  .’  And  the 
count  cast  a  fleeting  glance  at  his  son’s  face  and  walked  out  of  the  room. 
.  .  .  Nikolay  had  been  prepared  to  face  resistance,  but  he  had  not 
expected  this. 

‘Papa!  pa  ...  pa!’  he  cried  after  him,  sobbing;  ‘forgive  me!’  And 
clutching  at  his  father’s  hand,  he  pressed  it  to  his  lips  and  burst  into  tears. 

While  the  father  and  son  were  having  this  interview,  another,  hardly 
less  important,  was  taking  place  between  the  mother  and  daughter. 
Natasha,  in  great  excitement,  had  run  in  to  her  mother. 

‘Mamma!  .  .  .  Mamma!  ...  he  has  made  me  .  .  .’ 

‘Made  you  what?’ 

‘Pie’s  made,  rnade  an  offer.  Mamma!  Mamma!’  she  kept  crying. 

The  countess  could  not  believe  her  ears.  Denisov  had  made  an  offer 
.  .  .  to  whom?  ...  To  this  chit  of  a  girl  Natasha,  who  had  only  just 
given  up  playing  with  dolls,  and  was  still  having  lessons. 

‘Natasha,  enough  of  this  silliness!  ’  she  said,  hoping  it  was  a  joke. 

‘Silliness  indeed!  I  am  telling  you  the  fact,’  said  Natasha  angrily.  ‘I 
have  come  to  ask  you  what  to  do,  and  you  talk  to  me  of  “silliness”  .  .  .’ 

The  countess  shrugged  her  shoulders. 


WARANDPEACE  319 

‘If  it  is  true  that  Monsieur  Denisov  has  made  you  an  offer,  then  tell 
him  he  is  a  fool,  that’s  all.’ 

‘No,  he’s  not  a  fool,’  said  Natasha,  resentfully  and  seriously. 

‘Well,  what  would  you  have,  then?  You  are  all  in  love,  it  seems,  nowa¬ 
days.  Oh,  well,  if  you’re  in  love  w’ith  him,  better  marry  him,’  said  the 
countess,  laughing  angrily,  ‘and  God  bless  you.’ 

‘No,  mamma,  I’m  not  in  love  with  him.  I  suppose  I’m  not  in  love,  with 
him.’ 

‘Well,  then,  tell  him  so.’ 

‘Mamma,  are  you  cross?  Don’t  be  cross,  darling;  it’s  not  my  fault, 
is  it?’ 

‘No,  but  upon  my  word,  my  dear,  if  you  like,  I  will  go  and  tell  him 
so,’  said  the  countess,  smiling. 

‘No,  I’ll  do  it  myself;  only  tell  me  how  to  say  it.  Everything  comes 
easy  to  you,’  she  added,  responding  to  her  smile.  ‘And  if  you  could  have 
seen  how  he  said  it  to  me!  I  know  he  did  not  mean  to  say  it,  but  said 
it  by  accident.’ 

‘Well,  any  way  you  must  refuse  him.’ 

‘No,  I  mustn’t.  I  feel  so  sorry  for  him!  He’s  so  nice.’ 

‘Oh,  well,  accept  his  proposal,  then.  High  time  you  were  married,  I 
suppose,’  said  her  mother  angrily  and  ironically. 

‘No,  mamma,  but  I’m  so  sorry  for  him.  I  don’t  know  how  to  say  it.’ 

‘Well,  there’s  no  need  for  you  to  say  anything.  I’ll  speak  to  him 
myself,’  said  the  countess,  indignant  that  any  one  should  have  dared 
to  treat  this  little  Natasha  as  grown  up. 

‘No,  not  on  any  account;  I’ll  go  myself,  and  you  listen  at  the  door,’ — 
and  Natasha  ran  across  the  drawing-room  to  the  hall,  where  Denisov,  his 
face  in  his  hands,  was  still  sitting  in  the  same  chair  at  the  clavichord.  He 
jumped  up  at  the  sound  of  her  light  footsteps. 

‘Natalie,’  he  said,  moving  with  rapid  steps  towards  her,  ‘decide  my 
fate.  It  is  in  your  hands!  ’ 

‘Vassily  Dmitritch,  I’m  so  sorry  for  you!  .  .  .  No,  but  you  are  so 
nice  .  .  .  but  it  won’t  do  .  .  .  that  .  .  .  but  I  shall  always  love  you 
as  I  do  now.’ 

Denisov  bent  over  her,  and  she  heard  strange  sounds  that  she  did  not 
understand.  She  kissed  his  tangled  curly  black  head.  At  that  moment 
they  heard  the  hurried  rustle  of  the  countess’s  skirts.  She  came  up  to 
them. 

‘Vassily  Dmitritch,  I  thank  you  for  the  honour  you  do  us,’  said  the 
countess,  in  an  embarrassed  voice,  which  sounded  severe  to  Denisov, 
‘but  my  daughter  is  so  young,  and  I  should  have  thought  that  as  my 
son’s  friend  you  would  have  come  first  to  me.  In  that  case  you  would 
not  have  forced  me  to  make  this  refusal.’ 

‘Countess!  .  .  .’  said  Denisov,  with  downcast  eyes  and  a  guilty  face; 
he  tried  to  say  more,  and  stammered. 

Natasha  could  not  see  him  in  such  a  piteous  plight  without  emotion. 
She  began  to  whimper  loudly. 


320  WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Countess.  I  have  acted  wrongly,’  Denisov  went  on  in  a  breaking  voice, 
‘but  believe  me,  I  so  adore  your  daughter  and  all  your  family  that  I’d 
give  my  life  twice  over  .  .  He  looked  at  the  countess  and  noticed  her 
stern  face.  .  .  .  ‘Well,  good-bye,  countess,’  he  said,  kissing  her  hand, 
and  without  glancing  at  Natasha  he  walked  with  rapid  and  resolute  steps 
out  of  the  room. 

Next  day  Rostov  saw  Denisov  off,  as  he  was  unwilling  to  remain  an¬ 
other  day  in  Moscow.  All  his  Moscow  friends  gave  him  a  farewell  enter¬ 
tainment  at  the  Gypsies’,  and  he  had  no  recollection  of  how  they  got  him 
into  his  sledge,  or  of  the  first  three  stations  he  passed. 

After  Denisov’s  departure  Rostov  spent  another  fortnight  in  Moscow, 
waiting  for  the  money  to  pay  his  debt,  which  the  count  was  unable  to 
raise  all  at  once.  He  hardly  left  the  house,  and  spent  most  of  his  time 
in  the  young  girls’  room. 

Sonya  was  more  affectionate  and  devoted  to  him  than  ever.  She  seemed 
to  want  to  show  him  that  his  loss  at  cards  was  an  exploit  for  which  she 
loved  him  more  than  ever.  But  now  Nikolay  regarded  himself  as  un¬ 
worthy  of  her. 

He  copied  music  for  the  girls,  and  wrote  verses  in  their  albums,  and 
after  at  last  sending  off  all  the  forty-three  thousand  roubles,  and  receiv¬ 
ing  Dolohov’s  receipt  for  it,  he  left  Moscow  towards  the  end  of  Novem¬ 
ber  without  taking  leave  of  any  of  his  acquaintances,  and  overtook  his 
regiment,  which  was  already  in  Poland. 


PART  V 


I 

After  his  interview  with  his  wife,  Pierre  had  set  off  for  Petersburg. 
At  the  station  of  Torzhok  there  were  no  horses,  or  the  overseer  was 
unwilling  to  let  him  have  them.  Pierre  had  to  wait.  Without  removing 
his  outdoor  things,  he  lay  down  on  a  leather  sofa,  in  front  of  a  round 
table,  put  up  his  big  feet  in  their  thick  overboots  on  this  table  and  sank 
into  thought. 

‘Shall  I  bring  in  the  trunks?  Make  up  a  bed?  Will  you  take  tea?’  the 
valet  kept  asking. 

Pierre  made  no  reply,  for  he  heard  nothing  and  said  nothing.  He  had 
been  deep  in  thought  since  he  left  the  last  station,  and  still  went  on 
thinking  of  the  same  thing — of  something  so  important  that  he  did  not 
notice  what  was  passing  around  him.  Far  from  being  concerned  whether 
he  reached  Petersburg  sooner  or  later,  or  whether  there  would  or  would 
not  be  a  place  for  him  to  rest  in  at  this  station,  in  comparison  with  the 
thoughts  that  engrossed  him  now,  it  was  a  matter  of  utter  indifference  to 
him  whether  he  spent  a  few  hours  or  the  rest  of  his  life  at  that  station. 

The  overseer  and  his  wife,  his  valet,  and  a  peasant  woman  with  Torzhok 
embroidery  for  sale,  came  into  the  room,  offering  their  services.  Without 
changing  the  position  of  his  raised  feet,  Pierre  gazed  at  them  over  his 
spectacles,  and  did  not  understand  what  they  could  want  and  how  they 
all  managed  to  live,  without  having  solved  the  questions  that  absorbed 
him.  These  same  questions  had  possessed  his  mind  ever  since  that  day 
when  he  had  come  back  after  the  duel  from  Sokolniky  and  had  spent 
that  first  agonising,  sleepless  night.  But  now  in  the  solitude  of  his  jour¬ 
ney  they  seized  upon  him  with  special  force.  Of  whatever  he  began 
thinking  he  came  back  to  the  same  questions,  which  he  could  not  answer, 
and  from  which  he  could  not  escape.  It  was  as  though  the  chief  screw 
in  his  brain  upon  which  his  whole  life  rested  were  loose.  The  screw  moved 
no  forwarder,  no  backwarder,  but  still  it  turned,  catching  on  nothing, 
always  in  the  same  groove,  and  there  was  no  making  it  cease  turning. 

The  overseer  came  in  and  began  humbly  begging  his  excellency  to 
wait  only  a  couple  of  hours,  after  which  he  would  (come  what  might  of 
it)  let  his  excellency  have  the  special  mail  service  horses.  The  overseer 
was  unmistakably  lying,  with  the  sole  aim  of  getting  an  extra  tip  from 
the  traveller.  ‘Was  that  good  or  bad?’  Pierre  wondered.  ‘For  me  good, 
for  the  next  traveller  bad,  and  for  himself  inevitable  because  he  has 
nothing  to  eat;  he  said  that  an  officer  had  thrashed  him  for  it.  And  the 
officer  thrashed  him  because  he  had  to  travel  in  haste.  And  I  shot  Dolohov 


322  WARANDPEACE 

because  I  considered  myself  injured.  Louis  xvx.  was  executed  because 
they  considered  him  to  be  a  criminal,  and  a  year  later  his  judges  were 
killed  too  for  something.  What  is  wrong?  What  is  right?  What  must  one 
love,  what  must  one  hate?  What  is  life  for,  and  what  am  I?  What  is  life? 
What  is  death?  What  force  controls  it  all?’  he  asked  himself.  And  there 
was  no  answer  to  one  of  these  questions,  except  one  illogical  reply  that 
was  in  no  way  an  answer  to  any  of  them.  That  reply  was:  ‘One  dies  and 
it’s  all  over.  One  dies  and  finds  it  all  out  or  ceases  asking.’  But  dying 
too  was  terrible. 

The  Torzhok  pedlar  woman  in  a  whining  voice  proffered  her  wares, 
especially  some  goatskin  slippers.  ‘I  have  hundreds  of  roubles  I  don’t 
know  what  to  do  with,  and  she’s  standing  in  her  torn  cloak  looking 
timidly  at  me,’  thought  Pierre.  ‘And  what  does  she  want  the  money  for? 
As  though  that  money  could  give  her  one  hairsbreadth  of  happiness,  of 
peace  of  soul.  Is  there  anything  in  the  world  that  can  make  her  and  me 
less  enslaved  to  evil  and  to  death?  Death,  which  ends  all,  and  must  come 
to-day  or  to-morrow — which  beside  eternity  is  the  same  as  an  instant’s 
time.’  And  again  he  turned  the  screw  that  did  not  bite  in  anything,  and 
the  screw  still  went  on  turning  in  the  same  place. 

His  servant  handed  him  a  half-cut  volume  of  a  novel  in  the  form  of 
letters  by  Madame  Suza.  He  began  reading  of  the  sufferings  and  the 
virtuous  struggles  of  a  certain  ‘Amelie  de  Mansfeld.’  ‘And  what  did  she 
struggle  against  her  seducer  for?’  he  thought,  ‘when  she  loved  him.  God 
could  not  have  put  in  her  heart  an  impulse  that  was  against  His  will. 
My  wife — as  she  was  once — didn’t  struggle,  and  perhaps  she  was  right. 
Nothing  has  been  discovered,’  Pierre  said  to  himself  again,  ‘nothing  has 
been  invented.  We  can  only  know  that  we  know  nothing.  And  that’s  the 
highest  degree  of  human  wisdom.’ 

Everything  rvithin  himself  and  around  him  struck  him  as  confused, 
meaningless,  and  loathsome.  But  in  this  very  loathing  of  everything  sur¬ 
rounding  him  Pierre  found  a  sort  of  tantalising  satisfaction. 

‘I  make  bold  to  beg  your  excellency  to  make  room  the  least  bit  for  this 
gentleman  here,’  said  the  overseer,  coming  into  the  room  and  ushering 
in  after  him  another  traveller,  brought  to  a  standstill  from  lack  of  horses. 
The  traveller  was  a  thickset,  square-shouldered,  yellow,  wrinkled  old 
man,  with  grey  eyelashes  overhanging  gleaming  eyes  of  an  indefinite 
grey  colour. 

Pierre  took  his  feet  off  the  table,  stood  up  and  went  to  lie  down  on  the 
bed  that  had  been  made  ready  for  him,  glancing  now  and  then  at  the 
newcomer,  who,  without  looking  at  Pierre,  with  an  air  of  surly  fatigue 
was  wearily  taking  off  his  outer  wraps  with  the  aid  of  his  servant.  The 
traveller,  now  clothed  in  a  shabby  nankin-covered  sheepskin  coat  with 
felt  highboots  on  his  thin  bony  legs,  sat  down  on  the  sofa,  and  leaning 
on  its  back  his  close-cropped  head,  which  was  very  large  and  broad 
across  the  temples,  he  glanced  at  Bezuhov.  The  stern,  shrewd,  and  pene-i 
trating  expression  in  that  glance  impressed  Pierre.  He  felt  disposed  to 
speak  to  the  traveller,  but  by  the  time  he  had  ready  a  question  about i 


WAR  AND  PEACE  3*3 

the  road  with  which  to  address  him,  the  traveller  had  closed  his  eyes, 
and  folded  his  wrinkled  old  hands,  on  one  finger  of  which  there  was  a 
large  iron  ring  with  a  seal  representing  the  head  of  Adam.  He  sat  with¬ 
out  stirring,  either  resting  or  sunk,  as  it  seemed  to  Pierre,  in  profound 
and  calm  meditation.  The  newcomer’s  servant  was  also  a  yellow  old 
man,  covered  with  wrinkles.  He  had  neither  moustache  nor  beard,  not 
because  he  was  shaved,  but  obviously  had  never  had  any.  The  old 
servant  was  active  in  unpacking  a  travelling-case,  in  setting  the  tea- 
table,  and  in  bringing  in  a  boiling  samovar.  When  everything  was  ready, 
the  traveller  opened  his  eyes,  moved  to  the  table,  and  pouring  out  a 
glass  of  tea  for  himself,  poured  out  another  for  the  beardless  old  man 
and  gave  it  him.  Pierre  began  to  feel  an  uneasiness  and  a  sense  of  the 
necessity,  of  the  inevitability  of  entering  into  conversation  with  the 
traveller. 

The  servant  brought  back  his  empty  glass  turned  upside  down  with 
an  unfinished  piece  of  nibbled  sugar  beside  it,  and  asked  if  anything 
were  wanted. 

‘Nothing.  Give  me  my  book,’  said  the  traveller.  The  servant  gave  him 
a  book,  which  seemed  to  Pierre  to  be  of  a  devotional  character,  and  the 
traveller  became  absorbed  in  its  perusal.  Pierre  looked  at  him.  All  at 
once  the  stranger  laid  down  the  book,  and  putting  a  mark  in  it,  shut  it 
up.  Then  closing  his  eyes  and  leaning  his  arms  on  the  back  of  the  sofa, 
he  fell  back  into  his  former  attitude.  Pierre  stared  at  him,  and  had  not 
time  to  look  away  when  the  old  man  opened  his  eyes  and  bent  his  reso¬ 
lute  and  stern  glance  upon  Pierre.  Pierre  felt  confused  and  tried  to  turn 
away  from  that  glance,  but  the  gleaming  old  eyes  drew  him  irresistibly 
to  them. 


II 

‘I  have  the  pleasure  of  speaking  to  Count  Bezuhov,  if  I  am  not  mis¬ 
taken,’  said  the  stranger,  in  a  loud  deliberate  voice.  Pierre  looked  in 
silence  and  inquiringly  over  his  spectacles  at  the  speaker.  ‘I  have  heard 
of  you,’  continued  the  stranger,  ‘and  I  have  heard,  sir,  of  what  has 
happened  to  you,  of  your  misfortune.’  He  underlined,  as  it  were,  the 
last  word,  as  though  to  say:  ‘Yes,  misfortune,  whatever  you  call  it,  I 
know  that  what  happened  to  you  in  Moscow  was  a  misfortune.’ 

‘I  am  very  sorry  for  it,  sir.’  Pierre  reddened,  and  hurriedly  dropping 
his  legs  over  the  edge  of  the  bed,  he  bent  forward  towards  the  old  man, 
Ismiling  timidly  and  unnaturally. 

‘I  have  not  mentioned  this  to  you,  sir,  from  curiosity,  but  from  graver 
reasons.’  He  paused,  not  letting  Pierre  escape  from  his  gaze,  and  moved 
aside  on  the  sofa,  inviting  him  by  this  movement  to  sit  beside  him. 
Pierre  disliked  entering  into  conversation  with  this  old  man,  but  in¬ 
voluntarily  submitting  to  him,  he  came  up  and  sat  down  beside  him. 

‘You  are  unhappy,  sir,’  he  went  on,  ‘you  are  young,  and  I  am  old. 
I  should  like,  as  far  as  it  is  in  my  power,  to  help  you.’ 


324  WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Oh,  yes,’  said  Pierre,  with  an  unnatural  smile.  ‘Very  much  obliged 
to  you  .  .  .  where  have  you  been  travelling  from?’  The  stranger’s  face 
was  not  cordial,  it  was  even  cold  and  severe,  but  in  spite  of  that,  both 
the  speech  and  the  face  of  his  new  acquaintance  were  irresistibly  attrac¬ 
tive  to  Pierre. 

‘But  if  for  any  reason  you  dislike  conversing  with  me,’  said  the  old 
man,  ‘then  you  say  so,  sir.’  And  suddenly  he  smiled  a  quite  unexpected 
smile  of  fatherly  kindliness. 

‘Oh,  no,  not  at  all;  on  the  contrary,  I  am  very  glad  to  make  your 
acquaintance,’  said  Pierre,  and  glancing  once  more  at  the  stranger’s 
hands,  he  examined  the  ring  more  closely.  He  saw  the  head  of  Adam, 
the  token  of  masonry. 

‘Allow  me  to  inquire,’  he  said,  ‘are  you  a  mason?’ 

‘Yes,  I  belong  to  the  brotherhood  of  the  freemasons,’  said  the  stranger, 
looking  now  more  searchingly  into  Pierre’s  eyes.  ‘And  from  myself  and 
in  their  name  I  hold  out  to  you  a  brotherly  hand.’ 

‘I  am  afraid,’  said  Pierre,  smiling  and  hesitating  between  the  confi¬ 
dence  inspired  in  him  by  the  personality  of  the  freemason  and  the  habit 
of  ridiculing  the  articles  of  the  masons’  creed;  ‘I  am  afraid  that  I  am 
very  far  from  a  comprehension — how  shall  I  say — I  am  afraid  that  my 
way  of  thinking  in  regard  to  the  whole  theory  of  the  universe  is  so  op¬ 
posed  to  yours  that  we  shall  not  understand  one  another.’ 

‘I  am  aware  of  your  way  of  thinking,’  said  the  freemason,  ‘and  that 
way  of  thinking  of  which  you  speak,  which  seems  to  you  the  result  of 
your  own  thought,  is  the  way  of  thinking  of  the  majority  of  men,  and 
is  the  invariable  fruit  of  pride,  indolence,  and  ignorance.  Excuse  my 
saying,  sir,  that  if  I  had  not  been  aware  of  it,  I  should  not  have  addressed 
you.  Your  way  of  thinking  is  a  melancholy  error.’ 

‘Just  as  I  may  take  for  granted  that  you  are  in  error,’  said  Pierre, 
faintly  smiling. 

‘I  would  never  be  so  bold  as  to  say  I  know  the  truth,’  said  the  mason, 
the  definiteness  and  decision  of  whose  manner  of  speaking  impressed 
Pierre  more  and  more.  ‘No  one  alone  can  attain  truth;  only  stone  upon 
stone,  with  the  co-operation  of  all,  by  the  millions  of  generations  from 
our  first  father  Adam  down  to  our  day  is  that  temple  being  reared  that- 
should  be  a  fitting  dwelling-place  of  the  Great  God,’  said  the  freemason, 
and  he  shut  his  eyes. 

‘I  ought  to  tell  you  that  I  don’t  believe,  don’t  .  .  .  believe  in  God,’ 
said  Pierre  regretfully  and  with  effort,  feeling  it  essential  to  speak  the 
whole  truth. 

The  freemason  looked  intently  at  Pierre  and  smiled  as  a  rich  man,  \ 
holding  millions  in  his  hands,  might  smile  to  a  poor  wretch,  who  should 
say  to  him  that  he,  the  poor  man,  has  not  five  roubles  that  would  secure 
his  happiness. 

‘Yes,  you  do  not  know  Him,  sir,’  said  the  freemason.  ‘You  cannot 
know  Him.  You  know  not  Him,  that  is  why  you  are  unhappy.’ 

‘Yes,  yes,  I  am  unhappy,’  Pierre  assented;  ‘but  what  am  I  to  do?’ 


WAR  AND  PEACE  325 

‘You  know  not  Him,  sir,  and  that’s  why  you  are  very  unhappy.  You 
know  not  Him,  but  He  is  here,  He  is  within  me,  He  is  in  my  words,  He 
is  in  thee,  and  even  in  these  scoffing  words  that  thou  hast  just  uttered,’ 
said  the  mason  in  a  stern,  vibrating  voice. 

He  paused  and  sighed,  evidently  trying  to  be  calm. 

‘If  He  were  not,’  he  said  softly,  ‘we  should  not  be  speaking  of  Him,  sir. 
Of  what,  of  whom  were  we  speaking?  Whom  dost  thou  deny?’  he  said 
all  at  once,  with  enthusiastic  austerity  and  authority  in  his  voice.  ‘Who 
invented  Him,  if  He  be  not?  How  came  there  within  thee  the  conception 
that  there  is  such  an  incomprehensible  Being?  How  comes  it  that  thou 
and  all  the  world  have  assumed  the  existence  of  such  an  inconceivable 
Being,  a  Being  all  powerful,  eternal  and  infinite  in  all  His  qualities?  .  .  .’ 
He  stopped  and  made  a  long  pause. 

Pierre  could  not  and  would  not  interrupt  this  silence. 

‘He  exists,  but  to  comprehend  Him  is  hard,’  the  mason  began  again, 
not  looking  into  Pierre’s  face,  but  straight  before  him,  while  his  old 
hands,  which  could  not  keep  still  for  inward  emotion,  turned  the  leaves 
of  the  book.  ‘If  it  had  been  a  man  of  whose  existence  thou  hadst  doubts, 
I  could  have  brought  thee  the  man,  taken  him  by  the  hand,  and  shown 
him  thee.  But  how  am  I,  an  insignificant  mortal,  to  show  all  the  power, 
all  the  eternity,  all  the  blessedness  of  Him  to  one  who  is  blind,  or  to  one 
who  shuts  his  eyes  that  he  may  not  see,  may  not  understand  Him,  and 
may  not  see,  and  not  understand  all  his  own  vileness  and  viciousness.’ 
He  paused.  ‘Who  art  thou?  What  art  thou?  Thou  dreamest  that  thou 
art  wise  because  thou  couldst  utter  those  scoffing  words,’  he  said,  with  a 
gloomy  and  scornful  irony,  ‘while  thou  art  more  foolish  and  artless  than 
a  little  babe,  who,  playing  with  the  parts  of  a  cunningly  fashioned  watch, 
should  rashly  say  that  because  he  understands  not  the  use  of  that  watch, 
he  does  not  believe  in  the  maker  who  fashioned  it.  To  know  Him  is  a  hard 
matter.  For  ages,  from  our  first  father  Adam  to  our  day,  have  we  been 
striving  for  this  knowledge,  and  are  infinitely  far  from  the  attainment 
of  our  aim;  but  in  our  lack  of  understanding  we  see  only  our  own 
weakness  and  His  greatness  .  .  .’ 

Pierre  gazed  with  shining  eyes  into  the  freemason’s  face,  listening  with 
a  thrill  at  his  heart  to  his  words;  he  did  not  interrupt  him,  nor  ask  ques¬ 
tions,  but  with  all  his  soul  he  believed  what  this  strange  man  was  telling 
him.  Whether  he  believed  on  the  rational  grounds  put  before  him  by 
the  freemason,  or  believed,  as  children  do,  through  the  intonations,  the 
conviction,  and  the  earnestness,  of  the  mason’s  words,  the  quiver  in  his 
voice  that  sometimes  almost  broke  his  utterance,  or  the  gleaming  old 
eyes  that  had  grown  old  in  that  conviction,  or  the  calm,  the  resolution, 
and  the  certainty  of  his  destination,  which  were  conspicuous  in  the  whole 
personality  of  the  old  man,  and  struck  Pierre  with  particular  force,  beside 
his  own  abjectness  and  hopelessness, — any  way,  with  his  whole  soul  he 
longed  to  believe,  and  believed  and  felt  a  joyful  sense  of  soothing,  of 
renewal,  and  of  return  to  life. 

‘It  is  not  attained  by  the  reason,  but  by  life,’  said  the  mason. 


326  WAR  AND  PEACE 

T  don’t  understand,’  said  Pierre,  feeling  with  dismay  that  doubt  was 
stirring  within  him.  He  dreaded  obscurity  and  feebleness  in  the  free¬ 
mason’s  arguments,  he  dreaded  being  unable  to  believe  in  him.  ‘I  don’t 
understand,'  he  said,  ‘in  what  way  human  reason  cannot  attain  that 
knowledge  of  which  you  speak.’ 

The  freemason  smiled  his  mild,  fatherly  smile. 

‘The  highest  wisdom  and  truth  is  like  the  purest  dew,  which  we  try  to 
hold  within  us,’  said  he.  ‘Can  I  hold  in  an  impure  vessel  that  pure  dew 
and  judge  of  its  purity?  Only  by  the  inner  purification  of  myself  can  I 
bring  that  dew  contained  within  me  to  some  degree  of  purity.’ 

‘Yes,  yes;  that’s  so,’  Pierre  said  joyfully. 

‘The  highest  wisdom  is  founded  not  on  reason  only,  not  on  those 
worldly  sciences,  of  physics,  history,  chemistry,  etc.,  into  which  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  intellect  is  divided.  The  highest  wisdom  is  one.  The  highest 
wisdom  knows  but  one  science — the  science  of  the  whole,  the  science  that 
explains  the  whole  creation  and  the  place  of  man  in  it.  To  instil  this 
science  into  one’s  soul,  it  is  needful  to  purify  and  renew  one’s  inner 
man,  and  so,  before  one  can  know,  one  must  believe  and  be  made  per¬ 
fect.  And  for  the  attainment  of  these  aims  there  has  been  put  into  our 
souls  the  light  of  God,  called  the  conscience.’ 

‘Yes,  yes,’  Pierre  assented. 

‘Look  with  the  spiritual  eye  into  thy  inner  man,  and  ask  of  thyself 
whether  thou  art  content  with  thyself.  What  hast  thou  attained  with 
the  guidance  of  the  intellect  alone?  What  art  thou?  You  are  young,  you 
are  wealthy,  you  are  cultured,  sir.  What  have  you  made  of  all  the  bless-  || 
ings  vouchsafed  you?  Are  you  satisfied  with  yourself  and  your  life?’ 

‘No,  I  hate  my  life,’  said  Pierre,  frowning. 

‘Thou  hatest  it;  then  change  it,  purify  thyself,  and  as  thou  art  puri¬ 
fied,  thou  wilt  come  to  know  wisdom.  Look  at  your  life,  sir.  How  have  I: 
you  been  spending  it?  In  riotous  orgies  and  debauchery,  taking  every¬ 
thing  from  society  and  giving  nothing  in  return.  You  have  received  I 
wealth.  How  have  you  used  it?  What  have  you  done  for  your  neigh-  • 
bour?  Have  you  given  a  thought  to  the  tens  of  thousands  of  your  slaves,  ] 
have  you  succoured  them  physically  and  morally?  No.  You  have  profited  I 
by  their  toil  to  lead  a  dissipated  life.  That’s  what  you  have  done.  Have  ! 
you  chosen  a  post  in  the  service  where  you  might  be  of  use  to  your  neigh-  i 
bour?  No.  You  have  spent  your  life  in  idleness.  Then  you  married,  sir, 
took  upon  yourself  the  responsibility  of  guiding  a  young  woman  in  life, 
and  what  have  you  done?  You  have  not  helped  her,  sir,  to  find  the  path  ! 
of  truth,  but  have  cast  her  into  an  abyss  of  deception  and  misery.  A 
man  injured  you,  and  you  have  killed  him,  and  you  say  you  do  not  know  t 
God,  and  that  you  hate  your  life.  There  is  no  wisdom  in  all  that,  sir.’ 

After  these  words  the  freemason  leaned  his  elbow  again  on  the  back 
of  the  sofa  and  closed  his  eyes,  as  though  weary  of  prolonged  talking. 
Pierre  gazed  at  that  stern,  immovable,  old,  almost  death-like  face,  and 
moved  his  lips  without  uttering  a  sound.  He  wanted  to  say,  ‘Yes,  a  vile, 


WAR  AND  PEACE  327 

idle,  vicious  life,’  and  he  dared  not  break  the  silence.  The  freemason 
cleared  his  throat  huskily,  as  old  men  do,  and  called  his  servant. 

‘How  about  horses?’  he  asked,  without  looking  at  Pierre. 

‘They  havo  brought  round  some  that  were  given  up,’  answered  the  old 
man.  ‘You  won’t  rest?’ 

‘No,  tell  them  to  harness  them.’ 

‘Can  he  really  be  going  away  and  leaving  me  all  alone,  without  telling 
me  everything  and  promising  me  help?’  thought  Pierre,  getting  up  with 
downcast  head,  beginning  to  walk  up  and  down  the  room,  casting  a  glance 
from  time  to  time  at  the  freemason.  ‘Yes,  I  had  not  thought  of  it,  but  I 
have  led  a  contemptible,  dissolute  life,  but  I  did  not  like  it,  and  I  didn’t 
want  to,’  thought  Pierre,  ‘and  this  man  knows  the  truth,  and  if  he  liked 
he  could  reveal  it  to  me.’  Pierre  wanted  to  say  this  to  the  freemason 
and  dared  not.  After  packing  his  things  with  his  practised  old  hands, 
the  traveller  buttoned  up  his  sheepskin.  On  finishing  these  preparations, 
he  turned  to  Bezuhov,  and  in  a  polite,  indifferent  tone,  said  to  him: 

‘Where  are  you  going  now,  sir?’ 

‘I?  .  .  .  I’m  going  to  Petersburg,’ answered  Pierre  in  a  tone  of  childish 
indecision.  ‘I  thank  you.  I  agree  with  you  in  everything.  But  do  not 
suppose  that  I  have  been  so  bad.  With  all  my  soul  I  have  desired  to  be 
what  you  would  wish  me  to  be;  but  I  have  never  met  with  help  from 
any  one.  .  .  .  Though  I  was  myself  most  to  blame  for  everything.  Help 
me,  instruct  me,  and  perhaps  I  shall  be  able  .  . 

Pierre  could  not  say  more;  his  voice  broke  and  he  turned  away. 

The  freemason  was  silent,  obviously  pondering  something. 

‘Help  comes  only  from  God,’  he  said,  ‘but  such  measure  of  aid  as  it 
is  in  the  power  of  our  order  to  give  you,  it  will  give  you,  sir.  You  go  to 
Petersburg,  and  give  this  to  Count  Villarsky’  (he  took  out  his  note¬ 
book  and  wrote  a  few  words  on  a  large  sheet  of  paper  folded  into  four). 
‘One  piece  of  advice  let  me  give  you.  When  you  reach  the  capital,  devote 
your  time  at  first  there  to  solitude  and  to  self-examination,  and  do  not 
return  to  your  old  manner  of  life.  Therewith  I  wish  you  a  good  journey, 
sir,’  he  added,  noticing  that  his  servant  had  entered  the  room,  ‘and  all 
success  .  .  .’ 

The  stranger  wras  Osip  Alexyevitch  Bazdyev,  as  Pierre  found  out  from 
the  overseer’s  book.  Bazdyev  had  been  one  of  the  most  well-known  free¬ 
masons  and  Martinists  even  in  Novikov’s  day.  For  a  long  while  after  he 
had  gone,  Pierre  walked  about  the  station  room,  neither  lying  down  to 
sleep  nor  asking  for  horses.  He  reviewed  his  vicious  past,  and  with  an 
ecstatic  sense  of  beginning  anew,  pictured  to  himself  a  blissful,  irre¬ 
proachably  virtuous  future,  which  seemed  to  him  easy  of  attainment. 
It  seemed  to  him  that  he  had  been  vicious,  simply  because  he  had  acci¬ 
dentally  forgotten  how  good  it  was  to  be  virtuous.  There  was  left  in  his 
soul  not  a  trace  of  his  former  doubts.  He  firmly  believed  in  the  possi¬ 
bility  of  the  brotherhood  of  man,  united  in  the  aim  of  supporting  one 
another  in  the  path  of  virtue.  And  freemasonry  he  pictured  to  himself  as 
such  a  brotherhood. 


328 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


III 

On  reaching  Petersburg,  Pierre  let  no  one  know  of  his  arrival,  went  out 
to  see  nobody,  and  spent  whole  days  in  reading  Thomas  a  Kempis,  a 
book  which  had  been  sent  him,  he  did  not  know  from  whom.  One  thing, 
and  one  thing  only,  Pierre  thoroughly  understood  in  reading  that  book; 
he  understood  what  he  had  hitherto  known  nothing  of,  all  the  bliss  of 
believing  in  the  possibility  of  attaining  perfection,  and  in  the  possibility 
of  brotherly  and  active  love  between  men,  revealed  to  him  by  Osip 
Alexyevitch.  A  week  after  his  arrival,  the  young  Polish  count,  Villarsky, 
whom  Pierre  knew  very  slightly  in  Petersburg  society,  came  one  evening 
into  his  room  with  the  same  official  and  ceremonious  air  with  which 
Dolohov’s  second  had  called  on  him.  Closing  the  door  behind  him,  and 
assuring  himself  that  there  was  nobody  in  the  room  but  Pierre,  he  ad¬ 
dressed  him: 

‘I  have  come  to  you  with  a  message  and  a  suggestion,  count,’  he  said 
to  him,  not  sitting  down.  ‘A  personage  of  very  high  standing  in  our 
brotherhood  has  been  interceding  for  you  to  be  admitted  into  our 
brotherhood  before  the  usual  term,  and  has  asked  me  to  be  your  sponsor. 
I  regard  it  as  a  sacred  duty  to  carry  out  that  person’s  wishes.  Do  you 
wish  under  my  sponsorship  to  enter  the  brotherhood  of  freemasons?’ 

Pierre  was  impressed  by  the  cold  and  austere  tone  of  this  man,  whom 
he  had  almost  always  seen  before  at  balls  wearing  an  agreeable  smile, 
in  the  society  of  the  most  brilliant  women. 

‘Yes,  I  do  wish  it,’  said  Pierre. 

Villarsky  bent  his  head. 

‘One  more  question,  count,’  he  said,  ‘to  which  I  beg  you,  not  as  a  future 
mason,  but  as  an  honest  man  ( galant  homme)  to  answer  me  in  all  sin¬ 
cerity:  have  you  renounced  your  former  convictions?  do  you  believe 
in  God?’ 

Pierre  thought  a  moment. 

‘Yes  .  .  .  yes,  I  do  believe  in  God,’  he  said. 

‘In  that  case  .  .  .’  Villarsky  was  beginning,  but  Pierre  interrupted 
him. 

‘Yes,  I  believe  in  God,’  he  said  once  more. 

‘In  that  case,  we  can  go,’  said  Villarsky.  ‘My  carriage  is  at  your  dis¬ 
posal.’ 

Throughout  the  drive  Villarsky  was  silent.  In  answer  to  Pierre’s  in¬ 
quiries,  what  he  would  have  to  do,  and  how  he  would  have  to  answer, 
Villarsky  simply  said  that  brothers,  more  worthy  than  he,  would  prove 
him,  and  that  Pierre  need  do  nothing  but  tell  the  truth. 

They  drove  in  at  the  gates  of  a  large  house,  where  the  lodge  had  its 
quarters,  and,  passing  up  a  dark  staircase,  entered  a  small,  lighted  ante¬ 
room,  where  they  took  off  their  overcoats  without  the  assistance  of 
servants.  From  the  ante-room  they  walked  into  another  room.  A  man  in 
strange  attire  appeared  at  the  door.  Villarsky,  going  in  to  meet  him, 


WARANDPEACE  329 

said  something  to  him  in  French  in  a  low  voice,  and  went  up  to  a  small 
cupboard,  where  Pierre  noticed  garments  unlike  any  he  had  seen  before. 
Taking  a  handkerchief  from  the  cupboard,  Villarsky  put  it  over  Pierre’s 
eyes  and  tied  it  in  a  knot  behind,  catching  his  hair  painfully  in  the  knot. 
Then  he  drew  him  towards  himself,  kissed  him,  and  taking  him  by  the 
hand  led  him  away  somewhere.  Pierre  had  been  hurt  by  his  hair  being 
pulled  in  the  knot:  he  puckered  up  his  face  from  the  pain,  and  smiled 
with  vague  shame.  His  huge  figure  with  his  arms  hanging  at  his  sides, 
and  his  face  puckered  up  and  smiling,  moved  after  Villarsky  with  timid 
and  uncertain  steps. 

After  leading  him  for  about  ten  steps,  Villarsky  stopped. 

‘Whatever  happens  to  you,’  said  he,  ‘you  must  endure  all  with  good 
courage  if  you  are  firmly  resolved  to  enter  our  brotherhood.’  (Pierre 
answered  affirmatively  by  an  inclination  of  his  head.)  ‘When  you  hear 
a  knock  at  the  door,  you  may  uncover  your  eyes,’  added  Villarsky;  ‘I 
wish  you  good  courage  and  success,’  and,  pressing  Pierre’s  hand,  Villarsky 
went  away. 

When  he  was  left  alone,  Pierre  still  went  on  smiling  in  the  same  way. 
Twice  he  shrugged  his  shoulders  and  raised  his  hand  to  the  handkerchief, 
as  though  he  would  have  liked  to  take  it  off,  but  he  let  it  drop  again. 
The  five  minutes  he  had  spent  with  his  eyes  bandaged  seemed  to  him 
an  hour.  Plis  arms  felt  numb,  his  legs  tottered,  he  felt  as  though  he  were 
tired  out.  He  was  aware  of  the  most  complex  and  conflicting  feelings.  He 
was  afraid  of  what  would  be  done  to  him,  and  still  more  afraid  of  show¬ 
ing  fear.  He  felt  inquisitive  to  know  what  was  coming,  what  would  be 
revealed  to  him;  but  above  everything,  he  felt  joy  that  the  moment  had 
come  when  he  would  at  last  enter  upon  that  path  of  regeneration  and  of 
an  actively  virtuous  life,  of  which  he  had  been  dreaming  ever  since  his 
meeting  with  Osip  Alexyevitch. 

There  came  loud  knocks  at  the  door.  Pierre  took  off  the  bandage  and 
looked  about  him.  It  was  black  darkness  in  the  room;  only  in  one  spot 
there  was  a  little  lamp  burning  before  something  white.  Pierre  went 
nearer  and  saw  that  the  little  lamp  stood  on  a  black  table,  on  which  there 
lay  an  open  book.  The  book  was  the  gospel:  the  white  thing  in  which  the 
lamp  was  burning  was  a  human  skull  with  its  eyeholes  and  teeth.  After 
reading  the  first  words  of  the  gospel,  ‘In  the  beginning  was  the  Word 
and  the  Word  was  with  God,’  Pierre  went  round  the  table  and  caught 
sight  of  a  large  open  box  filled  with  something.  It  was  a  coffin  full  of 
bones.  He  was  not  in  the  least  surprised  by  what  he  saw.  Hoping  to  enter 
upon  a  completely  new  life,  utterly  unlike  the  old  life,  he  was  ready  for 
anything  extraordinary,  more  extraordinary  indeed  than  what  he  was 
seeing.  The  skull,  the  coffin,  the  gospel — it  seemed  to  him  that  he  had 
been  expecting  all  that;  had  been  expecting  more,  indeed.  He  tried 
to  stir  up  a  devotional  feeling  in  himself;  he  looked  about  him.  ‘God, 
death,  love,  the  brotherhood  of  man,’  he  kept  saying  to  himself,  associat¬ 
ing  with  those  words  vague  but  joyful  conceptions  of  some  sort.  The 
door  opened  and  some  one  came  in.  In  the  faint  light,  in  which  Pierre 


330  WAR  AND  PEACE 

could,  however,  see  a  little  by  this  time,  a  short  man  approached.  Ap¬ 
parently  dazed  by  coming  out  ot  the  light  into  the  darkness,  the  man 
stopped,  then  with  cautious  steps  moved  again  towards  the  table,  and 
laid  on  it  both  his  small  hands  covered  with  leather  gloves. 

This  short  man  was  wearing  a  white  leather  apron,  that  covered  his 
chest  and  part  of  his  legs;  upon  his  neck  could  be  seen  something  like 
a  necklace,  and  a  high  white  ruffle  stood  up  from  under  the  necklace, 
framing  his  long  face,  on  which  the  light  fell  from  below. 

‘For  what  are  you  come  hither?’  asked  the  newcomer,  turning  towards 
Pierre  at  a  faint  rustle  made  by  the  latter.  ‘For  what  are  you,  an  un¬ 
believer  in  the  truth  of  the  light,  who  have  not  seen  the  light,  for  what 
are  you  come  here?  What  do  you  seek  from  us?  Wisdom,  virtue,  en¬ 
lightenment?’ 

At  the  moment  when  the  door  opened  and  the  unknown  person  came 
in,  Pierre  had  a  sensation  of  awe  and  reverence,  such  as  he  had  felt  in 
childhood  at  confession;  he  felt  himself  alone  with  a  man  who  was  in 
the  circumstances  of  life  a  complete  stranger,  and  yet  through  the 
brotherhood  of  men  so  near.  With  a  beating  heart  that  made  him  gasp 
for  breath,  Pierre  turned  to  the  rhetor,  as  in  the  phraseology  of  free¬ 
masonry  the  man  is  called  who  prepares  the  seeker  for  entering  the 
brotherhood.  Going  closer,  Pierre  recognised  in  the  rhetor  a  man  he  knew, 
Smolyaninov,  but  it  was  mortifying  to  him  to  think  that  the  newcomer 
was  a  familiar  figure;  he  was  to  him  only  a  brother  and  a  guide  in  the 
path  of  virtue.  For  a  long  while  Pierre  could  not  utter  a  word,  so  that 
the  rhetor  was  obliged  to  repeat  his  question. 

‘Yes;  I  .  .  .  I  .  .  .  wish  to  begin  anew,’  Pierre  articulated  with  dif¬ 
ficulty. 

‘Very  good,’  said  Smolyaninov,  and  went  on  at  once. 

‘Have  you  any  idea  of  the  means  by  which  our  holy  order  will  assist 
you  in  attaining  your  aim?  .  .  .’  said  the  rhetor  calmly  and  rapidly. 

‘I  .  .  .  hope  for  .  .  .  guidance  ...  for  help  ...  in  renewing 
.  .  .’  said  Pierre,  with  a  tremble  in  his  voice  and  a  difficulty  in  utterance 
due  both  to  emotion  and  to  being  unaccustomed  to  speak  of  abstract 
subjects  in  Russian. 

‘What  idea  have  you  of  freemasonry?’ 

‘I  assume  that  freemasonry  is  the  jraternite  and  equality  of  men  with 
virtuous  aims,’  said  Pierre,  feeling  ashamed  as  he  spoke  of  the  in¬ 
congruity  of  his  words  with  the  solemnity  of  the  moment.  ‘I  assume  .  .  .’ 

‘Very  good,’  said  the  rhetor  hastily,  apparently  quite  satisfied  with  the 
reply.  ‘Have  you  sought  the  means  of  attaining  your  aim  in  religion?’ 

‘No;  I  regarded  it  as  untrue  and  have  not  followed  it,’  said  Pierre,  so 
softly  that  the  rhetor  did  not  catch  it,  and  asked  him  what  he  was  say¬ 
ing.  ‘I  was  an  atheist,’  answered  Pierre. 

‘You  seek  the  truth  in  order  to  follow  its  laws  in  life;  consequently, 
you  seek  wisdom  and  virtue,  do  you  not?’  said  the  rhetor,  after  a  mo¬ 
ment’s  pause. 

‘Yes,  yes,’  assented  Pierre. 


WARANDPEACE  331 

The  rhetor  cleared  his  throat,  folded  his  gloved  hands  across  his 
chest,  and  began  speaking. 

‘Now  I  must  reveal  to  you  the  chief  aim  of  our  order,’  he  said,  ‘and 
if  that  aim  coincides  with  yours,  you  may  with  profit  enter  our  brother¬ 
hood.  The  first  and  greatest  aim  and  united  basis  of  our  order,  on 
which  it  is  established  and  which  no  human  force  can  destroy,  is  the 
preservation  and  handing  down  to  posterity  of  a  certain  important  mys¬ 
tery  .  .  .  that  has  come  down  to  us  from  the  most  ancient  times,  even 
from  the  first  man — a  mystery  upon  which,  perhaps,  the  fate  of  the 
human  race  depends.  But  since  this  mystery  is  of  such  a  kind  that  no 
one  can  know  it  and  profit  by  it  if  he  has  not  been  prepared  by  a  pro¬ 
longed  and  diligent  self-purification,  not  every  one  can  hope  to  attain 
it  quickly.  Hence  we  have  a  second  aim,  which  consists  in  preparing  our 
members,  as  far  as  possible  reforming  their  hearts,  purifying  and  en¬ 
lightening  their  intelligence  by  those  means  which  have  been  revealed 
to  us  by  tradition  from  men  who  have  striven  to  attain  this  mystery,  and 
thereby  to  render  them  fit  for  the  reception  of  it.  Purifying  and  re¬ 
generating  our  members,  we  endeavour,  thirdly,  to  improve  the  whole 
human  race,  offering  it  in  our  members  an  example  of  piety  and  virtue, 
and  thereby  we  strive  with  all  our  strength  to  combat  the  evil  that  is 
paramount  in  the  world.  Ponder  on  these  things,  and  I  will  come  again 
to  you,’  he  said,  and  went  out  of  the  room. 

‘To  combat  the  evil  that  is  paramount  in  the  world  .  .  .’  Pierre  re¬ 
peated,  and  a  mental  image  of  his  future  activity  in  that  direction  rose 
before  him.  He  seemed  to  see  men  such  as  he  had  been  himself  a  fortnight 
ago,  and  he  was  mentally  addressing  an  edifying  exhortation  to  them. 
He  pictured  to  himself  persons  vicious  and  unhappy,  whom  he  would  help 
in  word  and  in  deed;  he  pictured  oppressors  whose  victims  he  would 
rescue.  Of  the  three  aims  enumerated  by  the  rhetor  the  last — the  refor¬ 
mation  of  the  human  race — appealed  particularly  to  Pierre.  The  great 
mystery  of  which  the  rhetor  had  made  mention,  though  it  excited  his 
curiosity,  did  not  strike  his  imagination  as  a  reality;  while  the  second 
aim,  the  purification  and  regeneration  of  himself,  had  little  interest  for 
him,  because  at  that  moment  he  was  full  of  a  blissful  sense  of  being 
completely  cured  of  all  his  former  vices,  and  being  ready  for  nothing 
but  goodness. 

Half  an  hour  later  the  rhetor  returned  to  enumerate  to  the  seeker  the 
seven  virtues  corresponding  to  the  seven  steps  of  the  temple  of  Solomon, 
in  which  every  freemason  must  train  himself.  Those  virtues  were:  (1) 
discretion,  the  keeping  of  the  secrets  of  the  order;  (2)  obedience  to  the 
higher  authorities  of  the  order;  (3)  morality;  (4)  love  for  mankind; 
(5)  courage;  (6)  liberality;  and  (7)  love  of  death. 

‘Seventhly,  strive,’  said  the  rhetor,  ‘by  frequent  meditation  upon  death 
to  bring  yourself  to  feel  it  not  an  enemy  to  be  dreaded,  but  a  friend  .  .  . 
which  delivers  the  soul  grown  wreary  in  the  labours  of  virtue  from  this 
distressful  life  and  leads  it  to  its  place  of  recompense  and  peace.’ 

‘Yes,  that’s  as  it  should  be,’  thought  Pierre,  when  the  rhetor  after  these 


332  WARANDPEACE 

words  left  him  again  to  solitary  reflection;  ‘that’s  as  it  ought  to  be,  but 
I’m  still  so  weak  as  to  love  this  life,  the  meaning  of  which  is  only  now 
by  degrees  being  revealed  to  me.’  But  the  other  five  virtues  which  Pierre 
recalled,  reckoning  them  on  his  fingers,  he  felt  already  in  his  soul; 
courage  and  liberality,  morality  and  love  for  mankind,  and  above  all, 
obedience,  which  seemed  to  him  not  to  be  a  virtue,  indeed,  but  a  happi¬ 
ness.  (It  was  such  a  joy  to  him  now  to  be  escaping  from  the  guidance  of 
his  own  caprice,  and  to  be  submitting  his  will  to  those  who  knew  the 
absolute  truth.)  The  seventh,  virtue  Pierre  had  forgotten,  and  he  could 
not  recall  it. 

The  third  time  the  rhetor  came  back  sooner,  and  asked  Pierre  whether 
he  were  still  resolute  in  his  intention,  and  whether  he  were  prepared  to 
submit  to  everything  that  would  be  demanded  of  him. 

‘I  am  ready  for  anything,’  said  Pierre. 

‘I  must  inform  you  further,’  said  the  rhetor,  ‘that  our  order  promul¬ 
gates  its  doctrine  not  by  word  only,  but  by  certain  means  which  have 
perhaps  on  the  true  seeker  after  wisdom  and  virtue  a  more  potent  effect 
than  merely  verbal  explanations.  This  temple,  with  what  you  see  therein, 
should  shed  more  light  on  your  heart,  if  it  is  sincere,  than  any  words 
can  do.  You  will  see,  maybe,  a  like  method  of  enlightenment  in  the  further 
rites  of  your  admittance.  Our  order  follows  the  usage  of  ancient  societies 
which  revealed  their  doctrine  in  hieroglyphs.  A  hieroglyph,’  said  the 
rhetor,  ‘is  the  name  given  to  a  symbol  of  some  object,  imperceptible  to 
the  senses  and  possessing  qualities  similar  to  those  of  the  symbol.’ 

Pierre  knew  very  well  what  a  hieroglyph  was,  but  he  did  not  venture 
to  say  so.  He  listened  to  the  rhetor  in  silence,  feeling  from  everything 
he  said  that  his  ordeal  was  soon  to  begin. 

‘If  you  are  resolved,  I  must  proceed  to  your  initiation,’  said  the  rhetor, 
coming  closer  to  Pierre.  ‘In  token  of  liberality  I  beg  you  to  give  me 
everything  precious  you  have.’ 

‘But  I  have  nothing  with  me,’  said  Pierre,  supposing  he  was  being 
asked  to  give  up  all  his  possessions. 

‘What  you  have  with  you:  watch,  money,  rings  .  .  .’ 

Pierre  made  haste  to  get  out  his  purse  and  his  watch,  and  was  a  long 
time  trying  to  get  his  betrothal  ring  off  his  fat  finger.  When  this  had 
been  done,  the  freemason  said: 

‘In  token  of  obedience  I  beg  you  to  undress.’  Pierre  took  off  his  coat 
and  waistcoat  and  left  boot  at  the  rhetor’s  instructions.  The  mason 
opened  his  shirt  over  the  left  sidc-of  his  chest  and  pulled  up  his  breeches 
on  the  left  leg  above  the  knee.  Pierre  would  hurriedly  have  taken  off  the 
right  boot  and  tucked  up  the  trouser-leg,  to  save  this  stranger  the  trouble 
of  doing  so,  but  the  mason  told  him  this  was  not  necessary  and  gave 
him  a  slipper  to  put  on  his  left  foot.  With  a  childish  smile  of  embar¬ 
rassment,  of  doubt,  and  of  self-mockery,  which  would  come  into  his 
face  in  spite  of  himself,  Pierre  stood  with  his  legs  wide  apart  and  his 
hands  hanging  at  his  side,  facing  the  rhetor  and  awaiting  his  next 
commands. 


333 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘And  finally,  in  token  of  candour,  I  beg  you  to  disclose  to  me  your 
chief  temptation,’  he  said. 

‘My  temptation!  I  had  so  many,’  said  Pierre. 

‘The  temptation  which  does  more  than  all  the  rest  to  make  you  stumble 
on  the  path  of  virtue,’  said  the  freemason. 

Pierre  paused,  seeking  a  reply. 

‘Wine?  gluttony?  frivolity?  laziness?  hasty  temper?  anger?  women?’ 
he  went  through  his  vices,  mentally  balancing  them,  and  not  knowing 
to  which  to  give  the  pre-eminence. 

‘Women,’  said  Pierre  in  a  low,  hardly  audible  voice.  The  freemason 
did  not  speak  nor  stir  for  a  long  while  after  that  reply.  At  last  he  moved 
up  to  Pierre,  took  the  handkerchief  that  lay  on  the  table,  and  again  tied 
it  over  his  eyes. 

‘For  the  last  time  I  say  to  you:  turn  all  your  attention  upon  yourself, 
put  a  bridle  on  your  feelings,  and  seek  blessedness  not  in  your  passions, 
but  in  your  own  heart.  The  secret  of  blessing  is  not  without  but  within 
us.  .  .  .’ 

Pierre  had  for  a  long  while  been  conscious  of  this  refreshing  fount  of 
blessing  within  him,  that  now  flooded  his  heart  with  joy  and  emotion. 


IV 

Shortly  after  this,  there  walked  into  the  dark  temple  to  fetch  Pierre, 
not  the  rhetor,  but  his  sponsor  Villarsky,  whom  he  recognised  by  his 
voice.  In  reply  to  fresh  inquiries  as  to  the  firmness  of  his  resolve,  Pierre 
answered: 

‘Yes,  yes,  I  agree,’  and  with  a  beaming,  childlike  smile  he  walked 
forward,  stepping  timidly  and  unevenly  with  one  booted  .and  one  slip¬ 
pered  foot,  while  Villarsky  held  a  sword  pointed  at  his  fat,  uncovered 
chest.  He  was  led  out  of  the  room  along  corridors,  turning  backwards  and 
forwards,  till  at  last  he  was  brought  to  the  doors  of  the  lodge.  Villarsky 
coughed;  he  was  answered  by  masonic  taps  with  hammers;  the  door 
opened  before  them.  A  bass  voice  (Pierre’s  eyes  were  again  bandaged) 
put  questions  to  him,  who  he  was,  where  and  when  he  was  born,  and 
so  on.  Then  he  was  again  led  away  somewhere  with  his  eyes  still 
bandaged,  and  as  he  walked  they  spoke  to  him  in  allegories  of  the  toils 
of  his  pilgrimage,  and  of  holy  love,  of  the  Eternal  Creator  of  the  world, 
of  the  courage  with  which  he  was  to  endure  toils  and  dangers.  During 
this  time  Pierre  noticed  that  he  was  called  sometimes  the  seeker,  some¬ 
times  the  sufferer,  and  sometimes  the  postulant,  and  that  they  made 
various  tapping  sounds  with  hammers  and  with  swords.  While  he  was 
being  led  up  to  some  object,  he  noticed  that  there  was  hesitation  and 
uncertainty  among  his  conductors.  He  heard  a  whispered  dispute  among 
the  people  round  him,  and  one  of  them  insisting  that  he  should  be  made 
to  cross  a  certain  carpet.  After  this  they  took  his  right  hand,  laid  it  on 
something,  while  they  bade  him  with  the  left  hold  a  compass  to  his  left 


334  WAR  AND  PEACE 

breast,  while  they  made  him  repeat  after  some  one  who  read  the  words 
aloud,  the  oath  of  fidelity  to  the  laws  of  the  order.  Then  the  candles  were 
extinguished  and  spirit  was  lighted,  as  Pierre  knew  from  the  smell  of  it, 
and  he  was  told  that  he  would  see  the  lesser  light.  The  bandage  was 
taken  off  his  eyes,  and  in  the  faint  light  of  the  burning  spirit  Pierre  saw, 
as  though  it  were  in  a  dream,  several  persons  who  stood  facing  him  in 
aprons  like  the  rhetor’s,  and  held  swords  pointed  at  his  breast.  Among 
them  stood  a  man  in  a  white  shirt  stained  with  blood.  On  seeing  this, 
Pierre  moved  with  his  chest  forward  towards  the  swords,  meaning  them 
to  stab  him.  But  the  swords  were  drawn  back,  and  the  bandage  was  at 
once  replaced  on  his  eyes. 

‘Now  you  have  seen  the  lesser  light,’  said  a  voice.  Then  again  they 
lighted  the  candles,  told  him  that  he  had  now  to  see  the  full  light,  and 
again  removed  the  bandage,  and  more  than  ten  voices  said  all  at  once: 
‘Sic  transit  gloria  mundi.’ 

Pierre  gradually  began  to  regain  his  self-possession,  and  to  look  about 
at  the  room  and  the  people  in  it.  Round  a  long  table  covered  with  black 
were  sitting  some  dozen  men,  all  in  the  same  strange  garment  that  he  had 
tseen  before.  Several  of  them  Pierre  knew  in  Petersburg  society.  In  the 
president’s  chair  sat  a  young  man,  with  a  peculiar  cross  on  his  neck, 
whom  he  did  not  know.  On  his  right  hand  sat  the  Italian  abbe  whom 
Pierre  had  seen  two  years  before  at  Anna  Pavlovna’s.  There  were  among 
them  a  dignitary  of  very  high  standing  and  a  Swiss  tutor,  who  had  once 
been  in  the  Kuragin  family.  All  preserved  a  solemn  silence,  listening  to 
the  president,  who  held  a  hammer  in  his  hand.  In  the  wall  was  carved 
a  blazing  star;  on  one  side  of  the  table  was  a  small  rug  with  various 
figures  worked  upon  it;  on  the  other  was  something  like  an  altar  with 
the  gospel  and  a  skull  on  it.  Round  the  table  stood  seven  big  ecclesiastical- 
looking  candlesticks.  Two  of  the  brothers  led  Pierre  up  to  the  altar,  set 
his  feet  at  right  angles  and  bade  him  lie  down,  saying  that  he  would  be 
casting  himself  down  at  the  gates  of  the  temple. 

‘He  ought  first  to  receive  the  spade,’  said  one  of  the  brothers  in  a 
whisper. 

‘Oh!  hush,  please,’  said  another. 

Pierre  did  not  obey,  but  with  uneasy  short-sighted  eyes  looked  about 
him,  and  suddenly  doubt  came  over  him.  ‘Where  am  I?  What  am  I 
doing?  Aren’t  they  laughing  at  me?  Shan’t  I  be  ashamed  to  remember 
this?’  But  this  doubt  only  lasted  a  moment.  Pierre  looked  round  at  the 
serious  faces  of  the  people  round  him,  thought  of  all  he  had  just  been 
through,  and  felt  that  there  was  no  stopping  half-way.  He  was  terrified 
at  his  own  hesitation,  and  trying  to  arouse  in  himself  his  former  devotional 
feeling,  he  cast  himself  down  at  the  gates  of  the  temple.  And  the  devo¬ 
tional  feeling  did  in  fact  come  more  strongly  than  ever  upon  him.  When 
he  had  lain  there  some  time,  he  was  told  to  get  up,  and  a  white  leather 
apron  such  as  the  others  wore  was  put  round  him,  and  a  spade  and 
three  pairs  of  gloves  were  put  in  his  hands;  then  the  grand  master  ad¬ 
dressed  him.  He  told  him  that  he  must  try  never  to  stain  the  whiteness 


WARANDPEACE  335 

of  that  apron,  which  symbolised  strength  and  purity.  Then  of  the  un¬ 
explained  spade  he  told  him  to  toil  with  it  at  clearing  his  heart  from 
vice,  and  with  forbearing  patience  smoothing  the  way  in  the  heart  of  his 
neighbour.  Then  of  the  first  pair  of  gloves  he  said  that  he  could  not  know 
yet  their  significance,  but  must  treasure  them;  of  the  second  pair  he 
said  that  he  must  put  them  on  at  meetings;  and  finally  of  the  third  pair 
— they  were  women’s  gloves — he  said: 

‘Dear  brother,  and  these  woman’s  gloves  are  destined  for  you  too. 
Give  them  to  the  woman  whom  you  shall  honour  beyond  all  others.  That 
gift  will  be  a  pledge  of  your  purity  of  heart  to  her  whom  you  select  as  a 
worthy  helpmeet  in  masonry.’  After  a  brief  pause,  he  added:  ‘But  beware, 
dear  brother,  that  these  gloves  never  deck  hands  that  are  impure.’ 

While  the  grand  master  uttered  the  last  words  it  seemed  to  Pierre  that 
he  was  embarrassed.  Pierre  was  even  more  embarrassed;  he  blushed  to 
the  point  of  tears,  as  children  blush,  looking  about  him  uneasily,  and 
an  awkward  silence  followed. 

This  silence  was  broken  by  one  of  the  brothers  who,  leading  Pierre  to 
the  rug,  began  reading  out  of  a  manuscript  book  the  interpretation  of  all 
the  figures  delineated  upon  it:  the  sun,  the  moon,  the  hammer,  the 
balance,  the  spade,  the  rough  stone  and  the  shaped  stone,  the  post,  the 
three  windows,  etc.  Then  Pierre  was  shown  his  appointed  place,  he  was 
shown  the  signs  of  the  lodge,  told  the  password,  and  at  last  permitted 
to  sit  down.  The  grand  master  began  reading  the  exhortation.  The  ex¬ 
hortation  was  very  long,  and  Pierre  in  his  joy,  his  emotion,  and  his  em¬ 
barrassment  was  hardly  in  a  condition  to  understand  what  was  read. 
He  only  grasped  the  last  words  of  the  exhortation,  which  stuck  in  his 
memory. 

‘In  our  temples  we  know  of  no  distinctions,’  read  the  grand  master, 
‘but  those  between  virtue  and  vice.  Beware  of  making  any  difference  that 
may  transgress  against  equality.  Fly  to  the  succour  of  a  brother  whoever 
he  may  be,  exhort  him  that  goeth  astray,  lift  up  him  that  falleth,  and 
cherish  not  malice  nor  hatred  against  a  brother.  Be  thou  friendly  and 
courteous.  Kindle  in  all  hearts  the  fire  of  virtue.  Share  thy  happiness  with 
thy  neighbour,  and  never  will  envy  trouble  that  pure  bliss.  Forgive  thy 
enemy,  revenge  not  thyself  on  him  but  by  doing  him  good.  Fulfilling  in 
this  wise  the  highest  law,  thou  wilt  regain  traces  of  the  ancient  grandeur 
thou  hadst  lost,’  he  concluded,  and  getting  up  he  embraced  Pierre  and 
kissed  him. 

Pierre  looked  round  with  tears  of  joy  in  his  eyes,  not  knowing  how  to 
answer  the  congratulations  and  greetings  from  acquaintances  with  which 
he  was  surrounded.  He  did  not  recognise  any  acquaintances;  in  all  these 
men  he  saw  only  brothers,  and  he  burned  with  impatience  to  get  to  work 
with  them.  The  grand  master  tapped  with  his  hammer,  all  sat  down  in 
their  places,  and  one  began  reading  a  sermon  on  the  necessity  of  meekness. 

The  grand  master  proposed  that  the  last  duty  be  performed,  and  the 
great  dignitary  whose  duty  it  was  to  collect  the  alms  began  making  the 
round  of  all  the  brothers.  Pierre  would  have  liked  to  give  to  the  list  of 


336  WAR  AND  PEACE 

alms  all  the  money  he  had  in  the  world,  but  he  feared  thereby  to  sin  by 
pride,  and  only  wrote  down  the  same  sum  as  the  others. 

The  sitting  was  over,  and  it  seemed  to  Pierre  on  returning  home  that 
he  had  come  back  from  a  long  journey  on  which  he  had  spent  dozens  of 
years,  and  had  become  utterly  changed,  and  had  renounced  his  old  habits 
and  manner  of  life. 

V 

The  day  after  his  initiation  at  the  Lodge,  Pierre  was  sitting  at  home 
reading  a  book,  and  trying  to  penetrate  to  the  significance  of  the  square, 
which  symbolised  by  one  of  its  sides,  God,  by  another  the  moral,  by  the 
third  the  physical,  by  the  fourth  the  nature  of  both  mingled.  Now  and 
then  he  broke  off  from  the  book  and  the  symbolic  square,  and  in  his 
imagination  shaped  his  new  plan  of  life.  On  the  previous  day  he  had 
been  told  at  the  lodge  that  the  rumour  of  the  duel  had  reached  the 
Emperor’s  ears,  and  that  it  would  be  more  judicious  for  him  to  withdraw 
from  Petersburg.  Pierre  proposed  going  to  his  estates  in  the  south,  and 
there  occupying  himself  with  the  care  of  his  peasants.  He  was  joyfully 
dreaming  of  this  new  life  when  Prince  Vassily  suddenly  walked  into  his 
room. 

‘My  dear  fellow,  what  have  you  been  about  in  Moscow?  What  have 
you  been  quarrelling  over  with  Ellen,  my  dear  boy?  You  have  been 
making  a  mistake,’  said  Prince  Vassily,  as  he  came  into  the  room.  ‘I  have 
heard  all  about  it;  I  can  tell  you  for  a  fact  that  Ellen  is  as  innocent  in 
her  conduct  towards  you  as  Christ  was  to  the  Jews.’ 

Pierre  would  have  answered,  but  he  interrupted  him. 

‘And  why  didn’t  you  come  simply  and  frankly  to  me  as  to  a  friend? 
I  know  all  about  it;  I  understand  it  all,’  said  he.  ‘You  have  behaved  as 
was  proper  for  a  man  who  valued  his  honour,  too  hastily,  perhaps,  but 
we  won’t  go  into  that.  One  thing  you  must  think  of,  the  position  you  are 
placing  her  and  me  in,  in  the  eyes  of  society  and  even  of  the  court,’  he 
added,  dropping  his  voice.  ‘She  is  in  Moscow,  while  you  are  here.  Think 
of  it,  my  dear  boy.’  He  drew  him  down  by  the  arm.  ‘It’s  simply  a  mis¬ 
understanding;  I  expect  you  feel  it  so  yourself.  Write  a  letter  with  me 
now  at  once,  and  she’ll  come  here,  and  everything  will  be  explained,  or 
else,  I  tell  you  plainly,  my  dear  boy,  you  may  very  easily  have  to  suffer 
for  it.’ 

Prince  Vassily  looked  significantly  at  Pierre. 

‘I  have  learned  from  excellent  sources  that  the  Dowager  Empress  is 
taking  a  keen  interest  in  the  whole  affair.  You  know  she  is  very  graciously 
disposed  to  Ellen.’ 

Several  times  Pierre  had  prepared  himself  to  speak,  but  on  one  hand 
Prince  Vassily  would  not  let  him,  and  on  the  other  hand  Pierre  himself 
was  loath  to  begin  to  speak  in  the  tone  of  resolute  refusal  and  denial,  in 
which  he  was  firmly  resolved  to  answer  his  father-in-law.  Moreover  the 
words  of  the  masonic  precept:  ‘Be  thou  friendly  and  courteous,’  recurred 


WARANDPEACE  337 

to  his  mind.  He  blinked  and  blushed,  got  up  and  sank  back  again,  trying 
to  force  himself  to  do  what  was  for  him  the  hardest  thing  in  life — to  say 
an  unpleasant  thing  to  a  man’s  face,  to  say  w'hat  was  not  expected  by 
that  man,  whoever  he  might  be.  He  was  so  much  in  the  habit  of  submitting 
to  that  tone  of  careless  authority  in  which  Prince  Vassily  spoke,  that 
even  now  he  felt  incapable  of  resisting  it.  But  he  felt,  too,  that  on  what 
he  said  now  all  his  future  fate  would  depend;  that  it  would  decide 
whether  he  continued  along  the  old  way  of  his  past  life,  or  advanced  along 
the  new  path  that  had  been  so  attractively  pointed  out  to  him  by  the 
masons,  and  that  he  firmly  believed  would  lead  him  to  regeneration  in 
a  new  life. 

‘Come,  my  dear  boy,’  said  Prince  Vassily  playfully,  ‘simply  say  “yes,” 
and  I’ll  write  on  my  own  account  to  her,  and  we’ll  kill  the  fatted  calf.’ 
But  before  Prince  Vassily  had  finished  uttering  his  playful  words,  Pierre 
not  looking  at  him,  but  with  a  fury  in  his  face  that  made  him  like  his 
father,  whispered,  ‘Prince,  I  did  not  invite  you  here;  go,  please,  go!’ 
He  leaped  up  and  opened  the  door  to  him.  ‘Go!’  he  repeated,  amazed  at 
himself  and  enjoying  the  expression  of  confusion  and  terror  in  the  coun¬ 
tenance  of  Prince  Vassily. 

‘What’s  the  matter  with  you?  are  you  ill?’ 

‘Go!’  the  quivering  voice  repeated  once  more.  And  Prince  Vassily  had 
to  go,  without  receiving  a  word  of  explanation. 

A  week  later  Pierre  went  away  to  his  estates,  after  taking  leave  of  his 
new  friends,  the  freemasons,  and  leaving  large  sums  in  their  hands  for 
alms.  His  new  brethren  gave  him  letters  for  Kiev  and  Odessa,  to  masons 
living  there,  and  promised  to  write  to  him  and  guide  him  in  his  new 
activity. 


VI 

Pierre’s  duel  with  Dolohov  was  smoothed  over,  and  in  spite  of  the 
Tsar’s  severity  in  regard  to  duels  at  that  time,  neither  the  principals  nor 
the  seconds  suffered  for  it.  But  the  scandal  of  the  duel,  confirmed  by 
Pierre’s  rupture  with  his  wife,  made  a  great  noise  in  society.  Pierre  had 
been  looked  upon  with  patronising  condescension  when  he  was  an  il¬ 
legitimate  son;  he  had  been  made  much  of  and  extolled  for  his  virtues 
while  he  was  the  wealthiest  match  in  the  Russian  empire;  but  after  his 
marriage,  when  young  ladies  and  their  mothers  had  nothing  to  hope  from 
him,  he  had  fallen  greatly  in  the  opinion  of  society,  especially  as  he  had 
neither  the  wit  nor  the  wish  to  ingratiate  himself  in  public  favour.  Now 
the  blame  of  the  whole  affair  was  thrown  on  him;  it  was  said  that  he  was 
insanely  jealous,  and  subject  to  the  same  fits  of  bloodthirsty  fury  as  his 
father  had  been.  And  when,  after  Pierre’s  departure,  Ellen  returned  to 
Petersburg,  she  was  received  by  all  her  acquaintances  not  only  cordially, 
but  with  a  shade  of  deference  that  was  a  tribute  to  her  distress.  When  the 
conversation  touched  upon  her  husband,  Ellen  assumed  an  expression  of 
dignity,  which  her  characteristic  tact  prompted  her  to  adopt,  though  she 


338  WAR  AND  PEACE 

had  no  conception  of  its  significance.  That  expression  suggested  that  she 
had  resolved  to  bear  her  amiction  without  complaint,  and  that  her  hus¬ 
band  was  a  cross  God  had  laid  upon  her.  Prince  Vassily  expressed  his 
opinion  more  openly.  He  shrugged  his  shoulders  when  the  conversation 
turned  upon  Tierre,  and  pointing  to  his  forehead,  said: 

‘Crackbrained,  I  always  said  so.’ 

‘I  used  to  say  so  even  before,’  Anna  Pavlovna  would  say  of  Pierre,  ‘at 
the. time  I  said  at  once  and  before  every  one’  (she  insisted  on  her  priority) 
‘that  he  was  an  insane  young  man,  corrupted  by  the  dissolute  ideas  of  the 
age.  I  used  to  say  so  at  the  time  when  every  one  was  in  such  ecstasies  over 
him;  and  he  had  only  just  come  home  from  abroad,  and  do  you  remember 
at  one  of  my  soirees  he  thought  fit  to  pose  as  a  sort  of  Marat?  And  how 
has  it  ended?  Even  then  I  was  against  this  marriage,  and  foretold  all  that 
has  come  to  pass.’ 

Anna  Pavlovna  used  still  to  give  soirees  on  her  free  days  as  before, 
soirees  such  as  only  she  had  the  gift  of  arranging,  soirees  at  which  were 
gathered  ‘the  cream  of  really  good  society,  the  flower  of  the  intellectual 
essence  of  Petersburg  society,’  as  Anna  Pavlovna  herself  used  to  say. 
Besides  this  fine  sifting  of  the  society,  Anna  Pavlovna’s  soirees  were 
further  distinguished  by  some  new  interesting  person,  secured  by  the 
hostess  on  every  occasion  for  the  entertainment  of  the  company.  More¬ 
over,  the  point  on  the  political  thermometer,  at  which  the  temperature  of 
loyal  court  society  stood  in  Petersburg,  was  nowhere  so  clearly  and  un¬ 
mistakably  marked  as  at  these  soirees. 

Towards  the  end  of  the  year  1806,  when  all  the  melancholy  details  of 
Napoleon’s  destruction  of  the  Prussian  army  at  Jena  and  Auerstadt,  and 
the  surrender  of  the  greater  number  of  the  Prussian  forts,  had  arrived, 
when  our  troops  were  already  entering  Prussia,  and  our  second  war  with 
Napoleon  was  beginning,  Anna  Pavlovna  was  giving  one  of  her  soirees. 
‘The  cream  of  really  good  society’  consisted  of  the  fascinating  and  un¬ 
happy  Ellen,  abandoned  by  her  husband ;  of  Mortemart ;  of  the  fascinating 
Prince  Ippolit,  who  had  just  come  home  from  Vienna;  of  two  diplomats, 
of  the  old  aunt;  of  a  young  man,  always  referred  to  in  that  society  by  the 
designation,  ‘a  man  of  a  great  deal  of  merit  .  .  .’;  of  a  newly  appointed 
maid  of  honour  and  her  mother,  and  several  other  less  noteworthy  persons. 

The  novelty  Anna  Pavlovna  was  offering  her  guests  for  their  entertain¬ 
ment  that  evening  was  Boris  Drubetskoy,  who  had  just  arrived  as  a 
special  messenger  from  the  Prussian  army,  and  was  in  the  suite  of  a 
personage  of  very  high  rank. 

What  the  political  thermometer  indicated  at  that  soiree  was  something 
as  follows:  All  the  European  rulers  and  generals  may  do  their  utmost 
to  flatter  Bonaparte  with  the  object  of  causing  me  and  us  generally  these 
annoyances  and  mortifications,  but  our  opinion  in  regard  to  Bonaparte 
can  undergo  no  change.  We  do  not  cease  giving  undisguised  expression  to 
our  way  of  thinking  on  the  subject,  and  can  only  say  to  the  Prussian 
king  and  others:  ‘So  much  the  worse  for  you.’  ‘Tu  l’ as  voulu,  George 
Dandin,’  that’s  all  we  can  say.  This  was  what  the  political  thermometer 


WAR  AND  PEACE  339 

indicated  at  Anna  Pavlovna’s  soiree.  When  Boris,  who  was  to  be  offered 
up  to  the  guests,  came  into  the  drawing-room,  almost  all  the  company 
had  assembled,  and  the  conversation,  guided  by  Anna  Pavlovna,  was  of 
our  diplomatic  relations  with  Austria,  and  the  hope  of  an  alliance  with  her. 

Boris,  fresh,  rosy,  and  manlier  looking,  walked  easily  into  the  drawing¬ 
room,  wearing  the  elegant  uniform  of  an  adjutant.  He  was  duly  conducted 
to  pay  his  respects  to  the  aunt,  and  then  joined  the  general  circle. 

Anna  Pavlovna  gave  him  her  shrivelled  hand  to  kiss,  introduced  him 
to  several  persons  whom  he  did  not  know,  and  gave  him  a  whispered 
description  of  each  of  them.  ‘Prince  Ippolit  Kuragin,  M.  Krug,  charge 
d’affaires  from  Copenhagen,  a  profound  intellect  and  simply,  M.  Shitov, 
a  man  of  a  great  deal  of  merit  .  .  .’  this  of  the  young  man  always  so 
spoken  of. 

Thanks  to  the  efforts  of  Anna  Mihalovna,  his  own  tastes  and  the 
peculiarities  of  his  reserved  character,  Boris  had  succeeded  by  that  time 
in  getting  into  a  very  advantageous  position  in  the  service.  He  was  an 
adjutant  in  the  suite  of  a  personage  of  very  high  rank,  he  had  received 
a  very  important  commission  in  Prussia,  and  had  only  just  returned  thence 
as  a  special  messenger.  He  had  completely  assimilated  that  unwritten 
code  which  had  so  pleased  him  at  Olmiitz,  that  code  in  virtue  of  which 
a  lieutenant  may  stand  infinitely  higher  than  a  general,  and  all  that  is 
needed  for  success  in  the  service  is  not  effort,  not  work,  not  gallantry,  not 
perseverance,  but  simply  the  art  of  getting  on  with  those  who  have  the 
bestowal  of  promotion,  and  he  often  himself  marvelled  at  the  rapidity 
of  his  own  progress,  and  that  others  failed  to  grasp  the  secret  of  it.  His 
whole  manner  of  life,  all  his  relations  with  his  old  friends,  all  his  plans 
for  the  future  were  completely  transformed  in  consequence  of  this  dis¬ 
covery.  He  was  not  well  off,  but  he  spent  his  last  copeck  to  be  better 
dressed  than  others.  He  would  have  deprived  himself  of  many  pleasures 
rather  than  have  allowed  himself  to  drive  in  an  inferior  carriage,  or  to 
be  seen  in  the  streets  of  Petersburg  in  an  old  uniform.  He  sought  the 
acquaintance  and  cultivated  the  friendship  only  of  persons  who  were  in 
a  higher  position,  and  could  consequently  be  of  use  to  him.  He  loved 
Petersburg  and  despised  Moscow.  Plis  memories  of  the  Rostov  household 
and  his  childish  passion  for  Natasha  were  distasteful  to  him,  and  he  had 
not  once  been  at  the  Rostovs’  since  he  had  entered  the  army.  In  Anna 
Pavlovna’s  drawing-room,  his  entry  into  which  he  looked  upon  as  an 
important  step  upward  in  the  service,  be  at  once  took  his  cue,  and  let 
Anna  Pavlovna  make  the  most  of  what  interest  he  had  to  offer,  while 
himself  attentively  watching  every  face  and  appraising  the  advantages 
and  possibilities  of  intimacy  with  every  one  of  the  persons  present.  He 
sat  on  the  seat  indicated  to  him  beside  the  fair  Ellen  and  listened  to  the 
general  conversation. 

‘Vienna  considers  the  bases  of  the  proposed  treaty  so  unattainable  that 
not  even  a  continuance  of  the  most  brilliant  successes  would  put  them 
within  reach,  and  doubts  whether  any  means  could  gain  them  for  us. 


340  WARANDPEACE 

These  are  the  actual  words  of  the  ministry  in  Vienna,’  said  the  Danish 
charge  d’affaires. 

Tt  is  polite  of  them  to  doubt,’  said  the  man  of  profound  intellect  with 
a  subtle  smile. 

‘We  must  distinguish  between  the  ministry  in  Vienna  and  the  Emperor 
of  Austria,’  said  Mortemart.  ‘The  Emperor  of  Austria  can  never  have 
thought  of  such  a  thing;  it  is  only  the  ministers  who  say  it.’ 

‘Ah,  my  dear  vicomte,’  put  in  Anna  Pavlovna;  ‘Europe  will  never  be 
our  sincere  ally.’ 

Then  Anna  Pavlovna  turned  the  conversation  upon  the  courage  and 
firmness  of  the  Prussian  king,  with  the  object  of  bringing  Boris  into  action. 

Boris  listened  attentively  to  the  person  who  was  speaking,  and  waited 
for  his  turn,  but  meanwhile  he  had  leisure  to  look  round  several  times 
at  the  fair  Ellen,  who  several  times  met  the  handsome  young  adjutant’s 
eyes  with  a  smile. 

Very  naturally,  speaking  of  the  position  of  Prussia,  Anna  Pavlovna 
asked  Boris  to  describe  his  journey  to  Glogau,  and  the  position  in  which 
he  had  found  the  Prussian  army.  Boris  in  his  pure,  correct  French,  told 
them  very  deliberately  a  great  many  interesting  details  about  .the  armies, 
and  the  court,  studiously  abstaining  from  any  expression  of  his  own 
opinion  in  regard  to  the  facts  he  was  narrating.  For  some  time  Boris 
engrossed  the  whole  attention  of  the  company,  and  Anna  Pavlovna  felt 
that  the  novelty  she  was  serving  her  guests  was  being  accepted  by  them 
all  with  pleasure.  Of  all  the  party,  the  person  who  showed  most  interest 
in  Boris’s  description  was  Ellen.  She  asked  him  several  questions  about 
his  expedition,  and  seemed  to  be  extremely  interested  in  the  position 
of  the  Prussian  army.  As  soon  as  he  had  finished,  she  turned  to  him  with 
her  habitual  smile. 

‘You  absolutely  must  come  and  see  me,’  she  said  in  a  tone  that  sug¬ 
gested  that  for  certain  considerations,  of  which  he  could  have  no  knowl¬ 
edge,  it  was  absolutely  essential.  ‘On  Tuesday  between  eight  and  nine. 
It  will  give  me  great  pleasure.’ 

Boris  promised  to  do  so,  and  was  about  to  enter  into  conversation  with 
her,  when  Anna  Pavlovna  drew  him  aside  on  the  pretext  that  her  aunt 
wished  to  hear  his  story. 

‘You  know  her  husband,  of  course?’  said  Anna  Pavlovna,  dropping 
her  eyelids,  and  with  a  melancholy  gesture  indicating  Ellen.  ‘Ah,  such 
an  unhappy  and  exquisite  woman!  Don’t  speak  of  him  before  her;  pray, 
don’t  speak  of  him.  It’s  too  much  for  her!’ 


VII 

When  Boris  and  Anna  Pavlovna  returned  to  the  rest,  Prince  Ippolit 
was  in  possession  of  the  ear  of  the  company.  Bending  forward  in  his  low 
chair,  he  was  saying: 

‘The  King  of  Prussia!’  and  as  he  said  it,  he  laughed.  Every  one  turned 


WARANDPEACE  341 

towards  him.  ‘The  King  of  Prussia/  Ippolit  said  interrogatively,  and 
again  he  laughed  and  again  settled  himself  placidly  and  seriously  in  the 
depths  of  his  big,  low  chair.  Anna  Pavlovna  paused  a  little  for  him,  but 
as  Ippolit  seemed  quite  certainly  not  intending  to  say  more,  she  began 
to  speak  of  how  the  godless  Bonaparte  had  at  Potsdam  carried  off  the 
sword  of  Frederick  the  Great. 

‘It  is  the  sword  of  Frederick  the  Great,  which  I  .  .  .’  she  was  begin¬ 
ning,  but  Ippolit  interrupted  her  with  the  words: 

‘The  King  of  Prussia  .  .  /  and  again  as  soon  as  all  turned  to  listen 
to  him,  he  excused  himself  and  said  no  more.  Anna  Pavlovna  frowned. 
Mortemart,  Ippolit’s  friend,  addressed  him  with  decision: 

‘Come,  what  are  you  after  with  your  King  of  Prussia?’ 

Ippolit  laughed  as  though  he  were  ashamed  of  his  own  laughter. 

‘No,  it’s  nothing.  I  only  meant  .  .  .’  (He  had  intended  to  repeat  a 
joke  that  he  had  heard  in  Vienna  and  had  been  trying  all  the  evening  to 
get  in.)  ‘I  only  meant  that  we  are  wrong  to  make  war  for  the  King  of 
Prussia.’ 1 

Boris  smiled  circumspectly,  a  smile  that  might  do  duty  either  for  a 
sneer  or  a  tribute  to  the  jest,  according  to  the  way  it  was  received.  Every 
one  laughed. 

‘It  is  too  bad,  your  joke,  very  witty  but  unjust,’  said  Anna  Pavlovna, 
shaking  her  little  wrinkled  finger  at  him.  ‘We  are  not  making  war  for  the 
sake  of  the  King  of  Prussia,  but  for  the  sake  of  right  principles.  Ah,  le 
mechant,  ce  Prince  Hippolyte!’  she  said. 

The  conversation  did  not  flag  all  the  evening,  and  turned  principally 
upon  the  political  news.  Towards  the  end  of  the  evening  it  became  par¬ 
ticularly  eager,  when  the  rewards  bestowed  by  the  Tsar  were  the  subjects 
of  discussion. 

‘Why,  last  year  N.  N.  received  the  snuff-box  with  the  portrait,’  said 
the  man  of  profound  intellect.  ‘Why  shouldn’t  S.  S.  receive  the  same 
reward?’ 

‘I  beg  your  pardon,  a  snuff-box  with  the  Emperor’s  portrait  is  a  re¬ 
ward,  but  not  a  distinction,’  said  a  diplomatist.  ‘A  present,  rather.’ 

‘There  are  precedents.  I  would  instance  Schwartzenberg.’ 

‘It  is  impossible,’  retorted  another. 

‘A  bet  on  it.  The  ribbon  of  the  order  is  different.’ 

When  every  one  got  up  to  take  leave,  Ellen,  who  had  said  very  little 
all  the  evening,  turned  to  Boris  again  with  a  request,  and  a  caressing, 
impressive  command  that  he  would  come  to  her  on  Tuesday. 

‘It  is  of  great  importance  to  me,’  she  said  with  a  smile,  looking  round 
at  Anna  Pavlovna,  and  Anna  Pavlovna,  with  the  same  mournful  smile 
with  which  she  accompanied  any  reference  to  her  royal  patroness,  gave 
her  support  to  Ellen’s  wishes.  It  appeared  that  from  some  words  Boris 
had  uttered  that  evening  about  the  Prussian  army  Ellen  had  suddenly 

1  Faire  quelque  chose  pour  le  roi  de  Prusse,’  is  a  French  idiom,  meaning  to  do 
anything  for  insufficient  reason  or  in  vain. 


542  W  A  R  A  N  D  P  E  A  C  E 

discovered  the  absolute  necessity  of  seeing  him.  She  seemed  to  promise 
him  that  when  he  came  on  Tuesday  she  would  disclose  to  him  that  neces¬ 
sity.  When  Boris  entered  Ellen’s  magnificent  reception-room  on  Tuesday 
evening  he  received  no  clear  explanation  of  the  urgent  reasons  for  his 
visit.  Other  guests  were  present,  the  countess  talked  little  to  him,  and 
only  as  he  kissed  her  hand  at  taking  leave,  with  a  strangely  unsmiling 
face,  she  whispered  to  him  unexpectedly: 

‘Come  to  dinner  to-morrow  ...  in  the  evening  .  .  .  you  must 
come  .  .  .  come.’ 

During  that  stay  in  Petersburg  Boris  was  constantly  at  the  house 
of  the  Countess  Bezuhov  on  a  footing  of  the  closest  intimacy. 


VIII 

War  had  broken  out  and  the  theatre  of  it  was  closer  to  the  borders  of 
Russia.  On  all  sides  could  be  heard  curses  upon  the  enemy  of  the  human 
race,  Bonaparte;  in  the  villages  there  were  levies  of  recruits  and  reserve 
men,  and  from  the  theatre  of  war  came  news  of  the  most  conflicting  kind, 
false  as  usual,  and  hence  variously  interpreted. 

The  life  of  the  old  Prince  Bolkonsky,  of  Prince  Andrey,  and  of  Princess 
Marya  was  greatly  changed  since  the  year  1805. 

In  1806  the  old  prince  had  been  appointed  one  of  the  eight  commanders- 
in-chief,  created  at  that  time  for  the  equipment  of  the  militia  throughout 
all  Russia.  In  spite  of  his  weakness  and  age,  which  had  been  particularly 
noticeable  during  the  time  when  he  believed  his  son  to  have  been  killed, 
the  old  prince  did  not  think  it  right  to  refuse  a  duty  to  which  he  had  been 
appointed  by  the  Emperor  himself,  and  this  new  field  for  his  activity  gave 
him  fresh  energy  and  strength.  He  was  continually  away  on  tours  about 
the  three  provinces  that  were  put  under  his  command;  he  was  punctilious 
to  pedantry  in  the  performance  of  his  duties,  severe  to  cruelty  with  his 
subordinates,  and  entered  into  the  minutest  details  of  the  work  himself. 
Princess  Marya  no  longer  took  lessons  in  mathematics  from  her  father, 
and  only  went  into  her  father’s  room  on  the  mornings  when  he  was  at 
home,  accompanied  by  the  wet  nurse  and  little  Prince  Nikolay  (as  his 
grandfather  called  him).  The  baby,  Prince  Nikolay,  with  his  wet  nurse 
and  the  old  nurse  Savishna,  occupied  the  rooms  that  had  been  his  mother’s, 
and  Princess  Marya  spent  most  of  her  time  in  the  nursery  taking  a 
mother’s  place  to  her  little  nephew,  to  the  best  of  her  powers.  Made¬ 
moiselle  Bourienne,  too,  appeared  to  be  passionately  fond  of  the  child, 
and  Princess  Marya  often  sacrificed  herself  by  giving  up  to  her  friend 
the  pleasure  of  dandling  and  playing  with  the  little  angel  (as  she  called 
the  baby). 

Near  the  altar  of  the  church  at  Bleak  Hills  was  a  little  chapel  over 
the  tomb  of  the  little  princess,  and  in  the  chapel  had  been  placed  a 
marble  monument  brought  from  Italy,  representing  an  angel  with  its 
wings  parted  about  to  take  flight  for  heaven.  The  angel  had  the  upper 


WARANDPEACE  343 

lip  lifted  as  thougn  about  to  smile,  and  one  day  Prince  Andrey  and 
Princess  Marya,  as  they  came  out  of  the  chapel,  confessed  to  one  another 
that,  strange  to  say,  the  face  of  the  angel  reminded  them  of  the  face  of 
the  little  princess.  But  what  was  stranger,  though  this  Prince  Andrey 
did  not  confess  to  his  sister,  was  that  in  the  expression  the  sculptor  had 
chanced  to  put  into  the  angel’s  face,  Prince  Andrey  read  the  same  words 
of  reproach  which  he  had  read  then  on  the  face  of  his  dead  wife:  ‘Ah, 
why  have  you  done  this  to  me?  .  . 

Soon  after  Prince  Andrey’s  return,  the  old  prince  made  over  a  part  of 
the  property  to  him,  giving  him  Bogutcharovo,  a  large  estate  about  thirty 
miles  from  Bleak  Hills.  Partly  to  escape  the  painful  memories  associated 
with  Bleak  Hills,  partly  because  Prince  Andrey  did  not  always  feel  equal 
to  bearing  with  his  father’s  peculiarities,  and  partly  from  a  craving  for 
solitude,  Prince  Andrey  made  use  of  Bogutcharovo,  established  himself 
there  and  spent  the  greater  part  of  his  time  there. 

After  the  Austerlitz  campaign,  Prince  Andrey  had  firmly  resolved  never 
to  serve  again  in  the  army.  And  when  war  broke  out  and  all  were  bound 
to  serve,  he  took  service  under  his  father  in  the  levying  of  the  militia, 
so  as  to  escape  active  service.  Since  the  campaign  of  1805  the  old  prince 
and  his  son  had  as  it  were  exchanged  parts.  The  old  prince,  stimulated 
by  activity,  expected  the  best  results  from  the  present  campaign.  Trince 
Andrey,  on  the  contrary,  taking  no  part  in  the  war,  and  secretly  regretting 
his  inaction,  saw  in  it  nothing  but  what  was  bad. 

On  the  26th  of  February  1807  the  old  prince  set  off  on  a  tour  of 
inspection.  Prince  Andrey  was  staying  at  Bleak  Hills,  as  he  usually  did 
in  his  father’s  absence.  Little  Nikolushka  had  been  ill  for  the  last  three 
days.  The  coachman,  who  had  driven  the  old  prince  away,  returned  bring¬ 
ing  papers  and  letters  from  the  town  for  Prince  Andrey.  The  valet  with 
the  letters  not  finding  the  young  prince  in  his  study,  went  to  Princess 
Marya’s  apartments,  but  he  was  not  there  either.  The  valet  was  told  that 
the  prince  had  gone  to  the  nursery.  ‘If  you  please,  your  excellency, 
Petrusha  has  come  with  some  papers,’  said  one  of  the  nursery  maids, 
addressing  Prince  Andrey,  who  was  sitting  on  a  child’s  little  chair.  Screw¬ 
ing  up  his  eyes,  he  was  with  trembling  hands  pouring  drops  from  a 
medicine  bottle  into  a  glass  half  full  of  water. 

‘What  is  it?’  he  said  angrily,  and  his  hand  shaking,  he  accidentally 
poured  too  many  drops  from  the  bottle  into  the  glass.  He  tipped  the 
medicine  out  of  the  glass  on  to  the  floor  and  asked  for  some  more  water. 
The  maid  gave  it  him. 

In  the  room  were  a  couple  of  armchairs,  a  child’s  crib,  a  table  and  a 
child’s  table  and  a  little  chair,  on  which  Prince  Andrey  was  sitting.  The 
windows  were  curtained,  and  on  the  table  a  single  candle  was  burning, 
screened  by  a  note-book,  so  that  the  light  did  not  fall  on  the  crib. 

‘My  dear,’  said  Princess  Marya,  turning  to  her  brother  from  beside 
the  crib  where  she  was  standing,  ‘it  would  be  better  to  wait  a  little  .  .  . 
later.’ 

‘Oh,  please,  do  as  I  say,  what  nonsense  you  keep  talking;  you  have 


344  WARANDPEACE 

kept  putting  things  off,  and  see  what’s  come  of  it!’  said  Prince  Andrey 
in  an  exasperated  whisper,  evidently  meaning  to  wound  his  sister. 

‘My  dear,  it’s  really  better  not  to  wake  him,  he  has  fallen  asleep,’  said 
the  princess  in  a  voice  of  entreaty. 

Prince  Andrey  got  up  and  went  on  tiptoe  to  the  crib  with  the  glass  in 
his  hand. 

‘Should  we  really  not  wake  him?’  he  said,  hesitating. 

‘As  you  think — really  ...  I  believe  so  .  .  .  but  as  you  think,’  said 
Princess  Marya,  obviously  intimidated  and  ashamed  that  her  opinion 
should  triumph.  She  drew  her  brother’s  attention  to  the  maid,  who  was 
summoning  him  in  a  whisper. 

It  was  the  second  night  that  they  had  been  without  sleep  looking  after 
the  baby  who  was  feverish.  Mistrusting  their  own  household  doctor  and 
expecting  the  doctor  they  had  sent  from  the  town,  they  had  spent  all  that 
time  trying  first  one  remedy  and  then  another.  Agitated  and  worn  out 
by  sleeplessness,  they  vented  their  anxiety  on  each  other,  found  fault 
with  each  other,  and  ouarrelled. 

‘Petrusha  with  papers  from  your  papa,’  whispered  the  maid.  Prince 
Andrey  went  out. 

‘Damn  them  all!’  he  commented  angrily,  and  after  listening  to  the  ■ 
verbal  instructions  sent  him  from  his  father,  and  taking  the  correspond¬ 
ence  and  his  father’s  letter,  he  went  back  to  the  nursery.  ‘Well?’  queried  ■ 
Prince  Andrey. 

‘No  change,  wait  a  little,  for  God’s  sake.  Karl  Ivanitch  always  says 
sleep  is  better  than  anything,’  Princess  Marya  whispered  with  a  sigh. 
Prince  Andrey  went  up  to  the  baby  and  felt  him.  He  was  burning  hot.  <; 
‘Bother  you  and  your  Karl  Ivanitch!’  He  took  the  glass  with  the  drops  . 
of  medicine  in  it  and  again  went  up  to  the  crib. 

‘Andryusha,  you  shouldn’t!’  said  Princess  Marya.  But  he  scowled  at 
her  with  an  expression  of  anger  and  at  the  same  time  of  anguish,  and  >i 
bent  over  the  child  with  the  glass. 

‘But  I  wish  it,’  he  said.  ‘Come,  I  beg  you,  give  it  him  .  .  .’ 

Princess  Marya  shrugged  her  shoulders,  but  obediently  she  took  the 
glass,  and  calling  the  nurse,  began  giving  the  child  the  medicine.  The 
baby  screamed  and  wheezed.  Prince  Andrey,  scowling  and  clutching  at 
his  head,  went  out  of  the  room  and  sat  down  on  the  sofa  in  the  adjoin¬ 
ing  one. 

The  letters  were  still  in  his  hand.  Mechanically  he  opened  them  and  i 
began  to  read.  The  old  prince  in  his  big,  sprawling  hand,  making  use  of  < 
occasional  abbreviations,  wrote  on  blue  paper  as  follows: 

‘I  have  this  moment  received,  through  a  special  messenger,  very  joyful 
news,  if  it’s  not  a  falsehood.  Bennigsen  has  gained  it  seems  a  complete 
victory  over  Bonaparte  near  Eylau.  In  Petersburg  every  one’s  jubilant 
and  rewards  have  been  sent  to  the  army  without  stint.  Though  he’s  a 
German — I  congratulate  him.  Commander  in  Kortchevo,  a  certain 
Handrikov,  I  can’t  make  out  what  he’s  about;  full  contingent  of  men  and 
regulation  provision  not  yet  arrived.  Gallop  over  at  once  and  say  I’ll 


WAR  AND  PEACE  345 

have  his  head  off  if  it’s  not  all  here  within  the  week.  I  have  a  letter  too 
about  the  Prussian  battle  at  Preussisch-Eylau  from  Petenka,  he  took  part 
in  it, — it’s  all  true.  If  people  don’t  meddle  who’ve  no  business  to  meddle, 
even  a  German  beats  Bonaparte.  They  say  he’s  running  away  in  great 
disorder.  Mind  you  gallop  over  to  Kortchevo  and  do  the  business  without 
delay!  ’ 

Prince  Andrey  sighed  and  broke  open  the  other  letter.  It  was  a  letter 
from  Bilibin,  two  sheets  covered  with  fine  handwriting.  He  folded  it  up 
without  reading  it,  and  read  through  once  more  his  father’s  letter,  ending 
with  the  words:  'Mind  you  gallop  over  to  Kortchevo  and  do  the  business 
without  delay! ’ 

‘No,  excuse  me,  I’m  not  going  now  till  the  child  is  better,’  he  thought, 
and  going  to  the  door  he  glanced  into  the  nursery.  Princess  Marya  was 
still  standing  at  the  crib,  softly  rocking  the  baby.  ‘Oh,  and  what  was  the 
other  unpleasant  thing  he  writes  about?’  Prince  Andrey  thought  of  the 
contents  of  his  father’s  letter.  ‘Yes.  Our  troops  have  gained  a  victory  over 
Bonaparte  precisely  when  I’m  not  in  the  army.  Yes,  yes,  everything 
mocks  at  me  .  .  .  well  and  welcome  too  .  .  .’  and  he  began  reading 
the  letter  in  French  from  Bilibin.  He  read,  not  understanding  half  of  it, 
read  simply  to  escape  for  one  moment  from  thinking  of  what  he  had  too 
long,  too  exclusively  and  too  anxiously  been  dwelling  upon. 


IX 

Bilibin  was  now  in  a  diplomatic  capacity  at  the  headquarters  of  the 
army,  and  though  he  wrote  in  French,  with  French  jests,  and  French 
turns  of  speech,  he  described  the  whole  campaign  with  an  impartial  self- 
criticism  and  self-mockery  exclusively  Russian.  Bilibin  wrote  that  the 
obligation  of  diplomatic  discretion  was  a  torture  to  him,  and  that  he  was 
happy  to  have  in  Prince  Andrey  a  trustworthy  correspondent  to  whom 
he  could  pour  out  all  the  spleen  that  had  been  accumulating  in  him  at 
the  sight  of  what  was  going  on  in  the  army.  The  letter  was  dated  some 
time  back,  before  the  battle  of  Eylau. 

‘Since  our  great  success  at  Austerlitz,  you  know,  my  dear  prince,’ 
wrote  Bilibin,  ‘that  I  have  not  left  headquarters.  Decidedly  I  have  ac¬ 
quired  a  taste  for  warfare,  and  it  is  just  as  well  for  me.  What  I  have  seen 
in  these  three  months  is  incredible. 

‘I  will  begin  ab  ovo.  “The  enemy  of  the  human  race,”  as  you  know, 
is  attacking  the  Prussians.  The  Prussians  are  our  faithful  allies,  who 
have  only  deceived  us  three  times  in  three  years.  We  stand  up  for  them. 
But  it  occurs  that  the  enemy  of  the  human  race  pays  no  attention  to 
our  fine  speeches,  and  in  his  uncivil  and  savage  way  flings  himself  upon 
the  Prussians  without  giving  them  time  to  finish  the  parade  that  they  had 
•begun,  and  by  a  couple  of  conjuring  tricks  thrashes  them  completely,  and 
goes  to  take  up  his  quarters  in  the  palace  of  Potsdam. 


346  W  A  R  A  N  D  P  E  A  C  E 

‘  “I  most  earnestly  desire,”  writes  the  King  of  Prussia  to  Bonaparte, 
“that  your  majesty  may  be  received  and  treated  in  my  palace  in  a  manner 
agreeable  to  you,  and  I  have  hastened  to  take  all  the  measures  to  that 
end  which  circumstances  allowed.  May  I  have  succeeded!”  The  Prussian 
generals  pride  themselves  on  their  politeness  towards  the  French,  and  lay 
down  their  arms  at  the  first  summons. 

‘The  head  of  the  garrison  at  Glogau,  who  has  ten  thousand  men,  asks 
the  King  of  Prussia  what  he  is  to  do  if  he  is  summoned  to  surrender.  .  .  . 
All  these  are  actual  facts. 

‘In  short,  hoping  only  to  produce  an  effect  by  our  military  attitude, 
we  find  ourselves  at  war  in  good  earnest,  and,  what  is  more,  at  war  on 
our  own  frontiers  with  and  for  the  King  of  Prussia.  Everything  is  fully 
ready,  we  only  want  one  little  thing,  that  is  the  commander-in-chief.  As 
it  is  thought  that  the  successes  at  Austerlitz  might  have  been  more  decisive 
if  the  commander-in-chief  had  not  been  so  young,  the  men  of  eighty  have 
been  passed  in  review,  and  of  Prosorovsky  and  Kamensky  the  latter  is 
preferred.  The  general  comes  to  us  in  a  kibik  after  the  fashion  of  Suvorov, 
and  is  greeted  with  acclamations  of  joy  and  triumph. 

‘On  the  4th  comes  the  first  post  from  Petersburg.  The  mails  are  taken 
to  the  marshal’s  room,  for  he  likes  to  do  everything  himself.  I  am  called 
to  sort  the  letters  and  take  those  meant  for  us.  The  marshal  looks  on 
while  we  do  it,  and  waits  for  the  packets  addressed  to  him.  We  seek — 
there  are  none.  The  marshal  gets  impatient,  sets  to  work  himself,  and 
finds  letters  from  the  Emperor  for  Count  T.,  Prince  V.,  and  others.  Then 
he  throws  himself  into  one  of  his  furies.  He  rages  against  everybody, 
snatches  hold  of  the  letters,  opens  them,  and  reads  those  from  the  Em¬ 
peror  to  other  people. 

‘  “Ah,  so  that’s  how  I’m  being  treated!  No  confidence  in  me!  Oh, 
ordered  to  keep  an  eye  on  me,  very  well;  get  along  with  you!  ” 

‘And  then  he  writes  the  famous  order  of  the  day  to  General  Bennigsen: 

‘  “I  am  wounded,  I  cannot  ride  on  horseback,  consequently  cannot 
command  the  army.  You  have  led  your  corps  d’armee  defeated  to  Pultusk! 
Here  it  remains  exposed  and  destitute  of  wood  and  of  forage,  and  in  need 
of  assistance,  and  so,  as  you  reported  yourself  to  Count  Buxhevden  yes¬ 
terday,  you  must  think  of  retreat  to  our  frontier,  and  so  do  to-day.” 

‘  “All  my  expeditions  on  horseback,”  he  writes  to  the  Emperor,  “have 
given  me  a  saddle  sore,  which,  after  my  former  journeys,  quite  prevents 
my  sitting  a  horse,  and  commanding  an  army  so  widely  scattered;  and 
therefore  I  have  handed  over  the  said  command  to  the  general  next  in 
seniority  to  me,  Count  Buxhevden,  having  despatched  to  him  all  my 
suite  and  appurtenances  of  the  same,  advising  him,  if  bread  should  run 
short,  to  retreat  further  into  the  interior  of  Prussia,  seeing  that  bread  for 
one  day’s  rations  only  is  left,  and  some  regiments  have  none,  as  the 
commanders  Osterman  and  Sedmoretsky  have  reported,  and  the  peasantry 
of  the  country  have  had  everything  eaten  up.  I  shall  myself  remain  in 
the  hospital  at  Ostrolenka  till  I  am  cured.  In  regard  to  which  I  must 


WARANDPEACE  347 

humbly  submit  the  report  that  if  the  army  remains  another  fortnight  in  its 
present  bivouac,  by  spring  not  a  man  will  be  left  in  health. 

‘  “Graciously  discharge  from  his  duty  an  old  man  who  is  sufficiently 
disgraced  by  his  inability  to  perform  the  great  and  glorious  task  for 
which  he  was  chosen.  I  shall  await  here  in  the  hospital  your  most  gracious 
acceptance  of  my  retirement,  that  I  may  not  have  to  act  the  part  of  a 
secretary  rather  than  a  commander.  My  removal  is  not  producing  the 
slightest  sensation — a  blind  man  is  leaving  the  army,  that  is  all.  More  like 
me  can  be  found  in  Russia  by  thousands!” 

‘The  marshal  is  angry  with  the  Emperor  and  punishes  all  of  us;  isn’t 
it  logical! 

‘That  is  the  first  act.  In  the  next  the  interest  and  the  absurdity  rise, 
as  they  ought.  After  the  marshal  has  departed  it  appears  that  we  are 
within  sight  of  the  enemy  and  shall  have  to  give  battle.  Buxhevden  is 
commanding  officer  by  right  of  seniority,  but  General  Bennigsen  is  not 
of  that  opinion,  the  rather  that  it  is  he  and  his  corps  who  face  the  enemy, 
and  he  wants  to  seize  the  opportunity  to  fight  a  battle  “on  his  own  hand,” 
as  the  Germans  say.  He  fights  it.  It  is  the  battle  of  Pultusk,  which  is 
counted  a  great  victory,  but  which  in  my  opinion  is  nothing  of  the  kind. 
We  civilians,  you  know,  have  a  very  ugly  way  of  deciding  whether  bat¬ 
tles  are  lost  or  won.  The  side  that  retreats  after  the  battle  has  lost,  that  is 
what  we  say,  and  according  to  that  we  lost  the  battle  of  Pultusk.  In  short, 
we  retreat  after  the  battle,  but  we  send  a  message  to  Petersburg  with 
news  of  a  victory,  and  the  general  does  not  give  up  the  command  to 
Buxhevden,  hoping  to  receive  from  Petersburg  the  title  of  commander- 
in-chief  in  return  for  his  victory.  During  this  interregnum  we  begin  an 
excessively  interesting  and  original  scheme  of  manoeuvres.  The  aim  does 
not,  as  it  should,  consist  in  avoiding  or  attacking  the  enemy,  but  solely 
in  avoiding  General  Buxhevden,  who  by  right  of  seniority  should  be  our 
commanding  officer.  We  pursue  this  object  with  so  much  energy  that 
even  when  we  cross  a  river  which  is  not  fordable  we  burn  the  bridges  in 
order  to  separate  ourselves  from  our  enemy,  who,  at  the  moment,  is  not 
Bonaparte  but  Buxhevden.  General  Buxhevden  was  nearly  attacked  and 
taken  by  a  superior  force  of  the  enemy,  in  consequence  of  one  of  our 
fine  manoeuvres  which  saved  us  from  him.  Buxhevden  pursues  us;  we 
scuttle.  No  sooner  does  he  cross  to  our  side  of  the  river  than  we  cross 
back  to  the  other.  At  last  our  enemy  Buxhevden  catches  us  and  attacks 
us.  The  two  generals  quarrel.  There  is  even  a  challenge  on  Buxhevden’s 
part  and  an  epileptic  fit  on  Bennigsen’s.  But  at  the  critical  moment  the 
i messenger  who  carried  the  news  of  our  Pultusk  victory  brings  us  from 
Petersburg  our  appointment  as  commander-in-chief,  and  the  first  enemy, 
Buxhevden,  being  overthrown,  we  are  able  to  think  of  the  second,  Bona¬ 
parte.  But  what  should  happen  at  that  very  moment  but  the  rising  against 
us  of  a  third  enemy,  which  is  the  “holy  armament”  fiercely  crying  out  for 
bread,  meat,  biscuits,  hay,  and  I  don’t  know  what  else!  The  storehouses 
are  empty,  the  roads  impassable.  The  “holy  armament”  sets  itself  to 


348  WAR  AND  PEACE 

pillage,  and  that  in  a  way  of  which  the  last  campaign  can  give  you  no 
notion.  Half  the  regiments  have  turned  themselves  into  free  companies, 
and  are  overrunning  the  country  with  fire  and  sword.  The  inhabitants 
are  totally  ruined,  the  hospitals  are  overflowing  with  sick,  and  famine 
is  everywhere.  Twice  over  the  headquarters  have  been  attacked  by  bands 
of  marauders,  and  the  commander-in-chief  himself  has  had  to  ask  for 
a  battalion  to  drive  them  off.  In  one  of  these  attacks  my  empty  trunk  and 
my  dressing-gown  were  carried  off.  The  Emperor  proposes  to  give  au¬ 
thority  to  all  the  commanders  of  divisions  to  shoot  marauders,  but  I 
greatly  fear  this  will  oblige  one  half  of  the  army  to  shoot  the  other.’ 

Prince  Andrey  at  first  read  only  with  his  eyes,  but  unconsciously  what 
he  read  (though  he  knew  how  much  faith  to  put  in  Bilibin)  began  to 
interest  him  more  and  more.  When  he  reached  this  passage,  he  crumpled 
up  the  letter  and  threw  it  away.  It  was  not  what  he  read  that  angered 
him;  he  was  angry  that  the  far-away  life  out  there — in  which  he  had  no 
part — could  trouble  him.  He  closed  his  eyes,  rubbed  his  forehead  with 
his  hand,  as  though  to  drive  out  all  interest  in  what  he  had  been  reading, 
and  listened  to  what  was  passing  in  the  nursery.  Suddenly  he  fancied 
a  strange  sound  through  the  door.  A  panic  seized  him;  he  was  afraid 
something  might  have  happened  to  the  baby  while  he  was  reading  the 
letter.  He  went  on  tiptoe  to  the  door  of  the  nursery  and  opened  it. 

At  the  instant  that  he  went  in,  he  saw  that  the  nurse  was  hiding  some¬ 
thing  from  him  with  a  scared  face,  and  Princess  Marya  was  no  longer 
beside  the  crib. 

‘My  dear,’  he  heard  behind  him  Princess  Marya  whisper — in  a  tone 
of  despair  it  seemed  to  him.  As  so  often  happens  after  prolonged  sleep¬ 
lessness  and  anxiety,  he  was  seized  by  a  groundless  panic ;  the  idea  came 
into  his  mind  that  the  baby  was  dead.  All  he  saw  and  heard  seemed  a 
confirmation  of  his  terror. 

‘All  is  over,’  he  thought,  and  a  cold  sweat  came  out  on  his  forehead. 
He  went  to  the  crib,  beside  himself,  believing  that  he  would  find  it  empty, 
that  the  nurse  had  been  hiding  the  dead  baby.  He  opened  the  curtains, 
and  for  a  long  while  his  hurrying,  frightened  eyes  could  not  find  the 
baby.  At  last  he  saw  him.  The  red-cheeked  child  lay  stretched  across  the 
crib,  with  its  head  lower  than  the  pillow;  and  it  was  making  a  smacking 
sound  with  its  lips  in  its  sleep  and  breathing  evenly. 

Prince  Andrey  rejoiced  at  seeing  the  child,  as  though  he  had  already 
lost  him.  Pie  bent  down  and  tried  with  his  lips  whether  the  baby  was  i 
feverish,  as  his  sister  had  shown  him.  The  soft  forehead  was  moist;  he 
touched  the  head  with  his  hand — even  the  hair  was  wet:  the  child  was  , 
in  such  a  thorough  perspiration.  He  was  not  dead;  on  the  contrary,  it 
was  evident  that  the  crisis  was  over  and  he  was  better.  Prince  Andrey' 
longed  to  snatch  up,  to  squeeze,  to  press  to  his  heart  that  little  helpless  i; 
creature;  he  did  not  dare  to  do  so.  Hf  stood  over  him,  gazing  at  his  head 
and  his  little  arms  and  legs  that  showed  beneath  the  quilt.  He  heard  a 
rustle  beside  him,  and  a  shadow  seemed  to  come  under  the  canopy  of  the 


WAR  AND  PEACE  349 

crib.  He  did  not  look  round,  and  still  gazing  at  the  baby’s  face,  listened 
to  his  regular  breathing.  The  dark  shadow  was  Princess  Marya,  who 
with  noiseless  steps  had  approached  the  crib,  lifted  the  canopy,  and  let 
it  fall  again  behind  her.  Prince  Andrey  knew  it  was  she  without  looking 
round,  and  held  out  his  hand  to  her.  She  squeezed  his  hand. 

‘He  is  in  a  perspiration,’  said  Prince  Andrey. 

‘I  was  coming  to  tell  you  so.’ 

The  baby  faintly  stirred  in  its  sleep,  smiled  and  rubbed  its  forehead 
against  the  pillow. 

Prince  Andrey  looked  at  his  sister.  In  the  even  half  light  under  the 
hanging  of  the  crib,  Princess  Marya’s  luminous  eyes  shone  more  than 
usual  with  the  happy  tears  that  stood  in  them.  She  bent  forward  to  her 
brother  and  kissed  him,  her  head  catching  in  the  canopy  of  the  crib.  They 
shook  their  fingers  at  one  another,  and  still  stood  in  the  twilight  of  the 
canopy,  as  though  unwilling  to  leave  that  seclusion  where  they  three 
were  alone,  shut  off  from  all  the  world.  Prince  Andrey,  ruffling  his  hair 
against  the  muslin  hangings,  was  the  first  to  move  away.  ‘Yes,  that  is 
the  one  thing  left  me  now,’  he  said  with  a  sigh. 


X 

Shortly  after  his  reception  into  the  brotherhood  of  the  freemasons, 
Pierre  set  off  to  the  Kiev  province,  where  were  the  greater  number  of  his 
peasants,  with  full  instructions  written  for  his  guidance  in  doing  his  duty 
on  his  estates. 

On  reaching  Kiev,  Pierre  sent  for  all  his  stewards  to  his  head  counting- 
house,  and  explained  to  them  his  intentions  and  his  desires.  He  told 
them  that  steps  would  very  shortly  be  taken  for  the  complete  liberation 
of  his  peasants  from  serfdom,  that  till  that  time  his  peasants  were  not 
to  be  overburdened  with  labour,  that  the  women  with  children  were  not 
to  be  sent  out  to  work,  that  assistance  was  to  be  given  to  the  peasants, 
that  wrong-doing  was  to  be  met  with  admonishment,  and  not  with  cor¬ 
poral  punishment;  and  that  on  every  estate  there  must  be  founded  hos¬ 
pitals,  almshouses,  and  schools.  Several  of  the  stewards  (among  them 
were  some  bailiffs  barely  able  to  read  and  write)  listened  in  dismay,  sup¬ 
posing  the  upshot  of  the  young  count’s  remarks  to  be  that  he  was  dissatis¬ 
fied  with  their  management  and  embezzlement  of  his  money.  Others, 
after  the  first  shock  of  alarm,  derived  amusement  from  Pierre’s  lisp  and 
the  new  words  he  used  that  they  had  not  heard  before.  Others  again 
found  a  simple  satisfaction  in  hearing  the  sound  of  their  master’s  voice. 
But  some,  among  them  the  head  steward,  divined  from  this  speech  how 
to  deal  with  their  master  for  the  attainment  of  their  own  ends. 

The  head  steward  expressed  great  sympathy  with  Pierre’s  projects; 
but  observed  that,  apart  from  these  innovations,  matters  were  in  a  bad 
>vay  and  needed  thoroughly  going  into. 

In  spite  of  Count  Bezuhov’s  enormous  wealth,  Pierre  ever  since  he 


35°  WARANDPEACE 

had  inherited  it,  and  had  been,  as  people  said,  in  receipt  of  an  annual  in¬ 
come  or  five  hundred  thousand,  had  felt  much  less  rich  than  when  he  had 
been  receiving  an  allowance  of  ten  thousand  from  his  father.  In  general 
outlines  he  was  vaguely  aware  of  the  following  budget.  About  eighty 
thousand  was  being  paid  into  the  Land  Bank  as  interest  on  mortgages 
on  his  estates.  About  thirty  thousand  went  to  the  maintenance  of  his 
estate  in  the  suburbs  of  Moscow,  his  Moscow  house,  and  his  cousins,  the 
princesses.  About  fifteen  thousand  were  given  in  pensions,  and  as  much 
more  to  benevolent  institutions.  One  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  were 
sent  to  his  countess  for  her  maintenance.  Some  seventy  thousand  were 
paid  away  as  interest  on  debts.  The  building  of  a  new  church  had  for  the 
last  two  years  been  costing  about  ten  thousand.  The  remainder — some 
one  hundred  thousand — was  spent — he  hardly  knew  how — and  almost 
every  year  he  was  forced  to  borrow.  Moreover  every  year  the  head 
steward  wrote  to  him  of  conflagrations,  or  failures  of  crops,  or  of  the 
necessity  of  rebuilding  factories  or  workshops.  And  so  the  first  duty  with 
which  Pierre  was  confronted  was  the  one  for  which  he  had  the  least 
capacity  and  inclination — attention  to  practical  business. 

Every  day  Pierre  went  into  things  with  the  head  steward.  But  he  felt 
that  what  he  was  doing  did  not  advance  matters  one  inch.  He  felt  that  : 
all  he  did  was  quite  apart  from  the  reality,  that  his  efforts  had  no  grip 
on  the  business,  and  would  not  set  it  in  progress.  On  one  side  the  head 
steward  put  matters  in  their  worst  light,  proving  to  Pierre  the  necessity 
of  paying  his  debts,  and  entering  upon  new  undertakings  with  the  labour 
of  his  serf  peasants,  to  which  Pierre  would  not  agree.  On  the  other  side,  j 
Pierre  urged  their  entering  upon  the  work  of  liberation,  to  which  the  head 
steward  objected  the  necessity  of  first  paying  off  the  loans  from  the  Land 
Bank,  and  the  consequent  impossibility  of  haste  in  the  matter.  The  head  i 
steward  did  not  say  that  this  was  utterly  impossible ;  he  proposed  as  the  | 
means  for  attaining  this  object,  the  sale  of  the  forests  in  the  Kostroma  I 
province,  the  sale  of  the  lands  on  the  lower  Volga,  and  of  the  Crimean 
estate.  But  all  these  operations  were  connected  in  the  head  steward’s 
talk  with  such  a  complexity  of  processes,  the  removal  of  certain  prohibi¬ 
tory  clauses,  the  obtaining  of  certain  permissions,  and  so  on,  that  Pierre 
lost  the  thread,  and  could  only  say:  ‘Yes,  yes,  do  so  then.’ 

Pierre  had  none  of  that  practical  tenacity,  which  would  have  made 
it  possible  for  him  to  undertake  the  business  himself,  and  so  he  did  not  I 
like  it,  and  only  tried  to  keep  up  a  pretence  of  going  into  business  before 
the  head  steward.  The  steward  too  kept  up  a  pretence  before  the  count  of 
regarding  his  participation  in  it  as  of  great  use  to  his  master,  and  a  great  1 
inconvenience  to  himself. 

In  Kiev  he  had  acquaintances:  persons  not  acquaintances  made  haste 
to  become  so,  and  gave  a  warm  welcome  to  the  young  man  of  fortune, 
the  largest  landowner  of  the  province,  who  had  come  into  their  midst.  | 
The  temptations  on  the  side  of  Pierre’s  besetting  weakness,  the  one  to 
which  he  had  given  the  first  place  at  his  initiation  into  the  lodge,  were  so  i 
strong  that  he  could  not  resist  them.  Again  whole  days,  weeks,  and  months 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


351 

of  his  life  were  busily  filled  up  with  parties,  dinners,  breakfasts,  and  balls, 
giving  him  as  little  time  to  think  as  at  Petersburg.  Instead  of  the  new  life 
Pierre  had  hoped  to  lead,  he  was  living  just  the  same  old  life  only  in 
different  surroundings. 

Of  the  three  precepts  of  freemasonry,  Pierre  had  to  admit  that  he  had 
not  fulfilled  that  one  which  prescribes  for  every  mason  the  duty  of  being 
a  model  of  moral  life;  and  of  the  seven  virtues  he  was  entirely  without 
two — morality  and  love  of  death.  He  comforted  himself  by  reflecting 
that,  on  the  other  hand,  he  was  fulfilling  the  other  precept — the  improve¬ 
ment  of  the  human  race;  and  had  other  virtues,  love  for  his  neighbour 
and  liberality. 

In  the  spring  of  1807,  Pierre  made  up, his  mind  to  go  back  again  to 
Petersburg.  On  the  way  back  he  intended  to  make  the  tour  of  all  his 
estates,  and  to  ascertain  personally  what  had  been  done  of  what  had  been 
prescribed  by  him,  and  in  what  position  the  people  now  were  who  had 
been  entrusted  to  him  by  God,  and  whom  he  had  been  striving  to  benefit. 

The  head  steward,  who  regarded  all  the  young  count’s  freaks  as  almost 
insanity — disastrous  to  him,  to  himself,  and  to  his  peasants — made  con¬ 
cessions  to  his  weaknesses.  While  continuing  to  represent  the  liberation 
of  his  serfs  as  impracticable,  he  made  arrangements  on  all  his  estates  for 
the  building  of  schools,  hospitals,  and  asylums  on  a  large  scale  to  be  begun 
ready  for  the  master’s  visit,  prepared  everywhere  for  him  to  be  met,  not' 
with  ceremonious  processions,  which  he  knew  would  not  be  to  Pierre’s 
taste,  but  with  just  the  devotionally  grateful  welcomes,  with  holy  images 
and  bread  and  salt,  such  as  would,  according  to  his  understanding  of  the 
count,  impress  him  and  delude  him. 

The  southern  spring,  the  easy,  rapid  journey  in  his  Vienna  carriage, 
and  the  solitude  of  the  road,  had  a  gladdening  influence  on  Pierre.  The 
estates,  which  he  had  not  before  visited,  were  one  more  picturesque  than 
the  other;  the  peasantry  seemed  everywhere  thriving,  and  touchingly 
grateful  for  the  benefits  conferred  on  them.  Everywhere  he  was  met  by 
welcomes,  which  though  they  embarrassed  Pierre,  yet  at  the  bottom  of  his 
heart  rejoiced  him.  At  one  place  the  peasants  had  brought  him  bread 
and  salt  and  the  images  of  Peter  and  Paul,  and  begged  permission  in 
honour  of  his  patron  saints,  Peter  and  Paul,  and  in  token  of  love  and 
gratitude  for  the  benefits  conferred  on  them,  to  erect  at  their  own  expense 
a  new  chapel  in  the  church.  At  another  place  he  was  welcomed  by  women 
with  babies  in  their  arms,  who  came  to  thank  him  for  being  released  from 
the  obligation  of  heavy  labour.  In  a  third  place  he  was  met  by  a  priest 
with  a  cross,  surrounded  by  children,  whom  by  the  favour  of  the  count 
he  was  instructing  in  reading  and  writing  and  religion.  On  all  his  estates 
Pierre  saw  with  his  own  eyes  stone  buildings  erected,  or  in  course  of 
erection,  all  on  one  plan,  hospitals,  schools,  and  almshouses,  which  were 
in  short  time  to  be  opened.  Everywhere  Pierre  saw  the  steward’s  reckoning 
of  service  due  to  him  diminished  in  comparison  with  the  past,  and  heard 
touching  thanks  for  what  was  remitted  from  deputations  of  peasants  in 
blue,  full-skirted  coats. 


352  WARANDPEACE 

But  Pierre  did  not  know  that  where  they  brought  him  bread  and  salt 
and  were  building  a  chapel  of  Peter  and  Paul  there  was  a  trading  village, 
and  a  fair  on  St.  Peter’s  day,  that  the  chapel  had  been  built  long  ago  by 
wealthy  peasants  of  the  village,  and  that  nine-tenths  of  the  peasants  of 
that  village  were  in  the  utmost  destitution.  He  did  not  know  that  since 
by  his  orders  nursing  mothers  were  not  sent  to  work  on  their  master’s 
land,  those  same  mothers  did  even  harder  work  on  their  own  bit  of  land. 
He  did  not  know  that  the  priest  who  met  him  with  the  cross  oppressed 
the  peasants  with  his  exactions,  and  that  the  pupils  gathered  around  him 
were  yielded  up  to  him  with  tears  and  redeemed  for  large  sums  by  their 
parents.  He  did  not  know  that  the  stone  buildings  were  being  raised  by 
his  labourers,  and  increased  the  forced  labour  of  his  peasants,  which  was 
only  less  upon  paper.  He  did  not  know  that  where  the  steward  pointed 
out  to  him  in  the  account  book  the  reduction  of  rent  to  one-third  in 
accordance  with  his  will,  the  labour  exacted  had  been  raised  by  one  half. 
And  so  Pierre  was  enchanted  by  his  journey  over  his  estates,  and 
came  back  completely  to  the  philanthropic  frame  of  mind  in  which 
he  had  left  Petersburg,  and  wrote  enthusiastic  letters  to  his  preceptor  and  ► 
brother,  as  he  called  the  grand  master. 

'How  easy  it  is,  how  little  effort  is  needed  to  do  so  much  good,’  thought 
Pierre,  ‘and  how  little  we  trouble  ourselves  to  do  it!’ 

He  was  happy  at  the  gratitude  shown  him,  but  abashed  at  receiving 
it.  That  gratitude  reminded  him  how  much  more  he  could  do  for  those 
simple,  good-hearted  people. 

The  head  steward,  a  very  stupid  and  crafty  man,  who  thoroughly 
understood  the  clever  and  naive  count,  and  played  with  him  like  a  toy, 
seeing  the  effect  produced  on  Pierre  by  these  carefully  arranged  receptions, 
was  bolder  in  advancing  arguments  to  prove  the  impossibility,  and  even 
more,  the  uselessness  of  liberating  the  peasants,  who  were  so  perfectly 
happy  without  that. 

In  the  recesses  of  his  own  heart,  Pierre  agreed  with  the  steward  that  it 
was  difficult  to  imagine  people  happier,  and  that  there  was  no  knowing 
what  their  future  would  be  in  freedom.  But  though  reluctantly,  he  stuck 
to  what  he  thought  the  right  thing.  The  steward  promised  to  use  every 
effort  to  carry  out  the  count’s  wishes,  perceiving  clearly  that  the  count 
would  never  be  in  a  position  to  verify  whether  every  measure  had  been 
taken  for  the  sale  of  the  forests  and  estates  for  the  repayment  of  loans 
from  the  bank,  would  never  probably  even  inquire,  and  would  certainly 
never  find  out  that  the  buildings,  when  finished,  stood  empty,  and  that 
the  peasants  were  giving  in  labour  and  money  just  what  they  gave  with 
other  masters,  that  is,  all  that  could  be  got  out  of  them. 

XI 

Returning  from  his  southern  tour  in  the  happiest  frame  of  mind,  Pierre 
carried  out  an  intention  he  had  long  had,  of  visiting  his  friend  Bolkonsky, 
whom  he  had  not  seen  for  two  years. 


WAR  AND  PEACE  353 

Bogutcharovo  lay  in  a  flat,  ugly  part  of  the  country,  covered  with 
fields  and  copses  of  fir  and  birch-trees,  in  parts  cut  down.  The  manor 
house  was  at  the  end  of  the  straight  village  that  ran  along  each  side 
of  the  high  road,  behind  an  overflowing  pond  newly  dug,  and  still  bare 
of  grass  on  its  banks  in  the  midst  of  a  young  copse,  with  several  large 
pines  standing  among  the  smaller  trees. 

The  homestead  consisted  of  a  threshing  floor,  serfs’  quarters,  stables, 
bath-houses,  lodges,  and  a  large  stone  house  with  a  semicircular  fagade, 
still  in  course  of  erection.  Round  the  house  a  garden  had  been  newly  laid 
out.  The  fences  and  gates  were  solid  and  new;  under  a  shed  stood  two 
fire-engines  and  a  tub  painted  green.  The  paths  were  straight,  the  bridges 
were  strong  and  furnished  with  stone  parapets.  Everything  had  an  air 
of  being  cared  for  and  looked  after.  The  house  serfs  on  the  way,  in  reply 
to  inquiries  where  the  prince  was  living,  pointed  to  a  small  new  lodge 
at  the  very  edge  of  the  pond.  Prince  Andrey’s  old  body-servant,  Anton, 
after  assisting  Pierre  out  of  his  carriage,  said  that  the  prince  was  at  home, 
and  conducted  him  into  a  clean  little  lobby. 

Pierre  was  struck  by  the  modesty  of  this  little,  clean  house,  after  the 
splendid  surroundings  in  which  he  had  last  seen  his  friend  in  Petersburg. 

He  went  hurriedly  into  the  little  parlour,  still  unplastered  and  smelling 
of  pine  wood,  and  would  have  gone  further,  but  Anton  ran  ahead  on  tip-toe 
and  knocked  at  the  door. 

‘What  is  it?’  he  heard  a  harsh,  unpleasant  voice. 

‘A  visitor,’  answered  Anton. 

‘Ask  him  to  wait’;  and  there  was  the  sound  of  a  chair  being  pushed 
back. 

Pierre  went  with  rapid  steps  to  the  door,  and  came  face  to  face  with 
Prince  Audrey,  who  came  out  frowning  and  looking  older.  Pierre  embraced 
him,  and  taking  off  his  spectacles,  kissed  him  and  looked  close  at  him. 

‘Well,  I  didn’t  expect  you;  I  am  glad,’  said  Prince  Andrey. 

Pierre  said  nothing;  he  was  looking  in  wonder  at  his  friend,  and  could 
not  take  his  eyes  off  him.  He  was  struck  by  the  change  in  Prince  Andrey. 
His  words  were  warm,  there  was  a  smile  on  the  lips  and  the  face,  but  there 
was  a  lustreless,  dead  lock  in  his  eyes,  into  which,  in  spite  of  his  evident 
desire  to  seem  glad,  Prince  Andrey  could  not  throw  a  gleam  of  happiness. 
It  was  not  only  that  his  friend  was  thinner,  paler,  more  manly  looking, 
but  the  look  in  his  eyes  and  the  line  on  his  brow,  that  expressed  prolonged 
concentration  on  some  one  subject,  struck  Pierre  and  repelled  him  till 
he  got  used  to  it. 

On  meeting  after  a  long  separation,  the  conversation,  as  is  always  the 
case,  did  not  for  a  long  while  rest  on  one  subject.  They  asked  questions 
and  gave  brief  replies  about  things  of  which  they  knew  themselves  they 
must  talk  at  length.  At  last  the  conversation  began  gradually  to  revolve 
more  slowly  about  the  questions  previously  touched  only  in  passing, 
their  life  in  the  past,  their  plans  for  the  future,  Pierre’s  journeys,  and 
what  he  had  been  doing,  the  war,  and  so  on.  The  concentrated  and  crushed 
look  which  Pierre  had  noticed  in  Prince  Andrey’s  eyes  was  still  more 


354  WARANDPEACE 

striking  now  in  the  smile  with  which  he  listened  to  him,  especially  when 
he  was  telling  him  with  earnestness  and  delight  of  his  past  or  his  future. 
It  was  as  though  Prince  Andrey  would  have  liked  to  take  interest  in 
what  he  was  telling  him,  but  could  not.  Pierre  began  to  feel  that  to  express  I 
enthusiasm,  ideals,  and  hopes  of  happiness  and  goodness  was  unseemly 
before  Prince  Andrey.  He  felt  ashamed  of  giving  expression  to  all  the 
new  ideas  he  had  gained  from  the  masons,  which  had  been  revived  and 
strengthened  in  him  by  his  last  tour.  He  restrained  himself,  afraid  of 
seeming  naive.  At  the  same  time  he  felt  an  irresistible  desire  to  show  his 
friend  at  once  that  he  was  now  a  quite  different  Pierre,  better  than  the 
one  he  had  known  in  Petersburg. 

‘I  can’t  tell  you  how  much  I  have  passed  through  during  this  time.  I 
shouldn’t  know  my  old  self.’ 

‘Yes,  you  are  very,  very  much  changed  since  those  days,’  said  Prince 
Andrey. 

‘Well,  and  what  of  you?’  asked  Pierre.  ‘What  are  your  plans?’ 

‘Plans?’  repeated  Prince  Andrey  ironically.  ‘My  plans?’  he  repeated, 
as  though  wondering  what  was  the  meaning  of  such  a  word.  ‘Why,  you 
see,  I  am  building;  I  want  next  year  to  settle  in  here  altogether  .  .  .’ 

Pierre  looked  silently  and  intently  into  the  face  of  Prince  Andrey,  which 
had  grown  so  much  older. 

‘No,  I’m  asking  about  .  .  .’  Pierre  began,  but  Prince  Andrey  inter¬ 
rupted  him. 

‘But  why  talk  about  me  .  .  .  talk  to  me,  and  tell  me  about  your1! 
journey,  about  everything  you  have  been  doing  on  your  estates.’ 

Pierre  began  describing  what  he  had  been  doing  on  his  estates,  trying  ] 
as  far  as  he  could  to  disguise  his  share  in  the  improvements  made  on 
them.  Prince  Andrey  several  times  put  in  a  few  words  before  Pierre  could 
utter  them,  as  though  all  Pierre’s  doings  were  an  old,  familiar  story,  and 
he  were  hearing  it  not  only  without  interest,  but  even  as  it  were  a  little  1 
ashamed  of  what  was  told  him. 

Pierre  began  to  feel  awkward  and  positively  wretched  in  his  friend’s  : 
company.  Pie  relapsed  into  silence. 

‘I  tell  you  what,  my  dear  fellow,’  said  Prince  Andrey,  who  was  unmis¬ 
takably  dreary  and  ill  at  ease  with  his  visitor,  ‘I’m  simply  bivouacking 
here;  I  only  came  over  to  have  a  look  at  things.  I’m  going  back  again 
to  my  sister  to-day.  I  will  introduce  you  to  her.  But  I  think  you  know 
her,  though,’  he  added,  obviously  trying  to  provide  entertainment  for  his 
guest,  with  whom  he  now  found  nothing  in  common.  ‘We  will  set  off  after 
dinner.  And  now  would  you  care  to  see  my  place?’  They  went  out  and 
walked  about  till  dinner  time,  talking  of  political  news  and  common 
acquaintances,  like  people  not  very  intimate.  The  only  thing  of  which 
Prince  Andrey  now  spoke  with  some  eagerness  and  interest  was  the  new 
buildings  and  homestead  he  was  building;  but  even  in  the  middle  of  a 
conversation  on  this  subject,  on  the  scaffolding,  when  Prince  Andrey  was 
describing  to  Pierre  the  plan  of  the  house,  he  suddenly  stopped.  ‘There’s:  t 


WARANDPEACE  355 

nothing  interesting  in  that,  though,  let  us  go  in  to  dinner  and  set  off.’ 

At  dinner  the  conversation  fell  on  Pierre’s  marriage. 

‘I  was  very  much  surprised  when  I  heard  of  it,’  said  Prince  Andrey. 

Pierre  blushed  as  he  always  did  at  any  reference  to  his  marriage,  and 
said  hurriedly:  ‘I’ll  tell  you  one  day  how  it  all  happened.  But  you  know 
that  it’s  all  over  and  for  ever.’ 

‘For  ever?’  said  Prince  Andrey;  ‘nothing’s  for  ever.’ 

‘But  do  you  know  how  it  all  ended?  Did  you  hear  of  the  duel?’ 

‘Yes,  you  had  to  go  through  that  too!  ’ 

‘The  one  thing  for  which  I  thank  God  is  that  I  didn’t  kill  that  man,’ 
said  Pierre. 

‘Why  so?’  said  Prince  Andrey.  ‘To  kill  a  vicious  dog  is  a  very  good 
thing  to  do,  really.’ 

‘No,  to  kill  a  man  is  bad,  wrong  .  .  .’ 

‘Why  is  it  wrong?’  repeated  Prince  Andrey;  ‘what’s  right  and  wrong 
is  a  question  it  has  not  been  given  to  men  to  decide.  Men  are  for  ever 
in  error,  and  always  will  be  in  error,  and  in  nothing  more  than  in  what 
they  regard  as  right  and  wrong.’ 

‘What  does  harm  to  another  man  is  wrong,’  said  Pierre,  feeling  with 
pleasure  that  for  the  first  time  since  his  arrival  Prince  Andrey  was  roused 
and  was  beginning  to  speak  and  eager  to  give  expression  to  what  had 
made  him  what  he  now  was. 

‘And  who  has  told  you  what  is  harm  to  another  man?’  he  asked. 

‘Harm?  harm?’  said  Pierre;  ‘we  all  know  what  harms  ourselves.’ 

‘Yes,  we  know  that,  but  it’s  not  the  same  harm  we  know  about  for 
ourselves  that  we  do  to  another  man,’  said  Prince  Andrey,  growing  more 
and  more  eager,  and  evidently  anxious  to  express  to  Pierre  his  new  view 
of  things.  He  spoke  in  French.  ‘I  only  know  two  very  real  ills  in  life,  re¬ 
morse  and  sickness.  There  is  no  good  except  the  absence  of  those  ills.  To 
ive  for  myself  so  as  to  avoid  these  two  evils:  that’s  the  sum  of  my  wisdom 
iow.’ 

‘And  love  for  your  neighbour,  and  self-sacrifice?’  began  Pierre.  ‘No,  I 
:an’t  agree  with  you!  To  live  with  the  sole  object  of  avoiding  doing  evil, 
o  as  not  to  be  remorseful,  that’s  very  little.  I  used  to  live  so,  I  used  to 
ive  for  myself,  and  I  spoilt  my  life.  And  only  now,  when  I’m  living,  at 
east  trying  to  live’  (modesty  impelled  Pierre  to  correct  himself)  ‘for 
tthers,  only  now  I  have  learnt  to  know  all  the  happiness  of  life.  No,  I 
lon’t  agree  with  you,  and  indeed,  you  don’t  believe  what  you’re  saying 
ourself.’ 

Prince  Andrey  looked  at  Pierre  without  speaking,  and  smiled  ironically. 
Yell,  you'll  see  my  sister  Marie.  You  will  get  on  with  her,’  said  he. 
Perhaps  you  are  right  for  yourself,’  he  added,  after  a  brief  pause,  ‘but 
very  one  lives  in  his  own  way;  you  used  to  live  for  yourself,  and  you  say 
lat  by  doing  so  you  almost  spoiled  your  life,  and  have  only  known 
appiness  since  you  began  to  live  for  others.  And  my  experience  has  been 
le  reverse.  I  used  to  live  for  glory.  (And  what  is  glory?  The  same  love 
>r  others,  the  desire  to  do  something  for  them,  the  desire  of  their  praise.) 


356  WARANDPEACE 

la  that  way  I  lived  for  others,  and  not  almost,  but  quite  spoilt  my  life. 
And  I  have  become  more  peaceful  since  I  live  only  for  myself.’ 

'But  how  are  you  living  only  for  yourself?’  Pierre  asked,  getting  hot. 
‘What  of  your  son,  your  sister,  your  father?’ 

‘Yes,  but  that’s  all  the  same  as  myself,  they  are  not  others,’  said  Prince 
Andrey;  ‘but  others,  one’s  neighbours,  as  you  and  Marie  call  them,  they 
are  the  great  source  of  error  and  evil.  One’s  neighbours  are  those — your 
Kiev  peasants — whom  one  wants  to  do  good  to.’ 

And  he  looked  at  Pierre  with  a  glance  of  ironical  challenge.  He  un¬ 
mistakably  meant  to  draw  him  on. 

'You  are  joking,’  said  Pierre,  getting  more  and  more  earnest.  ‘What 
error  and  evil  can  there  be  in  my  wishing  (I  have  done  very  little  and 
done  it  very  badly),  but  still  wishing  to  do  good,  and  doing  indeed  some¬ 
thing  any  way?  Where  can  be  the  harm  if  unhappy  people,  our  peasants, 
people  just  like  ourselves,  growing  up  and  dying  with  no  other  idea  of 
God  and  the  truth,  but  a  senseless  prayer  and  ceremony,  if  they  are 
instructed  in  the  consoling  doctrines  of  a  future  life,  of  retribution,  and 
recompense  and  consolation?  What  harm  and  error  can  there  be  in  my 
giving  them  doctors,  and  a  hospital,  and  a  refuge  for  the  aged,  when 
men  are  dying  of  disease  without  help,  and  it  is  so  easy  to  give  them 
material  aid?  And  isn’t  there  palpable,  incontestable  good,  when  the 
peasants  and  the  women  with  young  children  have  no  rest  day  or  night,! 
and  I  give  them  leisure  and  rest?  .  .  .’  said  Pierre,  talking  hurriedly 
and  lisping.  ‘And  I  have  done  that;  badly  it’s  true,  and  too  little  of  it, 
but  I  have  done  something -towards  it,  and  you’ll  not  only  fail  to  shake( 
my  conviction  that  I  have  done  well ,  you’ll  not  even  shake  my  conviction 
that  you  don’t  believe  that  yourself.  And  the  great  thing,’  Pierre  con¬ 
tinued,  ‘is  that  I  know  this — and  know  it  for  a  certainty — that  the  enjoy¬ 
ment  of  doing  this  good  is  the  only  real  happiness  in  life.’ 

‘Oh,  if  you  put  the  question  like  that,  it’s  a  different  matter,’  said 
Prince  Andrey.  ‘I’m  building  a  house  and  laying  out  a  garden,  while  you 
are  building  hospitals.  Either  occupation  may  serve  to  pass  the  time. 
But  as  to  what’s  right  and  what’s  good — leave  that  to  one  who  knows- 
all  to  judge;  it’s  not  for  us  to  decide.  Well,  you  want  an  argument,’  he! 
added;  ‘all  right,  let  us  have  one.’  They  got  up  from  the  table  and  sat 
out  on  the  steps  in  default  of  a  balcony.  ‘Come,  let  us  argue  the  matter,1 
said  Prince  Andrey.  ‘You  talk  of  schools,’  he  went  on,  crooking  one  finger, 
‘instruction,  and  so  forth,  that  is,  you  want' to  draw  him’  (he  pointed  to  a-1 
peasant  who  passed  by  them  taking  off  his  cap),  ‘out  of  his  animal  con¬ 
dition  and  to  give  him  spiritual  needs,  but  it  seems  to  me  that  the  onlj- 
possible  happiness  is  animal  happiness,  and  you  want  to  deprive  him  of  it 
I  envy  him,  while  you  are  trying  to  make  him  into  me,  without  giving 
hirn  my  circumstances.  Another  thing  you  speak  of  is  lightening  his  toil 
But  to  my  notions,  physical  labour  is  as  much  a  necessity  for  him,  a; 
much  a  condition  of  his  existence,  as  intellectual  work  is  for  me  anc 
for  you.  You  can’t  help  thinking.  I  go  to  bed  at  three  o’clock,  thought; 
come  into  my  mind,  and  I  can’t  go  to  sleep;  I  turn  over,  and  can’t  sleep 


WARANDPEACE  357 

till  morning,  because  I'm  thinking,  and  I  can’t  help  thinking,  just  as  he 
can’t  help  ploughing  and  mowing.  If  he  didn’t,  he  would  go  to  the  tavern, 
or  become  ill.  Just  as  I  could  not  stand  his  terrible  physical  labour,  but 
should  die  of  it  in  a  week,  so  he  could  not  stand  my  physical  inactivity, 
he  would  grow  fat  and  die.  The  third  thing — what  was  it  you  talked 
about?’ 

Prince  Andrev  crooked  his  third  finger. 

‘Oh,  yes,  hospitals,  medicine.  He  has  a  fit  and  dies,  but  you  have  him 
bled  and  cure  him.  He  will  drag  about  an  invalid  for  ten  years,  a  burden 
to  every  one.  It  would  be  ever  so  much  simpler  and  more  comfortable 
for  him  to  die.  Others  are  born,  and  there  are  always  plenty.  If  you 
grudge  losing  a  labourer — that’s  how  I  look  at  him — but  you  want  to 
cure  him  from  love  for  him.  But  he  has  no  need  of  that.  And  besides, 
what  a  notion  that  medicine  has  ever  cured  any  one!  Killed  them — yes!’ 
he  said,  scowling  and  turning  away  from  Pierre. 

,  Prince  Andrey  gave  such  clear  and  precise  utterance  to  his  ideas  that 
it  was  evident  he  had  thought  more  than  once  of  this  already,  and  he 
talked  rapidly  and  eagerly,  as  a  man  does  who  has  long  been  silent.  His 
eyes  grew  keener,  the  more  pessimistic  were  the  views  he  expressed. 

‘Oh,  this  is  awful,  awful!’  said  Pierre.  ‘I  don’t  understand  how  one 
can  live  with  such  ideas.  I  have  had  moments  of  thinking  like  that;  it 
was  not  long  ago  at  Moscow  and  on  a  journey,  but  then  I  become  so 
abject  that  I  don’t  live  at  all,  everything’s  hateful  to  me  .  .  .  myself, 
most  of  all.  Then  I  don’t  eat,  I  don’t  wash  .  .  .  how  can  you  go  on?  .  .  .’ 

‘Why  not  wash,  that’s  not  clean,’  said  Prince  Andrey;  ‘on  the  contrary, 
one  has  to  try  and  make  one’s  life  more  agreeable  as  far  as  one  can.  I’m 
alive,  and  it's  not  my  fault  that  I  am,  and  so  I  have  to  try  without  hurting 
others  to  get  on  as  well  as  I  can  till  death.’ 

‘But  what  impulse  have  you  to  live  with  such  ideas?  You  would  sit 
still  without  stirring,  taking  no  part  in  anything.  .  .  .’ 

‘Life  won’t  leave  you  in  peace  even  so.  I  should  be  glad  to  do  nothing, 
but  here  you  see  on  one  side,  the  local  nobility  have  done  me  the  honour 
of  electing  me  a  marshal ;  it  was  all  I  could  do  to  get  out  of  it.  They  could 
not  understand  that  I  haven’t  what’s  needed,  haven't  that  good-natured, 
fussy  vulgarity  we  all  know  so  well,  that’s  needed  for  it.  Then  there's 
this  house  here,  which  had  to  be  built  that  I  might  have  a  nook  of  my 
own  where  I  could  be  quiet.  Now  there’s  the  militia.’ 

‘Why  aren't  you  serving  in  the  army?’ 

‘After  Austerlitz!’  said  Prince  Andrey  gloomily.  ‘No,  thank  you;  I 
swore  to  myself  that  I  would  never  serve  in  the  Russian  army  again. 
And  I  will  not,  if  Bonaparte  were  stationed  here  at  Smolensk,  threatening 
Bleak  Hills!  even  then  I  wouldn’t  serve  in  the  Russian  army.  Well,  so  I 
was  saying,’  Prince  Andrey  went  on,  regaining  his  composure.  ‘Now, 
there’s  the  militia;  my  father’s  commander-in-chief  of  the  third  circuit, 
and  the  only  means  for  me  to  escape  from  active  service  is  to  serve  under 
him.’ 

‘So  you  are  in  the  service,  then?’ 


353  WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Yes.’  He  was  silent  for  a  while. 

‘Then  why  do  you  serve?’ 

‘I’ll  tell  you  why.  My  father  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable  men  of 
his  time.  But  he’s  grown  old,  and  he’s  not  cruel  exactly,  but  he’s  of  too 
energetic  a  character.  He’s  terrible  from  his  habit  of  unlimited  power, 
and  now  with  this  authority  given  him  by  the  Emperor  as  a  commander- 
in-chief  in  the  militia.  If  I  had  been  two  hours  later  a  fortnight  ago,  he 
would  have  hanged  the  register-clerk  at  Yuhnovo,’  said  Prince  Andrey 
with  a  smile.  ‘So  I  serve  under  him  now  because  no  one  except  me  has 
any  influence  over  my  father,  and  I  sometimes  save  him  from  an  act 
which  would  be  a  source  of  misery  to  him  afterwards.’ 

‘Ah,  there  you  see!  ’ 

‘Yes,  it  is  not  as  you  think,’  Prince  Andrey  continued.  ‘I  didn’t,  and 
I  don’t  wish  well  in  the  slightest  to  that  scoundrelly  register-clerk  who 
had  stolen  boots  or  something  from  the  militiamen;  indeed,  I  would  have 
been  very  glad  to  see  him  hanged,  but  I  feel  for  my  father,  that  is  again 
myself.’ 

Prince  Andrey  grew  more  and  more  eager.  His  eyes  glittered  feverishly, 
as  he  tried  to  prove  to  Pierre  that  there  was  never  the  slightest  desire  to 
do  good  to  his  neighbour  in  his  actions. 

‘Well,  you  want  to  liberate  your  serfs,  too,’  he  pursued;  ‘that’s  a  very 
good  thing,  but  not  for  you — I  expect  you  have  never  flogged  a  man  nor 
sent  one  to  Siberia — and  still  less  for  your  peasants.  If  a  peasant  is  beaten, 
flogged,  sent  to  Siberia,  I  dare  say  he’s  not  a  bit  the  worse  for  it.  In 
Siberia  he  can  lead  the  same  brute  existence;  the  stripes  on  the  body 
heal,  and  he’s  as  happy  as  before.  But  it’s  needed  for  the  people  who  are 
ruined  morally,  who  are  devoured  by  remorse,  who  stifle  that  remorse 
and  grow  callous  from  being  able  to  inflict  punishment  all  round  them. 
Perhaps  you  have  not  seen  it,  but  I  have  seen  good  men,  brought  up  in 
the  traditions  of  unlimited  power  with  years,  as  they  grew  more  irritable, 
become  cruel  and  brutal,  conscious  of  it,  and  unable  to  control  themselves, 
and  growing  more  and  more  miserable.’ 

Prince  Andrey  spoke  with  such  earnestness  that  Pierre  could  not  help 
thinking  those  ideas  were  suggested  to  him  by  his  father.  He  made  him 
no  reply. 

‘So  that’s  what  I  grieve  for — for  human  dignity,  for  peace  of  conscience, 
for  purity,  and  not  for  their  backs  or  their  heads,  which  always  remain 
just  the  same  backs  and  heads,  however  you  thrash  or  shave  them.’ 

‘No,  no,  a  thousand  times  no!  I  shall  never  agree  with  you,’  said 
Pierre. 

XII 

In  the  evening  Prince  Andrey  and  Pierre  got  into  the  coach  and  drove 
to  Bleak  Hills.  Prince  Andrey  watched  Pierre  and  broke  the  silence  from 
time  to  time  with  speeches  that  showed  he  was  in  a  good  humour. 


WARANDPEACE  359 

Pointing  to  the  fields,  he  told  him  of  the  improvements  he  was  making 
in  the  management  of  his  land. 

Pierre  preserved  a  gloomy  silence,  replying  only  by  monosyllables, 
and  apparently  plunged  in  his  own  thoughts. 

Pierre  was  reflecting  that  Prince  Andrey  was  unhappy,  that  he  was 
in  error,  that  he  did  not  know  the  true  light,  and  that  he  ought  to  come 
to  his  aid,  enlighten  him  and  lift  him  up.  But  as  soon  as  he  began  to 
deliberate  on  what  he  would  say,  he  foresaw  that  Prince  Andrey  with  one 
word,  one  argument,  would  annihilate  everything  in  his  doctrine;  and  he 
was  afraid  to  begin,  afraid  of  exposing  his  most  cherished  and  holiest 
to  possible  ridicule. 

‘No,  what  makes  you  think  so?’  Pierre  began  all  at  once,  lowering  his 
head  and  looking  like  a  butting  bull;  ‘what  makes  you  think  so?  You 
ought  not  to  think  so.’ 

‘Think  so,  about  what?’  asked  Prince  Andrey  in  surprise. 

‘About  life.  About  the  destination  of  man.  It  can’t  be  so.  I  used  to 
think  like  that,  and  I  have  been  saved,  do  you  know,  by  what? — free¬ 
masonry.  No,  you  must  not  smile.  Freemasonry  is  not  a  religious  sect,  nor 
mere  ceremonial  rites,  as  I  used  to  suppose;  freemasonry  is  the  best,  the 
only  expression  of  the  highest,  eternal  aspects  of  humanity.’  And  he  began 
expounding  to  Prince  Andrey  freemasonry,  as  he  understood  it. 

He  said  that  freemasonry  is  the  teaching  of  Christianity,  freed  from 
its  political  and  religious  fetters;  the  teaching  of  equality,  fraternity, 
and  love. 

‘Our  holy  brotherhood  is  the  only  thing  that  has  real  meaning  in  life; 
all  the  rest  is  a  dream,’  said  Pierre.  ‘You  understand,  my  dear  fellow,  that 
outside  this  brotherhood  all  is  filled  with  lying  and  falsehood,  and  I  agree 
with  you  that  there’s  nothing  left  for  an  intelligent  and  good-hearted 
man  but,  like  you,  to  get  through  his  life,  only  trying  not  to  hurt  others. 
But  make  our  fundamental  convictions  your  own,  enter  into  our  brother¬ 
hood,  give  yourself  up  to  us,  let  us  guide  you,  and  you  will  at  once  feel 
yourself,  as  I  felt,  a  part  of  a  vast,  unseen  chain,  the  origin  of  which  is  lost 
in  the  skies,’  said  Pierre,  looking  straight  before  him. 

Prince  Andrey  listened  to  Pierre’s  words  in  silence.  Several  times  he 
did  not  catch  words  from  the  noise  of  the  wheels,  and  he  asked  Pierre  to 
repeat  what  he  had  missed.  From  the  peculiar  light  that  glowed  in  Prince 
Andrey’s  eyes,  and  from  his  silence,  Pierre  saw  that  his  words  were  not 
in  vain,  that  Prince  Andrey  would  not  interrupt  him  nor  laugh  at  what 
he  said. 

They  reached  a  river  that  had  overflowed  its  banks,  and  had  to  cross 
it  by  a  ferry.  While  the  coach  and  horses  waited  they  crossed  on  the 
ferry.  Prince  Andrey  with  his  elbow  on  the  rail  gazed  mutely  over  the 
stretch  of  water  shining  in  the  setting  sun. 

‘Well,  what  do  you  think  about  it?’  asked  Pierre.  ‘Why  are  you  silent?’ 

‘What  do  I  think?  I  have  heard  what  you  say.  That's  all  right,’  said 
Prince  Andrey.  ‘But  you  say,  enter  into  our  brotherhood,  and  we  will 
show  you  the  object  of  life  and  the  destination  of  man,  and  the  laws  that 


s6o  WARANDPEACE 

govern  the  universe.  But  who  are  we? — men?  How  do  you  know  it  all? 
Why  is  it  I  alone  don’t  see  what  you  see?  You  see  on  earth  the  dominion 
of  good  and  truth,  but  I  don’t  see  it.’ 

Pierre  interrupted  him.  ‘Do  you  believe  in  a  future  life?’  he  asked. 

‘In  a  future  life?’  repeated  Prince  Andrey. 

But  Pierre  did  not  give  him  time  to  answer,  and  took  this  repetition  as 
a  negative  reply,  the  more  readily  as  he  knew  Prince  Andrey’s  atheistic 
views  in  the  past.  ‘You  say  that  you  can’t  see  the  dominion  of  good  and 
truth  on  the  earth.  I  have  not  seen  it  either,  and  it  cannot  be  seen  if 
one  looks  upon  our  life  as  the  end  of  everything.  On  earth,  this  earth 
here’  (Pierre  pointed  to  the  open  country),  ‘there  is  no  truth — all  is 
deception  and  wickedness.  But  in  the  world,  the  whole  world,  there  is  a 
dominion  of  truth,  and  we  are  now  the  children  of  earth,  but  eternally 
the  children  of  the  whole  universe.  Don’t  I  feel  in  my  soul  that  I  am  a 
part  of  that  vast,  harmonious  whole?  Don’t  I  feel  that  in  that  vast,  in¬ 
numerable  multitude  of  beings,  in  which  is  made  manifest  the  Godhead, 
the  higher  power — what  you  choose  to  call  it — I  constitute  one  grain, 
one  step  upward  from  lower  beings  to  higher  ones?  If  I  see,  see  clearly 
that  ladder  that  rises  up  from  the  vegetable  to  man,  why  should  I  suppose 
that  ladder  breaks  off  with  me  and  does  not  go  on  further  and  further? 
I  feel  that  I  cannot  disappear  as  nothing  does  disappear  in  the  universe, 
that  indeed  I  always  shall  be  and  always  have  been.  I  feel  that  beside 
me,  above  me,  there  are  spirits,  and  that  in  their  world  there  is  truth.’ 

‘Yes,  that’s  Herder’s  theory,’  said  Prince  Andrey.  ‘But  it’s  not  that,  my 
dear  boy,  convinces  me;  but  life  and  death  are  what  have  convinced  me. 
What  convinces  me  is  seeing  a  creature  dear  to  me,  and  bound  up  with 
me,  to  whom  one  has  done  wrong,  and  hoped  to  make  it  right’  (Prince 
Andrey’s  voice  shook  and  he  turned  away),  ‘and  all  at  once  that  creature 
suffers,  is  in  agony,  and  ceases  to  be.  .  .  .  What  for?  It  cannot  be  that 
there  is  no  answer!  And  I  believe  there  is.  .  .  .  That’s  what  convinces, 
that’s  what  has  convinced  me,’  said  Prince  Andrey. 

‘Just  so,  just  so,’  said  Pierre;  ‘isn’t  that  the  very  thing  I’m  saying?’ 

‘No.  I  only  say  that  one  is  convinced  of  the  necessity  of  a  future  life, 
not  by  argument,  but  when  one  goes  hand-in-hand  with  some  one,  and  all 
at  once  that  some  one  slips  away  yonder  into  nowhere,  and  you  are  left 
facing  that  abyss  and  looking  down  into  it.  And  I  have  looked  into  it  .  .  .’ 

‘Well,  that’s  it  then!  You  know  there  is  a  yonder  and  there  is  some  one. 
Yonder  is  the  future  life;  Some  One  is  God.’ 

Prince  Andrey  did  not  answer.  The  coach  and  horses  had  long  been 
taken  across  to  the  other  bank,  and  had  been  put  back  into  the  shafts, 
and  the  sun  had  half  sunk  below  the  horizon,  and  the  frost  of  evening 
was  starring  the  pools  at  the  fording-place ;  but  Pierre  and  Andrey,  to 
the  astonishment  of  the  footmen,  coachmen,  and  ferrymen,  still  stood 
in  the  ferry  and  were  still  talking. 

‘If  there  is  God  and  there  is  a  future  life,  then  there  is  truth  and  there 
is  goodness;  and  the  highest  happiness  of  man  consists  in  striving  for  their 
attainment.  We  must  live,  we  must  love,  we  must  believe,’  said  Pierre, 


WARANDPEACE  361 

‘that  we  are  not  only  living  to-day  on  this  clod  of  earth,  but  have  lived 
and  will  live  for  ever  there  in  everything’  (he  pointed  to  the  sky).  Prince 
Andrey  stood  with  his  elbow  on  the  rail  of  the  ferry,  and  as  he  listened 
to  Pierre  he  kept  his  eyes  fixed  on  the  red  reflection  of  the  sun  on  the 
bluish  stretch  of  water.  Pierre  ceased  speaking.  There  was  perfect  stillness. 

'  The  ferry  had  long  since  come  to  a  standstill,  and  only  the  eddies  of  the 
current  flapped  with  a  faint  sound  on  the  bottom  of  the  ferry  boat.  It 
seemed  to  Prince  Andrey  that  the  lapping  of  the  water  kept  up  a  refrain 
to  Pierre’s  words:  ‘It’s  the  truth,  believe  it.’ 

Prince  Andrey  sighed,  and  with  a  radiant,  childlike,  tender  look  in  his 
eyes  glanced  at  the  face  of  Pierre — flushed  and  triumphant,  though  still 
timidly  conscious  of  his  friend’s  superiority. 

‘Yes,  if  only  it  were  so!’  he  said.  ‘Let  us  go  and  get  in,  though,’  added 
Prince  Andrey,  and  as  he  got  out  of  the  ferry  he  looked  up  at  the  sky,  to 
which  Pierre  had  pointed  him,  and  for  the  first  time  since  Austerlitz  he 
saw  the  lofty,  eternal  sky,  as  he  had  seen  it  lying  on  the  field  of  Austerlitz, 
and  something  that  had  long  been  slumbering,  something  better  that  had 
been  in  him,  suddenly  awoke  with  a  joyful,  youthful  feeling  in  his  soul. 
That  feeling  vanished  as  soon  as  Prince  Andrey  returned  again  to  the 
habitual  conditions  of  life,  but  he  knew  that  that  feeling — though  he 
knew  not  how  to  develop  it — was  still  within  him.  Pierre’s  visit  was  for 
Prince  Andrey  an  epoch,  from  which  there  began,  though  outwardly  un¬ 
changed,  a  new  life  in  his  inner  world. 


XIII 

It  was  dark  by  the  time  Prince  Andrey  and  Pierre  drove  up  to  the  principal 
entrance  of  the  house  at  Bleak  Hills.  While  they  were  driving  in,  Prince 
Andrey  with  a  smile  drew  Pierre’s  attention  to  a  commotion  that  was 
taking  place  at  the  back  entrance.  A  bent  little  old  woman  with  a  wallet 
on  her  back,  and  a  short  man  with  long  hair,  in  a  black  garment,  ran 
back  to  the  gate  on  seeing  the  carriage  driving  up.  Two  women  ran  out 
after  them,  and  all  the  four,  looking  round  at  the  carriage  with  scared 
faces,  ran  in  at  the  back  entrance. 

‘Those  are  Masha’s  God’s  folk,’  said  Prince  Andrey.  ‘They  took  us 
for  my  father.  It’s  the  one  matter  in  which  she  does  not  obey  him.  He 
orders  them  to  drive  away  these  pilgrims,  but  she  receives  them.’ 

‘But  what  are  God’s  folk?’  asked  Pierre. 

Prince  Andrey  had  not  time  to  answer  him.  The  servants  came  out  to 
meet  them,  and  he  inquired  where  the  old  prince  was  and  whether  they 
expected  him  home  soon.  The  old  prince  was  still  in  the  town,  and  they 
were  expecting  him  every  minute. 

Prince  Andrey  led  Pierre  away  to  his  own  suite  of  rooms,  which  were 
always  in  perfect  readiness  for  him  in  his  father’s  house,  and  went  off 
himself  to  the  nursery. 

‘Let  us  go  to  my  sister/  said  Prince  Andrey,  coming  back  to  Pierre; 


362  WARANDPEACE 

'I  have  not  seen  her  yet,  she  is  in  hiding  now,  sitting  with  her  God’s  folk. 
Serve  her  right;  she  will  be  put  to  shame,  and  you  will  see  God’s  folk. 
It’s  curious,  upon  my  word.’ 

‘What  are  “God’s  folk”?’  asked  Pierre. 

‘You  shall  see.’ 

Princess  Marya  certainly  was  disconcerted,  and  reddened  in  patches 
when  they  went  in.  In  her  snug  room,  with  lamps  before  the  holy  picture 
stand,  there  was  sitting,  behind  the  samovar,  on  the  sofa  beside  her,  a 
young  lad  with  a  long  nose  and  long  hair,  wearing  a  monk’s  cassock.  In 
a  low  chair  near  sat  a  wrinkled,  thin,  old  woman,  with  a  meek  expression 
on  her  childlike  face. 

‘Andrey,  why  did  you  not  let  me  know?’  she  said  with  mild  reproach, 
standing  before  her  pilgrims  like  a  hen  before  her  chickens. 

‘Delighted  to  see  you.  I  am  very  glad  to  see  you,’  she  said  to  Pierre,  as 
he  kissed  her  hand.  She  had  known  him  as  a  child,  and  now  his  friendship 
with  Andrey,  his  unhappy  marriage,  and  above  all,  his  kindly,  simple 
face,  disposed  her  favourably  to  him.  She  looked  at  him  with  her  beauti¬ 
ful,  luminous  eyes,  and  seemed  to  say  to  him:  ‘I  like  you  very  much,  but, 
please,  don’t  laugh  at  my  friends.’ 

After  the  first  phrases  of  greeting,  they  sat  down. 

‘Oh,  and  Ivanushka’s  here,’  said  Prince  Andrey  with  a  smile,  indicating 
the  young  pilgrim. 

‘Andryusha!  ’  said  Princess  Marya  imploringly. 

‘You  must  know,  it  is  a  woman,’  said  Andrey  to  Pierre  in  French. 

‘Andrey,  for  heaven’s  sake!  ’  repeated  Princess  Marya. 

It  was  plain  that  Prince  Andrey’s  ironical  tone  to  the  pilgrims,  and 
Princess  Marya’s  helpless  championship  of  them,  were  their  habitual, 
long-established  attitudes  on  the  subject. 

‘Why,  my  dear  girl,’  said  Prince  Andrey,  ‘you  ought  to  be  obliged  to 
me,  on  the  contrary,  for  explaining  your  intimacy  with  this  young  man 
to  Pierre.’ 

‘Indeed?’ said  Pierre,  looking  with  curiosity  and  seriousness  (for  which 
Princess  Marya  felt  particularly  grateful  to  him )  at  the  face  of  I vanushka, 
who,  seeing  that  he  was  the  subject  under  discussion,  looked  at  all  of 
them  with  his  crafty  eyes. 

Princess  Marya  had  not  the  slightest  need  to  feel  embarrassment  on 
her  friends’  account.  They  were  quite  at  their  ease.  The  old  woman  cast 
down  her  eyes,  but  stole  sidelong  glances  at  the  new-comers,  and  turning 
her  cup  upside  down  in  the  saucer,  and  laying  a  nibbled  lump  of  sugar 
beside  it,  sat  calmly  without  stirring  in  her  chair,  waiting  to  be  offered 
another  cup.  Ivanushka,  sipping  out  of  the  saucer,  peeped  from  under 
his  brows  with  his  sly,  feminine  eyes  at  the  young  men. 

‘Where  have  you  been,  in  Kiev?’  Prince  Andrey  asked  the  old  woman. 

‘I  have,  good  sir,’  answered  the  old  woman,  who  was  conversationally 
disposed;  ‘just  at  the  Holy  Birth  I  was  deemed  worthy  to  be  a  partaker 
in  holy,  heavenly  mysteries  from  the  saints.  And  now,  good  sir,  from 
Kolyazin  a  great  blessing  has  been  revealed.’ 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


‘And  Ivanushka  was  with  you?’ 

‘I  go  alone  by  myself,  benefactor,’  said  Ivanushka,  trying  to  speak  in 
a  bass  voice. ‘It  was  only  at  Yuhnovo  I  joined  Pelageyushka  .  .  .’ 

Pelageyushka  interrupted  her  companion;  she  was  evidently  anxious 
to  tell  of  what  she  had  seen.  ‘In  Kolyazin,  good  sir,  great  is  the  blessing 
revealed.’ 

‘What,  new  relics?’  asked  Prince  Andrey. 

‘Hush,  Andrey,’  said  Princess  Marya.  ‘Don’t  tell  us  about  it,  Pela¬ 
geyushka.’ 

‘Not  .  .  .  nay,  ma’am,  why  not  tell  him?  I  like  him.  He’s  a  good 
gentleman,  chosen  of  God,  he's  my  benefactor;  he  gave  me  ten  roubles, 
I  remember.  When  I  was  in  Kiev,  Kiryusha,  the  crazy  pilgrim,  tells  me — - 
verily  a  man  of  God,  winter  and  summer  he  goes  barefoot — why  are  you 
not  going  to  your  right  place,  says  he;  go  to  Kolyazin,  there  a  wonder¬ 
working  ikon,  a  holy  Mother  of  God  has  been  revealed.  On  these  words 
I  said  good-bye  to  the  holy  folk  and  off  I  went  .  .  .’ 

All  were  silent,  only  the  pilgrim  woman  talked  on  in  her  measured 
voice,  drawing  her  breath  regularly.  ‘I  came,  good  sir,  and  folks  say  to 
me:  a  great  blessing  has  been  vouchsafed,  drops  of  myrrh  trickle  from 
the  cheeks  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God  .  .  .’ 

‘Come,  that  will  do,  that  will  do;  you  shall  tell  me  later,’  said  Princess 
Marya,  flushing. 

‘Let  me  ask  her  a  question,’  said  Pierre.  ‘Did  you  see  it  yourself?’  he 
asked. 

‘To  be  sure,  good  sir,  I  myself  was  found  worthy.  Such  a  brightness 
overspread  the  face,  like  the  light  of  heaven,  and  from  the  Holy  Mother’s 
cheeks  drops  like  this  and  like  this  .  .  .’ 

‘Why,  but  it  must  be  a  trick,’  said  Pierre  naively,  after  listening  at¬ 
tentively  to  the  old  woman. 

‘Oh,  sir,  what  a  thing  to  say!’  said  Pelageyushka  with  horror,  turning 
to  Princess  Marya  for  support. 

‘They  impose  upon  the  people,’  he  repeated. 

‘Lord  Jesus  Christ!’  said  the  pilgrim  woman,  crossing  herself.  ‘Oh, 
don’t  speak  so,  sir.  There  was  a  general  did  not  believe  like  that,  said  “the 
monks  cheat,”  and  as  he  said  it,  he  was  struck  blind.  And  he  dreamed  a 
dream,  the  holy  mother  of  Petchersky  comes  to  him  and  says:  “Believe 
in  me  and  I  will  heal  thee.”  And  so  he  kept  beseeching  them:  “Take  me 
to  her,  take  me  to  her.”  It’s  the  holy  truth  I’m  telling  you,  I’ve  seen  it 
myself.  They  carried  him,  blind  as  he  was,  to  her;  he  went  up,  fell  dowm, 
and  said:  “Heal  me!  I  will  give  thee,”  says  he,  “what  the  Tsar  bestowed 
an  me.”  I  saw  it  myself — a  sort  of  star  carved  in  it.  Well — he  regained  his 
sight!  It’s  a  sin  to  speak  so.  God  will  punish  you,’  she  said  admonishingly 
to  Pierre. 

‘How?  Was  the  star  in  the  holy  image?’  asked  Pierre. 

‘And  didn’t  they  make  the  holy  mother  a  general?’  said  Prince  Andrey, 
smiling. 

Pelageyushka  turned  suddenly  pale  and  flung  up  her  hands. 


^64  WARANDPEACE 

‘Sir,  sir,  it's  a  sin  of  you,  you've  a  son!’  she  said,  suddenly  turning 
from  white  to  dark  red.  ‘Sir,  for  what  you  have  said,  God  forgive  you.’ 
She  crossed  herself.  ‘Lord,  forgive  him.  Lady,  what’s  this?  .  .  .’  she 
turned  to  Princess  Marya.  She  got  up,  and  almost  crying  began  gathering 
up  her  wallet.  Plainly  she  was  both  frightened  and  ashamed  at  having 
accepted  bounty  in  a  house  where  they  could  say  such  things,  and  sorry 
that  she  must  henceforth  deprive  herself  of  the  bounty  of  that  house. 

‘What  did  you  want  to  do  this  for?’  said  Princess  Marya.  ‘Why  did  you 
come  to  me?  .  .  .’ 

‘No,  I  was  joking  really,  Pelageyushka,’  said  Pierre.  ‘Princess,  via 
parole,  je  n’ai  pas  voulu  I’offenser.  I  said  it,  meaning  nothing.  Don’t  think 
of  it,  I  was  joking,’  he  said,  smiling  timidly  and  trying  to  smooth  over 
his  crime.  ‘It  was  all  my  fault;  but  he  didn’t  mean  it,  he  was  joking.’ 

Pelageyushka  remained  mistrustful,  but  Pierre’s  face  wore  a  look  of 
such  genuine  penitence,  and  Prince  Andrey  looked  so  mildly  from  Pela¬ 
geyushka  to  Pierre,  that  she  was  gradually  reassured. 

XIV 

The  pilgrim  woman  was  appeased,  and  being  drawn  into  conversation 
again,  told  them  a  long  story  again  of  Father  Amfilohey,  who  was  of  so 
holy  a  life  that  his  hands  smelt  of  incense,  and  how  some  monks  of  her 
acquaintance  had,  on  her  last  pilgrimage  to  Kiev,  given  her  the  keys  of 
the  catacombs,  and  how  taking  with  her  some  dry  bread  she  had  spent 
two  days  and  nights  in  the  catacombs  with  the  saints.  ‘I  pray  a  bit  in 
one,  chant  a  hymn,  and  go  into  another.  I  fall  asleep,  again  I  go  and  kiss  j 
the  holy  relics;  and  such  peace,  ma’am,  such  blessedness,  that  one  has  no 
wish  to  come  out  into  God’s  world  again.’ 

Pierre  listened  to  her  attentively  and  seriously.  Prince  Andrey  went 
out  of  the  room.  And  leaving  God’s  folk  to  finish  their  tea,  Princess  Marya 
followed  him  with  Pierre  to  the  drawing-room.  ‘You  are  very  kind,’  she 
said  to  him. 

‘Ah,  I  really  didn’t  mean  to  hurt  her  feelings ;  I  so  well  understand  those 
feelings,  and  prize  them  so  highly.’ 

Princess  Marya  looked  mutely  at  him,  and  smiled  affectionately. 

‘I  have  known  you  for  a  long  time,  you  see,  and  I  love  you  like  a 
brother,’  she  said.  ‘How  do  you  think  Andrey  is  looking?’  she  asked  ; 
hurriedly,  not  letting  him  have  time  to  say  anything  in  reply  to  her  affec-  j 
tionate  words.  ‘He  makes  me  very  uneasy.  His  health  was  better  in  the  i  : 
winter,  but  last  spring  the  wound  reopened,  and  the  doctor  says  he  ought 
to  go  away  for  proper  treatment.  And  I  feel  afraid  for  him  morally.  He  M 
has  not  a  character  like  us  women,  to  suffer  and  find  relief  for  sorrow  in 
tears.  He  keep  it  all  within  him.  To-day  he  is  lively  and  in  good  spirits. 
But  that’s  the  effect  of  your  being  with  him;  he  is  not  often  like  this.  If  t( 
only  you  could  persuade  him  to  go  abroad.  He  needs  activity,  and  this  b 


WARANDPEACE  365 

quiet,  regular  life  is  bad  for  him.  Others  don't  notice  it,  but  I  see  it.’ 

Towards  ten  o’clock  the  footmen  rushed  to  the  steps,  hearing  the  bells 
of  the  old  prince's  carriage  approaching.  Prince  Andrey  and  Pierre,  too, 
went  out  on  to  the  steps. 

‘Who’s  that?’  asked  the  old  prince,  as  he  got  out  of  the  carriage  and 
saw  Pierre. 

‘Ah!  very  glad!  kiss  me!’  he  said,  on  learning  who  the  young  stranger 
was. 

The  old  prince  was  in  a  good  humour  and  very  cordial  to  Pierre. 

Before  supper,  Prince  Andrey,  on  coming  back  into  his  father’s  study, 
found  the  old  prince  in  hot  dispute  with  Pierre.  The  latter  was  maintain¬ 
ing  that  a  time  would  come  when  there  would  be  no  more  war.  The  old 
prince  was  making  fun  of  him,  but  with  good  humour. 

‘Let  off  blood  from  men’s  veins  and  fill  them  up  with  water,  then 
there’ll  be  no  more  war.  Old  women’s  nonsense,  old  women’s  nonsense/ 
he  was  saying,  but  still  he  slapped  Pierre  affectionately  on  the  shoulder, 
and  went  up  to  the  table  where  Prince  Andrey,  evidently  not  caring  to 
take  part  in  the  conversation,  was  looking  through  the  papers  the  old 
prince  had  brought  from  the  town.  The  old  prince  went  up  to  him  and 
began  to  talk  of  business. 

‘The  marshal,  a  Count  Rostov,  hasn’t  sent  half  his  contingent.  Came 
to  the  town  and  thought  fit  to  invite  me  to  dinner — a  pretty  dinner  I  gave 
him!  .  .  .  And  here,  look  at  this.  .  .  .  Well,  my  boy,’  said  the  old 
prince  to  his  son,  clapping  Pierre  on  the  shoulder,  ‘your  friend  is  a  capital 
fellow;  I  like  him!  He  warms  me  up.  Other  people  will  talk  sense  and  one 
doesn’t  care  to  listen,  and  he  talks  nonsense,  but  it  does  an  old  man  like 
me  good.  There,  run  along,’  he  said;  ‘maybe  I  ll  come  and  sit  with  you 
at  your  supper.  We’ll  have  another  dispute.  Make  friends  with  my  dunce, 
Princess  Marya/  he  shouted  to  Pierre  from  the  door. 

It  was  only  now  on  his  visit  to  Bleak  Hills  that  Pierre  appreciated  fully 
all  the  charm  of  his  friendship  with  Prince  Andrey.  The  charm  was  not 
so  manifest  in  his  relations  with  his  friend  himself  as  in  his  relations  with 
all  his  family  and  household.  Though  he  had  hardly  known  them,  Pierre 
felt  at  once  like  an  old  friend  both  with  the  harsh  old  prince  and  the  gentle, 
timid  Princess  Marya.  They  all  liked  him.  Not  only  Princess  Marya,  who 
had  been  won  by  his  kindliness  with  the  pilgrims,  looked  at  him  with  her 
most  radiant  expression,  little  Prince  Nikolay,  as  the  old  prince  called  the 
year-old  baby,  smiled  at  Pierre  and  went  to  him.  Mihail  Ivanitch  and 
Mademoiselle  Bourienne  looked  at  him  with  smiles  when  he  talked  to 
the  old  prince. 

The  old  prince  came  in  to  supper;  it  was  obviously  on  Tierre’s  account. 
He  was  extremely  warm  with  him  both  days  of  his  stay  at  Bleak  Hills,  and 
asked  him  to  come  and  stay  with  him  again. 

When  Pierre  had  gone,  and  all  the  members  of  the  family  were  met 
together,  they  began  to  criticise  him,  as  people  always  do  after  a  new 
guest  has  left,  and  as  rarely  happens,  all  said  nothing  but  good  of  him. 


366 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


XV 

On  returning  this  time  from  his  leave,  Rostov  for  the  first  time  felt  and 
recognised  how  strong  was  the  tie  that  bound  him  to  Denisov  and  all  his  1 
regiment. 

When  Rostov  reached  the  regiment,  he  experienced  a  sensation  akin 
to  what  he  had  felt  on  reaching  his  home  at  Moscow.  When  he  caught  sight 
of  the  first  hussar  in  the  unbuttoned  uniform  of  his  regiment,  when  he 
recognised  red-haired  Dementyev,  and  saw  the  picket  ropes  of  the  chest¬ 
nut  horses,  when  Lavrushka  gleefully  shouted  to  his  master,  ‘The  count 
has  come!’  and  Denisov,  who  had  been  asleep  on  his  bed,  ran  all  dis- 
bevelled  out  of  the  mud-hut,  and  embraced  him,  and  the  officers  gathered 
around  to  welcome  the  newcomer — Rostov  felt  the  same  sensation  as 
when  his  mother  had  embraced  him,  and  his  father  and  sisters,  and  the 
tears  of  joy  that  rose  in  his  throat  prevented  his  speaking.  The  regiment 
was  a  home,  too,  and  a  home  as  unchangeably  dear  and  precious  as  the 
parental  home. 

After  reporting  himself  to  his  colonel,  being  assigned  to  his  own  squad¬ 
ron,  and  serving  on  orderly  duty  and  going  for  forage,  after  entering  into 
all  the  little  interests  of  the  regiment,  and  feeling  himself  deprived  of 
liberty  and  nailed  down  within  one  narrow,  unchangeable  framework, 
Rostov  had  the  same  feeling  of  peace  and  of  moral  support  and  the  same 
rense  of  being  at  home  here,  and  in  his  proper  place,  as  he  had  once  felt 
under  his  father’s  roof.  Here  was  none  of  all  that  confusion  of  the  free 
world,  where  he  did  not  know  his  proper  place,  and  made  mistakes  in 
exercising  free  choice.  There  was  no  Sonya,  with  whom  one  ought  or 
ought  not  to  have  a  clear  understanding.  There  was  no  possibility  of  going 
to  one  place  or  to  another.  There  were  not  twenty-four  hours  every  day 
which  could  be  used  in  so  many  different  ways.  There  were  not  those  in¬ 
numerable  masses  of  people  of  whom  no  one  was  nearer  or  further  from 
one.  There  were  none  of  those  vague  and  undefined  money  relations  i 
with  his  father ;  no  memories  of  his  awful  loss  to  Dolohov.  Here  in  the 
regiment  everything  was  clear  and  simple.  The  whole  world  was  divided 
into  two  unequal  parts:  one,  our  Pavlograd  regiment,  and  the  other — all 
the  remainder.  And  with  all  that  great  remainder  one  had  no  concern.  In 
the  regiment  everything  was  well  known:  this  man  was  a  lieutenant,  that 
one  a  captain;  this  was  a  good  fellow  and  that  one  was  not;  but  most  of 
all,  every  one  was  a  comrade.  The  canteen-keeper  would  give  him  credit, 
his  pay  would  come  every  four  months.  There  was  no  need  of  thought 
or  of  choice;  one  had  only  to  do  nothing  that  was  considered  low  in  the 
Pavlograd  regiment,  and  when  occasion  came,  to  do  what  was  clear  and 
distinct,  defined  and  commanded;  and  all  would  be  well. 

On  becoming  subject  again  to  the  definite  regulations  of  regimental 
life,  Rostov  had  a  sense  of  pleasure  and  relief,  such  as  a  weary  man  feels 
in  lying  down  to  rest.  The  regimental  life  was  the  greater  relief  to  Rostov 
on  this  campaign,  because  after  his  loss  to  Dolohov  (for  which,  in  spite 


WARANDPEACE  367 

of  his  family’s  efforts  to  console  him,  he  could  not  forgive  himself),  he 
had  resolved  not  to  serve  as  before,  but  to  atone  for  his  fault  by  good  con¬ 
duct,  and  by  being  a  thoroughly  good  soldier  and  officer,  that  is  a  good 
man,  a  task  so  difficult  in  the  world,  but  so  possible  in  the  regiment. 

Rostov  had  determined  to  repay  his  gambling  debt  to  his  parents  in 
the  course  of  five  years.  He  had  been  sent  ten  thousand  a  year ;  now  he  had 
made  up  his  mind  to  take  only  two  thousand,  and  to  leave  the  remainder 
to  repay  the  debt  to  his  parents. 

After  continual  retreats,  advances,  and  engagements  at  Fultusk  and 
Freussisch-Eylau,  our  army  was  concentrated  about  Bartenstein.  They 
were  waiting  for  the  arrival  of  the  Tsar  and  the  beginning  of  a  new 
campaign. 

The  Pavlograd  regiment,  belonging  to  that  part  of  the  army  which  had 
been  in  the  campaign  of  1805,  had  stayed  behind  in  Russia  to  make  up 
its  full  complement  of  men,  and  did  not  arrive  in  time  for  the  first  actions 
of  the  campaign.  It  took  no  part  in  the  battles  of  Pultusk  and  of  Preus- 
sisch-Eylau,  and  joining  the  army  in  the  field,  in  the  second  half  of  the 
campaign,  was  attached  to  Platov’s  detachment. 

Platov’s  detachment  was  acting  independently  of  the  main  army.  Sev¬ 
eral  times  the  Pavlograd  hussars  had  taken  part  in  skirmishes  with  the 
enemy,  had  captured  prisoners,  and  on  one  occasion  had  even  carried  off 
the  carriages  of  Marshal  Oudinot.  In  April  the  Pavlograd  hussars  had  for 
several  weeks  been  encamped  near  an  utterly  ruined,  empty  German  vil¬ 
lage,  and  had  not  stirred  from  that  spot. 

It  was  thawing,  muddy,  and  cold,  the  ice  had  broken  upon  the  river, 
the  roads  had  become  impassable;  for  several  days  there  had  been  neither 
provender  for  the  horses  nor  provisions  for  the  men.  Seeing  that  the  trans¬ 
port  of  provisions  was  impossible,  the  soldiers  dispersed  about  the  aban¬ 
doned  and  desert  villages  to  try  and  find  potatoes,  but  very  few  were  to 
be  found  even  of  these. 

Everything  had  been  eaten  up,  and  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  district 
had  fled;  those  that  remained  were  worse  than  beggars,  and  there  was 
nothing  to  be  taken  from  them;  indeed,  the  soldiers,  although  little  given 
to  compassion,  often  gave  their  last  ration  to  them. 

The  Pavlograd  regiment  had  only  lost  two  men  wounded  in  action,  but 
had  lost  almost  half  its  men  from  hunger  and  disease.  In  the  hospitals  they 
died  so  invariably,  that  soldiers  sick  with  fever  or  the  swelling  that  came 
from  bad  food,  preferred  to  remain  on  duty,  to  drag  their  feeble  limbs  in 
the  ranks,  rather  than  to  go  to  the  hospitals.  As  spring  came  on,  the 
soldiers  found  a  plant  growing  out  of  the  ground,  like  asparagus,  which 
for  some  reason  they  called  Mary’s  sweet-root,  and  they  wandered  about 
the  fields  and  meadows  seeking  this  Mary’s  sweet-root  (which  was  very 
bitter).  They  dug  it.  up  with  their  swords  and  ate  it,  in  spite  of  all  prohi¬ 
bition  of  this  noxious  root  being  eaten.  In  the  spring  a  new  disease  broke 
out  among  the  soldiers,  with  swelling  of  the  hands,  legs,  and  face,  which 
the  doctors  attributed  to  eating  this  root.  But  in  spite  of  the  prohibition, 


368  WARANDPEACE 

the  soldiers  of  Denisov’s  squadron  in  particular  ate  a  great  deal  of  the 
Mary’s  sweet-root,  because  they  had  been  for  a  fortnight  eking  out  the 
last  biscuits,  giving  qut  only  half  a  pound  a  man,  and  the  potatoes  in  the 
last  lot  of  stores  were  sprouting  and  rotten. 

The  horses,  too,  had  for  the  last  fortnight  been  fed  on  the  thatched  ! 
roofs  of  the  houses;  they  were  hideously  thin,  and  still  covered  with  their 
shaggy,  winter  coats,  which  were  coming  o£f  in  tufts. 

In  spite  of  their  destitute  condition,  the  soldiers  and  officers  went  on 
living  exactly  as  they  always  did.  Just  as  always,  though  now  with  pale 
and  swollen  faces  and  torn  uniforms,  the  hussars  were  drawn  up  for  call¬ 
ing  over,  went  out  to  collect  forage,  cleaned  down  their  horses,  and  rubbed 
up  their  arms,  dragged  in  straw  from  the  thatched  roofs  in  place  of  fodder, 
and  assembled  for  dinner  round  the  cauldrons,  from  which  they  rose  up 
hungry,  making  jokes  over  their  vile  food  and  their  hunger.  Just  as  ever, 
in  their  spare  time  off  duty  the  soldiers  lighted  camp-fires,  and  warmed 
themselves  naked  before  them,  smoked,  picked  out,  and  baked  the  sprout¬ 
ing,  rotten  potatoes,  and  told  and  heard  either  stories  of  Potyomkin’s  and 
Suvorov’s  campaigns  or  popular  legends  of  cunning  Alyoshka,  and  of  the 
priests’  workman,  Mikolka. 

The  officers  lived  as  usual  in  twos  and  threes  in  the  roofless,  broken- 
down  houses.  The  senior  officers  were  busily  engaged  in  trying  to  get  hold 
of  straw  and  potatoes,  and  the  means  of  sustenance  for  the  soldiers  gen-  i 
erally,  while  the  younger  ones  spent  their  time  as  they  always  did,  some 
over  cards  (money  was*plentiful,  though  there  was  nothing  to  eat) ,  others 
over  more  innocent  games,  a  sort  of  quoits  and  skittles.  Of  the  general  j 
cause  of  the  campaign  little  was  said,  partly  because  nothing  certain  was 
known,  partly  because  there  was  a  vague  feeling  that  the  war  was  not 
going  well. 

Rostov  lived  as  before  with  Denisov,  and  the  bond  of  friendship  be¬ 
tween  them  had  become  still  closer  since  their  furlough.  Denisov  never 
spoke  of  any  of  Rostov’s  family,  but  from  the  tender  affection  the  senior 
officer  showed  his  junior,  Rostov  felt  that  the  older  hussar’s  luckless  pas¬ 
sion  for  Natasha  had  something  to  do  with  the  strengthening  of  their 
friendship.  There  was  no  doubt  that  Denisov  tried  to  take  care  of  Rostov,  i 
and  to  expose  him  as  rarely  as  possible  to  danger,  and  after  action  it  was 
with  unmistakable  joy  that  he  saw  him  return  safe  and  sound.  On  one  of 
his  foraging  expeditions  in  a  deserted  and  ruined  village  to  which  he  had 
come  in  search  of  provisions,  Rostov  found  an  old  Pole  and  his  daughter 
with  a  tiny  baby.  They  were  without  clothes  or  food;  they  had  not  the 
strength  to  go  away  on  foot,  and  had  no  means  of  getting  driven  away. 
Rostov  brought  them  to  his  camp,  installed  them  in  his  own  quarters,  and 
maintained  them  for  several  weeks  till  the  old  man  was  better.  One  of 
Rostov’s  comrades,  talking  of  women,  began  to  rally  him  on  the  subject,  j 
declaring  that  he  was  the  slyest  fellow  of  the  lot,  and  that  he  ought  to  be 
ashamed  not  to  have  introduced  his  comrades,  too,  to  the  pretty  Polish 
woman  he  had  rescued.  Rostov  took  the  jest  as  an  insult,  and  firing  up, 
said  such  unpleasant  things  to  the  officer,  that  Denisov  had  much  ado  to  < 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


369 

prevent  a  duel.  When  the  officer  had  gone  away,  and  Denisov,  who  knew 
nothing  himself  of  Rostov’s  relations  with  the  Polish  woman,  began  to 
scold  him  for  his  hastiness,  Rostov  said  to  him:  ‘Say  what  you  like.  .  .  . 
She  was  like  a  sister  to  me,  and  I  can’t  tell  you  how  sick  it  made  me  .  .  . 
because  .  .  .  well,  just  because  .  .  .’ 

Denisov  slapped  him  on  the  shoulder,  and  fell  to  walking  rapidly  up 
and  down  the  room  not  looking  at  Rostov,  which  was  what  he  always  did 
at  moments  of  emotional  excitement.  ‘What  a  jolly  lot  of  fools  all  you 
Rostovs  are,’  he  said,  and  Rostov  saw  tears  in  Denisov’s  eyes. 


XVI 

In  April  the  army  was  excited  by  the  news  of  the  arrival  of  the  Tsar. 
Rostov  did  not  succeed  in  being  present  at  the  review  the  Tsar  held  at 
Bartenstein;  the  Pavlograd  hussars  were  at  the  advance  posts,  a  long 
way  in  front  of  Bartenstein. 

They  were  bivouacking.  Denisov  and  Rostov  were  living  in  a  mud  hut 
dug  out  by  the  soldiers  for  them,  and  roofed  with  branches  and  turf.  The 
hut  was  made  after  a  pattern  that  had  just  come  into  fashion  among  the 
soldiers.  A  trench  was  dug  out  an  ell  and  a  half  in  breadth,  two  ells  in 
depth,  and  three  and  a  half  in  length.  At  one  end  of  the  trench  steps  were 
(Scooped  out,  and  these  formed  the  entrance  and  the  approach.  The 
trench  itself  was  the  room,  and  in  it  the  lucky  officers,  such  as  the  cap¬ 
tain,  had  a  plank  lying  on  piles  at  the  further  end  away  from  the  steps — 
this  was  the  table.  On  both  sides  of  the  trench  the  earth  had  been  thrown 
up,  and  these  mounds  made  the  two  beds  and  the  sofa.  The  roof  was  so 
constructed  that  one  could  stand  upright  in  the  middle,  and  on  the  beds 
it  was  possible  to  sit,  if  one  moved  up  close  to  the  table.  Denisov,  who 
always  fared  luxuriously,  because  the  soldiers  of  his  squadron  were  fond 
of  him,  had  a  board  nailed  up  in  the  front  part  of  the  roof,  and  in  the 
board  a  broken  but  cemented  window  pane.  When  it  was  very  cold,  they 
used  to  bring  red-hot  embers  from  the  soldiers’  camp-fires  in  a  bent  sheet 
of  iron  and  set  them  near  the  steps  (in  the  drawing-room,  as  Denisov 
called  that  part  of  the  hut),  and  this  made  it  so  warm  that  the  officers, 
’of  whom  there  were  always  a  number  with  Denisov  and  Rostov,  used  to 
sit  with  nothing  but  their  shirts  on. 

In  April  Rostov  had  been  on  duty.  At  eight  o’clock  in  the  morning,  on 
coming  home  after  a  sleepless  night,  he  sent  for  hot  embers,  changed 
his  rain-soaked  underclothes,  said  his  prayers,  drank  some  tea,  warmed 
himself,  put  things  tidy  in  his  corner  and  on  the  table,  and  with  a  wind- 
beaten,  heated  face,  and  with  only  his  shirt  on,  lay  down  on  his  back, 
folding  his  hands  behind  his  head.  He  was  engaged  in  agreeable  medita¬ 
tions,  reflecting  that  he  would  be  sure  to  be  promoted  for  the  last  recon¬ 
noitring  expedition,  and  was  expecting  Denisov  to  come  in.  He  wanted 
to  talk  to  him. 

Behind  the  hut  he  heard  the  resounding  roar  of  Denisov,  unmistakably 


3?o  WAR  AND  R  E  A  C  E 

irritated.  Rostov  moved  to  the  window  to  see  to  whom  he  was  speaking, 
and  saw  the  quartermaster,  Toptcheenko. 

‘I  told  you  not  to  let  them  stuff  themselves  with  that  root — Mary’s 
what  do  you  call  it!’  Denisov  was  roaring.  ‘Why,  I  saw  it  myself,  La- 
zartchuk  was  pulling  it  up  in  the  field.’ 

‘I  did  give  the  order,  your  honour;  they  won’t  heed  it,’  answered  the 
quartermaster. 

Rostov  lay  down  again  on  his  bed,  and  thought  contentedly:  ‘Let  him 
see  to  things  now;  he’s  fussing  about  while  I  have  done  my  work,  and  I 
am  lying  here — it’s  splendid!  ’  Through  the  wall  he  could  hear  now  some 
one  besides  the  quartermaster  speaking.  Lavrushka,  Denisov’s  smart 
rogue  of  a  valet,  was  telling  him  something  about  some  transports,  biscuits 
and  oxen,  he  had  seen,  while  on  the  look-out  for  provisions. 

Again  he  heard  Denisov’s  shout  from  further  away,  and  the  words: 
‘Saddle!  second  platoon!’ 

Where  are  they  off  to?’  thought  Rostov. 

Five  minutes  later  Denisov  came  into  the  hut,  clambered  with  muddy 
feet  on  the  bed,  angrily  lighted  his  pipe,  scattered  about  all  his  belong¬ 
ings,  put  on  his  riding-whip  and  sword,  and  was  going  out  of  the  hut. 
In  reply  to  Rostov’s  question,  where  was  he  going?  he  answered  angrily 
and  vaguely  that  he  had  business  to  see  after. 

‘God  be  my  judge,  then,  and  our  gracious  Emperor!’  said  Denisov,  as 
he  went  out.  Outside  the  hut  Rostov  heard  the  hoofs  of  several  horses 
splashing  through  the  mud.  Rostov  did  not  even  trouble  himself  to  find 
out  where  Denisov  was  going.  Getting  warm  through  in  his  corner,  he 
fell  asleep,  and  it  was  only  towards  evening  that  he  came  out  of  the  hut. 
Denisov  had  not  yet  come  back.  The  weather  had  cleared;  near  the  next 
hut  two  officers  were  playing  quoits,  with  a  laugh  sticking  big  radishes 
for  pegs  in  the  soft  muddy  earth.  Rostov  joined  them.  In  the  middle  of 
a  game  the  officers  saw  transport  waggons  driving  up  to  them,  some 
fifteen  hussars  on  lean  horses  rode  behind  them.  The  transport  waggons, 
escorted  by  the  hussars,  drove  up  to  the  picket  ropes,  and  a  crowd  of 
hussars  surrounded  them. 

‘There,  look!  Denisov  was  always  fretting  about  it,’  said  Rostov;  ‘here 
are  provisions  come  at  last.’ 

‘High  time,  too!  ’  said  the  officers.  ‘Won’t  the  soldiers  be  pleased!  ’ 

A  little  behind  the  hussars  rode  Denisov,  accompanied  by  two  in¬ 
fantry  officers,  with  whom  he  was  in  conversation.  Rostov  went  to  meet 
them. 

‘I  warn  you,  captain,’  one  of  the  officers  was  saying,  a  thin,  little 
man,  visibly  wrathful. 

‘Well,  I  have  told  you,  I  won’t  give  them  up,’  answered  D.enisov. 

‘You  will  have  to  answer  for  it,  captain.  It’s  mutiny — carrying  off 
transports  from  your  own  army!  Our  men  have  had  no  food  for  two 
days.’ 

‘Mine  have  had  nothing  for  a  fortnight,’  answered  Denisov. 


WARANDPEACE  371 

‘It’s  brigandage;  you  will  answer  for  it,  sir!’  repeated  the  infantry 
officer,  raising  his  voice. 

‘But  why  do  you  keep  pestering  me?  Eh?’  roared  Denisov,  suddenly 
getting  furious.  ‘It’s  I  will  have  to  answer  for  it,  and  not  you;  and 
you’d  better  not  cry  out  till  you’re  hurt.  Be  off!  ’  he  shouted  at  the  officers. 

‘All  right!’  the  little  officer  responded,  not  the  least  intimidated,  and 
not  moving  away.  ‘It’s  robbery,  so  I  tell  you.  .  .  .’ 

‘Go  to  the  devil,  quick  march,  while  you’re  safe  and  sound.’  And 
Denisov  moved  towards  the  officer. 

‘All  right,  all  right,’  said  the  officer  threateningly;  and  he  turned  his 
horse  and  trotted  away,  swaying  in  the  saddle. 

‘A  dog  astride  a  fence,  a  dog  astride  a  fence  to  the  life!  ’  Denisov  called 
after  him — the  bitterest  insult  a  cavalry  man  can  pay  an  infantry  man 
on  horseback;  and  riding  up  to  Rostov  he  broke  into  a  guffaw. 

‘Carried  off  the  transports,  carried  them  off  from  the  infantry  by 
force.!  ’  he  said.  ‘Why,  am  I  to  let  the  men  die  of  hunger?’ 

The  stores  carried  off  by  the  hussars  had  been  intended  for  an  infantry 
regiment,  but  learning  from  Lavrushka  that  the  transport  was  unescorted, 
Denisov  and  his  hussars  had  carried  off  the  stores  by  force.  Biscuits  were 
dealt  out  freely  to  the  soldiers;  they  even  shared  them  with  the  other 
squadrons. 

Next  day  the  colonel  sent  for  Denisov,  and  putting  his  fingers  held 
apart  before  his  eyes,  he  said  to  him:  ‘I  look  at  the  matter  like  this;  see, 
I  know  nothing,  and  will  take  no  steps;  but  I  advise  you  to  ride  over 
to  the  staff,  and  there,  in  the  commissariat  department,  to  smooth  the 
thing  over,  and  if  possible  give  a  receipt  for  so  much  stores.  If  not,  and 
a  claim  is  entered  for  the  infantry  regiments,  there  will  be  a  fuss,  and  it 
may  end  unpleasantly.’ 

Denisov  went  straight  from  the  colonel  to  the  staff  with  a  sincere  desire 
to  follow  his  advice. 

In  the  evening  he  came  back  to  his  hut  in  a  condition  such  as  Rostov 
had  never  seen  his  friend  in  before.  Denisov  could  not  speak,  and  was 
gasping  for  breath.  When  Rostov  asked  him  what  was  wrong  with  him,  he 
could  only  in  a  faint  and  husky  voice  utter  incoherent  oaths  and  threats. 

Alarmed  at  Denisov’s  condition,  Rostov  suggested  he  should  undress, 
drink  some  water,  and  sent  for  the  doctor. 

‘Me  to  be  court-martialled  for  brigandage — oh!  some  more  water!  — 
Let  them  court-martial  me;  I  will,  I  always  will,  beat  blackguards,  and 
I’ll  tell  the  Emperor. — Ice,’  he  kept  saying. 

The  regimental  doctor  said  it  was  necessary  to  bleed  him.  A  deep 
saucer  of  black  blood  was  drawn  from  Denisov’s  hairy  arm,  and  only 
then  did  he  recover  himself  sufficiently  to  relate  what  had  happened. 

‘I  got  there,’  Denisov  said.  ‘  “Well,  where  are  your  chief’s  quarters,”  1 
asked.  They  showed  me.  “Will  you  please  to  wait?”  “I  have  come  on 
business,  and  I  have  come  over  thirty  versts,  I  haven’t  time  to  wait;  an¬ 
nounce  me.”  Very  good;  but  the  over-thief  appears;  he,  too,  thought  fit 
to  lecture  me.  “This  is  robbery!”  says  he.  “The  robber,”.said  I,  “is  not 


37-  WAR  AND  PEACE 

the  man  who  takes  the  stores  to  feed  his  soldiers,  but  the  man  who  takes 
them  to  fill  his  pockets.”  “Will  you  please  to  be  silent?”  Very  good. 
“Give  a  receipt,”  says  he,  “to  the  commissioner,  but  the  affair  will  be 
reported  at  headquarters.”  I  go  before  the  commissioner.  I  go  in.  Sitting 
at  the  table  .  .  .  Who?  No,  think  of  it!  .  .  Who  is  it  that’s  starving 
us  to  death?’  roared  Denisov,  bringing  the  fist  of  his  lanced  arm  down 
so  violently  that  the  table  almost  fell  over,  and  the  glasses  jumped  on  it. 
‘Telyanin!  .  .  .  “What,  it’s  you  that’s  starving  us  to  death?”  said  I, 
and  I  gave  him  one  on  the  snout,  and  well  it  went  home,  and  then  another, 
so  .  .  .  “Ah!  .  .  .  you  so-and-so  .  .  .”  and  I  gave  him  a  thrashing. 
But  I  did  have  a  bit  of  fun,  though,  I  can  say  that,’  cried  Denisov,  his 
white  teeth  showing  in  a  smile  of  malignant  glee  under  his  black  mous¬ 
taches.  ‘I  should  have  killed  him,  if  they  hadn’t  pulled  me  off.’ 

‘But  why  are  you  shouting;  keep  quiet,’  said  Rostov;  ‘it’s  bleeding 
again.  Stay,  it  must  be  bound  up.’ 

Denisov  was  bandaged  up  and  put  to  bed.  Next  day  he  waked  up  calm 
and  in  good  spirits. 

But  at  midday  the  adjutant  of  the  regiment  came  with  a  grave  and 
gloomy  face  to  the  hut  shared  by  Denisov  and  Rostov,  and  regretfully 
showed  them  a  formal  communication  to  Major  Denisov  from  the  colonel, 
in  which  inquiries  were  made  about  the  incidents  of  the  previous  day. 
The  adjutant  informed  them  that  the  affair  seemed  likely  to  take  a  very 
disastrous  turn ;  that  a  court-martial  was  to  be  held ;  and  that,  with  the 
strictness  now  prevailing  as  regards  pillaging  and  breach  of  discipline, 
it  would  be  a  lucky  chance  if  it  ended  in  being  degraded  to  the  ranks. 

The  case,  as  presented  by  the  offended  parties,  was  that  Major  Denisov, 
after  carrying  off  the  transports,  had  without  any  provocation  come  in  a 
drunken  condition  to  the  chief  commissioner  of  the  commissariat,  had 
called  him  a  thief,  threatened  to  beat  him;  and,  when  he  was  led  out, 
had  rushed  into  the  office,  attacked  two  officials,  and  sprained  the  arm 
of  one  of  them. 

In  response  to  further  inquiries  from  Rostov,  Denisov  said,  laughing, 
that  it  did  seem  certainly  as  though  some  other  fellow  had  been  mixed 
up  in  it,  but  that  it  was  all  stuff  and  nonsense;  that  he  would  never 
dream  of  being  afraid  of  courts  of  any  sort,  and  that  if  the  scoundrels 
dared  to  pick  a  quarrel  with  him,  he  would  give  them  an  answer  they 
wouldn’t  soon  forget. 

Denisov  spoke  in  this  careless  way  of  the  whole  affair.  But  Rostov 
knew  him  too  well  not  to  detect  that  in  his  heart  (though  he  hid  it  from 
others)  he  was  afraid  of  a  court-martial,  and  was  worrying  over  the 
matter,  which  was  obviously  certain  to  have  disastrous  consequences. 
Documents  began  to  come  every  day,  and  notices  from  the  court,  and 
Denisov  received  a  summons  to  put  his  squadron  under  the  command 
of  the  officer  next  in  seniority,  and  on  the  first  of  May  to  appear  before 
the  staff  of  the  division  for  an  investigation  into  the  row  in  the  com¬ 
missariat  office.  On  the  previous  day  Platov  undertook  a  reconnaissance 
of  the  enemy  with  two  regiments  of  Cossacks  and  two  squadrons  of  hus- 


WAR  AND  PEACE  373 

sars.  Denisov,  with  his  usual  swaggering  gallantry,  rode  in  the  front  of 
the  line.  One  of  the  bullets  fired  by  the  French  sharpshooters  struck  him 
in  the  fleshy  upper  part  of  the  leg.  Possibly  at  any  other  time  Denisov 
would  not  have  left  the  regiment  for  so  slight  a  wound,  but  now  he  took 
advantage  of  it  to  excuse  himself  from  appearing  before  the  staff,  and 
went  into  the  hospital. 


XVII 

In  the  month  of  June  was  fought  the  battle  of  Friedland,  in  which  the 
Pavlograd  hussars  did  not  take  part.  It  was  followed  by  a  truce.  Rostov, 
who  sorely  felt  his  friend's  absence,  and  had  had  no  news  of  him  since 
he  left,  was  uneasy  about  his  wound  and  the  course  his  difficulties  might 
be  taking,  and  he  took  advantage  of  the  truce  to  get  leave  to  visit 
Denisov  at  the  hospital. 

The  hospital  was  in  a  little  Prussian  town,  which  had  twice  been  sacked 
by  Russian  and  French  troops.  I11  the  summer  weather,  when  the  country 
looked  so  pleasant,  this  little  town  presented  a  strikingly  melancholy 
contrast,  with  its  broken  roofs  and  fences,  its  foul  streets  and  ragged 
inhabitants,  and  the  sick  and  drunken  soldiers  wandering  about  it. 

The  hospital  was  a  stone  house  with  remnants  of  fence  torn  up  in  the 
yard,  and  window  frames  and  panes  partly  broken.  Several  soldiers 
bandaged  up,  and  with  pale  and  swollen  faces,  were  walking  or  sitting 
in  the  sunshine  in  the  yard. 

As  soon  as  Rostov  went  in  at  the  door,  he  was  conscious  of  the  stench 
of  hospital  and  putrefying  flesh  all  about  him.  On  the  stairs  he  met  a 
Russian  army  doctor  with  a  cigar  in  his  mouth.  He  was  followed  by  a 
Russian  trained  assistant. 

‘I  can’t  be  everywhere  at  once,’  the  doctor  was  saying;  ‘come  in  the 
evening  to  Makar  Alexyevitch’s,  I  shall  be  there.’  The  assistant  asked 
some  further  question.  ‘Oh!  do  as  you  think  best!  What  difference  will 
it  make?’ 

The  doctor  caught  sight  of  Rostov  mounting  the  stairs. 

‘What  are  you  here  for,  your  honour?’  said  the  doctor.  ‘What  are  you 
here  for?  Couldn’t  you  meet  with  a  bullet  that  you  want  to  pick  up 
typhus?  This  is  a  pest-house,  my  good  sir.’ 

‘How  so?’  asked  Rostov. 

‘Typhus,  sir.  It’s  death  to  any  one  to  go  in.  It’s  only  we  two,  Makeev 
and  I’  (he  pointed  to  the  assistant)  ‘w'ho  are  still  afoot  here.  Five  of 
us,  doctors,  have  died  here  already.  As  soon  as  a  new  one  comes,  he’s 
done  for  in  a  week,’  said  the  doctor  with  evident  satisfaction.  ‘They  have 
sent  for  Prussian  doctors,  but  our  allies  aren’t  fond  of  the  job.’ 

Rostov  explained  that  he  wanted  to  see  Major  Denisov  of  the  hussars, 
who  was  lying  wounded  here. 

‘I  don’t  know,  can’t  tell  you,  my  good  sir.  Only  think,  I  have  three 
hospitals  to  look  after  alone — over  four  hundred  patients.  It’s  a  good 
thing  the  Prussian  charitable  ladies  send  us  coffee  and  lint — two  pounds 


374  WAR  AND  PEACE 

a  month — or  we  should  be  lost.’  He  laughed.  ‘Four  hundred,  sir;  and 
they  keep  sending  me  in  fresh  cases.  It  is  four  hundred,  isn’t  it?  Eh?’ 
He  turned  to  the  assistant. 

The  assistant  looked  worried.  He  was  unmistakably  in  a  hurry  for  the 
talkative  doctor  to  be  gone,  and  was  waiting  with  vexation. 

‘Major  Denisov,’  repeated  Rostov;  ‘he  was  wounded  at  Moliten.’ 

‘I  believe  he’s  dead.  Eh,  Makeev?’  the  doctor  queried  of  the  assistant 
carelessly. 

The  assistant  did  not,  however,  confirm  the  doctor’s  words. 

‘Is  he  a  long,  red-haired  man?’  asked  the  doctor. 

Rostov  described  Denisov’s  appearance. 

‘He  was  here,  he  was,’  the  doctor  declared,  with  a  sort  of  glee.  ‘He 
must  be  dead,  but  still  I’ll  see.  I  have  lists.  Have  you  got  them,  Makeev?’ 

‘The  lists  are  at  Makar  Alexyevitch’s,’  said  the  assistant.  ‘But  go  to 
the  officers’  ward,  there  you’ll  see  for  yourself,’  he  added,  turning  to 
Rostov. 

‘Ah,  you’d  better  not,  sir!’  said  the  doctor,  ‘or  you  may  have  to  stay 
here  yourself.’  But  Rostov  bowed  himself  away  from  the  doctor,  and 
asked  the  assistant  to  show  him  the  way. 

‘Don’t  blame  me  afterwards,  mind!’  the  doctor  shouted  up  from  the 
stairs  below. 

Rostov  and  the  assistant  went  into  the  corridor.  The  hospital  stench 
was  so  strong  in  that  dark  corridor  that  Rostov  held  his  nose,  and  was 
obliged  to  pause  to  recover  his  energy  to  go  on.  A  door  was  opened  on 
the  right,  and  there  limped  out  on  crutches  a  thin  yellow  man  with  bare 
feet,  and  nothing  on  but  his  underlinen.  Leaning  against  the  doorpost, 
he  gazed  with  glittering,  anxious  eyes  at  the  persons  approaching.  Rostov 
glanced  in  at  the  door  and  saw  that  the  sick  and  wounded  were  lying 
there  on  the  floor,  on  straw  and  on  overcoats. 

‘Can  one  go  in  and  look?’  asked  Rostov. 

‘What  is  there  to  look  at?’  said  the  assistant.  But  just  because  the 
assistant  was  obviously  disinclined  to  let  him  go  in,  Rostov  went  into 
the  soldiers’  ward.  The  stench,  to  which  he  had  grown  used  a  little  in 
the  corridor,  was  stronger  here.  Here  the  stench  was  different;  it  was 
more  intense;  and  one  could  smell  that  it  was  from  here  that  it  came. 
In  the  long  room,  brightly  lighted  by  the  sun  in  the  big  window,  lay  the 
sick  and  wounded  in  two  rows  with  their  heads  to  the  wall,  leaving  a 
passage  down  the  middle.  The  greater  number  of  them  were  unconscious, 
and  took  no  notice  of  the  entrance  of  outsiders.  Those  who  were  conscious 
got  up  or  raised  their  thin,  yellow  faces,  and  all  gazed  intently  at  Rostov, 
with  the  same  expression  of  hope  of  help,  of  reproach,  and  envy  of  an¬ 
other  man’s  health.  Rostov  went  into  the  middle  of  the  room,  glanced  in 
at  the  open  doors  of  adjoining  rooms,  and  on  both  sides  saw  the  same 
thing.  He  stood  still,  looking  round  him  speechless.  He  had  never  ex¬ 
pected  to  see  anything  like  this.  Just  before  him  lay  right  across  the 
empty  space  down  the  middle,  on  the  bare  floor,  a  sick  man,  probably  a 
Cossack,  for  his  hair  was  cut  round  in  basin  shape.  This  Cossack  lay  on 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


375 

his  back,  his  huge  arms  and  legs  outstretched.  His  face  was  of  a  purple 
red,  his  eyes  were  quite  sunk  in  his  head  so  that  only  the  whites  could 
be  seen,  and  on  his  legs  and  on  his  hands,  which  were  still  red,  the  veins 
stood  out  like  cords.  He  was  knocking  his  head  against  the  floor,  and 
he  uttered  some  word  and  kept  repeating  it.  Rostov  listened  to  what 
he  was  saying,  and  distinguished  the  word  he  kept  repeating.  That  word 
was  ‘drink — drink — drink!'  Rostov  looked  about  for  some  one  who 
could  lay  the  sick  man  in  his  place  and  give  him  water. 

‘Who  looks  after  the  patients  here?’  he  asked  the  assistant.  At  that 
moment  a  commissariat  soldier,  a  hospital  orderly,  came  in  from  the 
adjoining  room,  and,  marching  in  drill  step,  drew  himself  up  before  him. 

‘Good  day.  your  honour!’  bawled  this  soldier,  rolling  his  eyes  at 
Rostov,  and  obviously  mistaking  him  for  some  one  in  authority. 

‘Take  him  away,  give  him  water,’  said  Rostov,  indicating  the  Cossack. 

‘Certainly,  your  honour,’  the  soldier  replied  complacently,  rolling  his 
eyes  more  strenuously  than  ever,  and  drawing  himself  up,  but  not 
budging  to  do  so. 

‘No,  there’s  no  doing  anything  here,’  thought  Rostov,  dropping  his 
eyes;  and  he  wanted  to  get  away,  but  he  was  aware  of  a  significant  look 
bent  upon  him  from  the  right  side,  and  he  looked  round  at  it.  Almost 
in  the  corner  there  was,  sitting  on  a  military  overcoat,  an  old  soldier  with 
a  stern  yellow  face,  thin  as  a  skeleton’s,  and  an  unshaved  grey  beard.  He 
was  looking  persistently  at  Rostov.  The  man  next  the  old  soldier  was 
whispering  something  to  him,  pointing  to  Rostov.  Rostov  saw  the  old 
man  wanted  to  ask  him  something.  He  went  closer  and  saw  that  the  old 
man  had  only  one  leg  bent  under  him,  the  other  had  been  cut  off  above 
the  knee.  On  the  other  side  of  the  old  man,  at  some  distance  from  him, 
there  lay  with  head  thrown  back  the  motionless  figure  of  a  young  soldier 
with  a  waxen  pallor  on  his  snub-nosed  and  still  freckled  face,  and  eyes 
sunken  under  the  lids.  Rostov  looked  at  the  snub-nosed  soldier  and  a 
shiver  ran  down  his  back. 

“Why,  that  one  seems  to  be  .  .  .’  he  said  to  the  assistant. 

‘We’ve  begged  and  begged,  your  honour,’  said  the  old  soldier  with  a 
quiver  in  his  lower  jaw.  ‘He  died  early  in  the  morning.  We’re  men,  too, 
not  dogs.  .  .  .’ 

‘I’ll  see  to  it  directly;  they  shall  take  him,  they  shall  take  him  away,’ 
said  the  assistant  hurriedly.  ‘Come,  your  honour.’ 

‘Let  us  go,  let  us  go,’  said  Rostov  hastily;  and  dropping  his  eyes  and 
shrinking  together,  trying  to  pass  unnoticed  through  the  lines  of  those 
reproachful  and  envious  eyes  fastened  upon  him,  he  went  out  of  the 
room. 

XVIII 

The  assistant  walked  along  the  corridor  and  led  Rostov  to  the  officers’ 
wards,  three  rooms  with  doors  opening  between  them.  In  these  rooms 
there  were  bedsteads;  the  officers  were  sitting  and  lying  upon  them. 


376  WAR  AND  PEACE 

Some  were  walking  about  the  room  in  hospital  dressing-gowns.  The  first 
person  who  met  Rostov  in  the  officers’  ward  was  a  thin  little  man  who 
had  lost  one  arm.  He  was  walking  about  the  first  room  in  a  nightcap  and 
hospital  dressing-gown,  with  a  short  pipe  between  his  teeth.  Rostov,  look¬ 
ing  intently  at  him,  tried  to  recall  where  he  had  seen  him. 

‘See  where  it  was  God's  will  for  us  to  meet  again,’  said  the  little  man. 
‘Tushin,  Tushin,  do  you  remember  I  brought  you  along  after  Schon- 
graben?  They  have  sliced  a  bit  off  me,  see,  .  .  .’  said  he  smiling,  and 
showing  the  empty  sleeve  of  his  dressing-gown.  ‘Is  it  Vassily  Dmitrye- 
vitch  Denisov  you  are  looking  for — a  fellow-lodger  here?’  he  said,  hear¬ 
ing  who  it  was  Rostov  wanted.  ‘Here,  here,’  and  he  led  him  into  the  next 
room,  from  which  there  came  the  sound  of  several  men  laughing. 

‘How  can  they  live  in  this  place  even,  much  less  laugh?’  thought 
Rostov,  still  aware  of  that  corpse-like  smell  that  had  been  so  overpower¬ 
ing  in  the  soldiers’  ward,  and  still  seeing  around  him  those  envious  eyes 
following  him  on  both  sides,  and  the  face  of  that  young  soldier  with  the 
sunken  eyes. 

Denisov,  covered  up  to  his  head  with  the  quilt,  was  still  in  bed, 
though  it  was  twelve  o’clock  in  the  day. 

‘Ah,  Rostov!  How  are  you,  how  are  you?’  he  shouted,  still  in  the 
same  voice  as  in  the  regiment.  But  Rostov  noticed  with  grief,  behind 
this  habitual  briskness  and  swagger,  some  new,  sinister,  smothered  feel¬ 
ing  that  peeped  out  in  the  words  and  intonations  and  the  expression  of 
the  face  of  Denisov. 

His  wound,  trifling  as  it  was,  had  still  not  healed,  though  six  weeks 
had  passed  since  he  was  wounded.  His  face  had  the  same  swollen  pallor 
as  all  the  faces  in  the  hospital.  But  that  was  not  what  struck  Rostov: 
what  struck  him  was  that  Denisov  did  not  seem  pleased  to  see  him,  and 
his  smile  was  forced.  Denisov  asked  him  nothing  either  of  the  regiment 
or  of  the  general  progress  of  the  war.  When  Rostov  talked  of  it,  Denisov 
did  not  listen. 

Rostov  even  noticed  that  Denisov  disliked  all  reference  to  the  regi¬ 
ment,  and  to  that  other  free  life  going  on  outside  the  hospital  walls. 
He  seemed  to  be  trying  to  forget  that  old  life,  and  to  be  interested  only 
in  his  quarrel  with  the  commissariat  officials.  In  reply  to  Rostov’s  in¬ 
quiry  as  to  how  this  matter  was  going,  he  promptly  drew  from  under 
his  pillow  a  communication  he  had  received  from  the  commissioner, 
and  a  rough  copy  of  his  answer.  He  grew  more  eager  as  he  began  to  read 
his  answer,  and  specially  called  Rostov’s  attention  to  the  biting  sarcasm 
with  which  he  addressed  his  foes.  Denisov’s  companions  in  the  hospital, 
who  had  gathered  round  Rostov,  as  a  person  newly  come  from  the  world 
of  freedom  outside,  gradually  began  to  move  away  as  soon  as  Denisov  be¬ 
gan  reading  his  answer.  From  their  faces  Rostov  surmised  that  all  these 
gentlemen  bad  more  than  once  heard  the  whole  story,  and  had  had  time 
to  be  bored  with  it.  Only  his  nearest  neighbour,  a  stout  Uhlan,  sat  on 
his  pallet-bed,  scowling  gloomily  and  smoking  a  pipe,  and  little  one- 


WARANDPEACE  377 

armed  Tushin  still  listened,  shaking  his  head  disapprovingly.  In  the 
middle  of  the  reading  the  Uhlan  interrupted  Denisov. 

‘What  I  say  is,’  he  said,  turning  to  Rostov,  ‘he  ought  simply  to  petition 
the  Emperor  for  pardon.  Just  now,  they  say,  there  will  be  great  rewards 
given  and  they  will  surely  pardon.’ 

‘Me  petition  the  Emperor!  ’  said  Denisov  in  a  voice  into  which  he  tried 
to  throw  his  old  energy  and  fire,  but  which  sounded  like  the  expression 
of  impotent  irritability.  ‘What  for?  If  I  had  been  a  robber,  I’d  beg  for 
mercy;  why,  I’m  being  called  up  for  trying  to  show  up  robbers.  Let 
them  try  me,  I’m  not  afraid  of  any  one;  I  have  served  my  Tsar  and  my 
country  honestly,  and  I’m  not  a  thief!  And  degrade  me  to  the  ranks  and 
.  .  .  Listen,  I  tell  them  straight  out,  see,  I  write  to  them,  “If  I  had 
been  a  thief  of  government  property  .  .  .”  ’ 

‘It’s  neatly  put,  no  question  about  it,’  said  Tushin.  ‘But  that’s  not  the 
point,  Vassily  Dmitritch,’  he  too  turned  to  Rostov,  ‘one  must  submit, 
and  Vassily  Dmitritch  here  won’t  do  it.  The  auditor  told  you,  you  know, 
that  it  looks  serious  for  you.’ 

‘Well,  let  it  be  serious,’  said  Denisov. 

‘The  auditor  wrote  a  petition  for  you,’  Tushin  went  on,  ‘and  you  ought 
io  sign  it  and  despatch  it  by  this  gentleman.  No  doubt  he’  (he  indicated 
Rostov)  ‘has  influence  on  the  staff  too.  You  won’t  find  a  better  oppor¬ 
tunity.’ 

‘But  I  have  said  I  won’t  go  cringing  and  fawning,’  Denisov  inter¬ 
rupted,  and  he  went  on  reading  his  answer. 

Rostov  did  not  dare  to  try  and  persuade  Denisov,  though  he  felt  in¬ 
stinctively  that  the  course  proposed  by  Tushin  and  the  other  officers 
was  the  safest.  He  would  have  felt  happy  if  he  could  have  been  of  assist¬ 
ance  to  Denisov,  but  he  knew  his  stubborn  will  and  straightforward 
hasty  temper. 

When  the  reading  of  Denisov’s  biting  replies,  which  lasted  over  an 
hour,  was  over,  Rostov 'said  nothing,  and  in  the  most  dejected  frame  of 
mind  spent  the  rest  of  the  day  in  the  society  of  Denisov’s  companions, 
who  had  again  gathered  about  him.  He  told  them  what  he  knew,  and 
listened  to  the  stories  told  by  others.  Denisov  maintained  a  gloomy 
silence  the  whole  evening. 

Late  in  the  evening,  when  Rostov  was  about  to  leave,  he  asked  Denisov 
if  he  had  no  commission  for  him. 

‘Yes,  wait  a  bit,’  said  Denisov.  He  looked  round  at  the  officers,  and 
taking  his  papers  from  under  his  pillow,  he  went  to  the  window  where 
there  was  an  inkstand,  and  sat  down  to  write. 

‘It  seems  it's  no  good  knocking  one’s  head  against  a  stone  wall,’  said 
he,  coming  from  the  window  and  giving  Rostov  a  large  envelope.  It  was 
the  petition  addressed  to  the  Emperor  that  had  been  drawn  up  by  the 
auditor.  In  it  Denisov,  making  no  reference  to  the  shortcoming  of  the 
commissariat  department,  simply  begged  for  mercy.  ‘Give  it,  it  seems 
.  .  .’  He  did  not  finish,  and  smiled  a  forced  and  sickly  smile. 


378 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


XIX 

After  going  back  to  the  regiment  and  reporting  to  the  colonel  the  posi¬ 
tion  of  Denisov’s  affairs,  Rostov  rode  to  Tilsit  with  the  letter  to  the 
Emperor. 

On  the  13th  of  June  the  French  and  Russian  Emperors  met  at  Tilsit. 
Boris  Drubetskoy  had  asked  the  personage  of  high  rank  on  whom  he  was 
in  attendance  to  include  him  in  the  suite  destined  to  be  staying  at  Tilsit. 

‘I  should  like  to  see  the  great  man,’  he  said,  meaning  Napoleon,  whom 
he  had  hitherto,  like  every  one  else,  always  spoken  of  as  Bonaparte. 

‘You  are  speaking  of  Buonaparte?’  the  general  said  to  him,  smiling. 

Boris  looked  inquiringly  at  his  general,  and  immediately  saw  that  this 
was  a  playful-test. 

‘I  am  speaking,  prince,  of  the  Emperor  Napoleon,’  he  replied.  With  a 
smile  the  general  clapped  him  on  the  shoulder. 

‘You  will  get  on,’  said  he,  and  he  took  him  with  him.  Boris  was  among 
the  few  present  at  Niemen  on  the  day  of  the  meeting  of  the  Emperors. 
He  saw  the  raft  with  the  royal  monograms,  saw  Napoleon’s  progress 
through  the  French  guards  along  the  further  bank,  saw  the  pensive  face 
of  the  Emperor  Alexander  as  he  sat  silent  in  the  inn  on  the  bank  of  the 
Niemen  waiting  for  Napoleon’s  arrival.  He  saw  both  the  Emperors  get 
into  boats,  and  Napoleon  reaching  the  raft  first,  walked  rapidly  forward, 
and  meeting  Alexander,  give  him  his  hand ;  then  both  the  Emperors  dis¬ 
appeared  into  a  pavilion.  Ever  since  he  had  entered  these  higher  spheres, 
Boris  had  made  it  his  habit  to  keep  an  attentive  watch  on  what  was 
passing  round  him,  and  to  note  it  all  down.  During  the  meeting  of  the 
Emperors  at  Tilsit,  he  asked  the  names  of  the  persons  accompanying 
Napoleon,  inquired  about  the  uniforms  they  were  wearing,  and  listened 
carefully  to  the  utterances  of  persons  of  consequence.  When  the  Em¬ 
perors  went  into  the  pavilion,  he  looked  at  his  watch,  and  did  not  forget 
to  look  at  it  again  when  Alexander  came  out.  The  interview  had  lasted 
an  hour  and  fifty-three  minutes;  he  noted  this  down  that  evening  among 
other  facts,  which  he  felt  were  of  historical  importance.  As  the  Emperors’ 
suite  were  few  in  number,  to  be  present  at  Tilsit  at  the  meeting  of  the 
Emperors  was  a  matter  of  great  consequence  for  a  man  who  valued 
success  in  the  service,  and  Boris,  when  he  succeeded  in  obtaining  this 
privilege,  felt  that  his  position  was  henceforth  perfectly  secure.  He  was 
not  simply  known,  he  had  become  an  observed  and  familiar  figure.  On 
two  occasions  he  had  been  sent  with  commissions  to  the  Emperor  him¬ 
self,  so  that  the  Emperor  knew  him  personally,  and  all  the  court  no 
longer  held  aloof  from  him,  as  they  had  done  at  first,  considering  him 
a  new  man,  and  would  even  have  noticed  his  absence  with  surprise  if 
he  had  been  away. 

Boris  was  lodging  with  another  adjutant,  the  Polish  count,  Zhilinsky. 
Zhilinsky,  a  Pole  educated  in  Paris,  was  a  wealthy  man,  devotedly  at¬ 
tached  to  the  French,  and  almost  every  day  of  their  stay  in  Tilsit,  French 


N  D  PEACE 


379 


officers  of  the  Guards. ardoi, the  French  head  staff  were  dining  and  break¬ 
fasting  with  Zhihnskyv/iiftdJBoris. 

On  the  24th  of  June  Zhilinsky,  with  whom  Boris  shared  quarters,  was 
giving  a  supper  to  hig  fvench  acquaintances.  At  this  supper  there  were 
present  one  of  Napoleon  s  adjutants — the  guest  of  honour — several  offi¬ 
cers  of  the  P'rench  Guards,  arid  a  young  lad  of  an  aristocratic  old  French 
family,  a  page  of  Napoleon'r^Jpn  the  same  evening  Rostov,  taking  ad¬ 
vantage  ofctkfiyidarknesBsto  p&ss  through  unrecognised,  came  to  Tilsit 
in  civilian  dnefls^and  weftlnto'the  quarters  of  Zhilinsky  and  Boris. 

Rostov, bM©rithe  whole  army  indeed,  was  far  from  having  passed 
through  that  revolution  of  feeling,  in  regard  to  Napoleon  and  the  French 
— transforming  Them  frojm  rfoclvinto  friends — that  had  taken  place  at 
headquar,tefERarid  in  Bonajlh  life  army  every  one  was  still  feeling  the 
same  mingl«(4hatred,  feared,  contempt  for  Bonaparte  and  the  French. 
Only  recen  tJyrRostov  had  ij^ued  with  an  officer  of  Platov’s  Cossacks  the 
question  wi’^th^r  jii.  Napoleon  taken  prisoner  he  was  to  be  treated 

as  an  empfei-ott^  as  a  crumoalf  Only  a  little  while  previously  Rostov 
had  met  a.  vtosttkled  Fr'anli  Wmk  Uon  the  road,  and  had  maintained  to 
him  with  Heart!  AtalrftBere  coudtbe  norgpace  concluded  between  a  legitimate 
emperor  and  thd  criminal  Bonaparte.  Consequently  it  struck  Rostov  as 
strange  isnseBaSirench  officer^;  in  Bojig’s  quarters  wearing  the  uniforms 
at  which  he  waslused  to  looking  with  j|ery  different  eyes  from  the  line  of 
pickets^  Ascsffeamiasebe  caughtrsighFbf  a  French  officer,  that  feeling  of 
war,  of  hostility^  which  he  always  experienced  at  the  sight  of  the  enemy, 
came  upon  ifcdBT  at;  once.  He  stood  still  on  the  threshold  and  asked  in 

Russian:  JJrubetskoy  lived  there.  Boris,  hearing  a  strange  voice 

in  thfe  pfeGSfcnBtJaKent  out  to  meet  him.  For  the  first  moment  when  he  recog- 
nisedffetfetiii'^btH  fa  .a  betrayed  his  annoyance. 

very  glad,  very  glad  to  see  you,’  he  said,  however, 

smilijig^hi^tffMving  towards  him.  But  Rostov  had  detected  his  first 

impplj^q  qiH  ir 

;I(l^igq5^erat  a  bad  time,  it  seems,’  said  he;  ‘I  shouldn’t  have  come, 
biBni^  ffljakfflatter  of  importance,’  he  said  coldly.  .  .  . 

;£b  9,nly  surprised  at  your  getting  away  from  the  regiment.  I 
■  yjou  in  a  moment,’  he  said  in  reply  to  a  voice  calling  him. 
come  at  a  bad  time,’  repeated  Rostov. 

.egression  of  annoyance  had  by  now  vanished  from  Boris’s  face; 
jy  having  reflected  and  made  up  his  mind  how  to  act,  he  took 
lim  b>/  bgt’n  hands  with  marked  composure  and  led  him  into  the  next 
•bpm;  Boris's  eyes,  gazing  serenely  and  unflinchingly  at  Rostov,  seemed 
1? iV  (V^e  \&i!ed  by  something,  as  though  a  sort  of  screen — the  blue  spec- 
Conventional  life — had  been  put  over  them.  So  it  seemed  to 

Rostov.; 

don’t  talk  nonsense,  as  if  you  could  come  at  a  wrong 
ane,’  said  Boris.  Boris  led  him  into  a  room  where  supper  was  laid,  intro¬ 
duced  him  to  his  guests,  mentioning  his  name,  and  explaining  that  he 
vas  not  a  civilian,  but  an  officer  in  the  hussars,  and  his  old  friend.  ‘Count 


3  So 


WAR  AND  P  E  A  C  W 


Zhilinsky,  Count  N.  N.,  Captain  S.  S.,’  he^aid,?foaming  his  guests. 
Rostov  looked  frowning  at  the  Frenchmen,  bowed; Reluctantly,  and  was 


mute. 


ntilirf.k 


Zhilinsky  was  obviously  not  pleased  to  receive  this  unknown  Russian 
outsider  into  his  circle,  and  said  nothing  tp'Rostov.  Boris  appeared  not 
to  notice  the  constraint  produced  by  the  ifcewcdnier,  and  with  the  same 
amiable  composure  and  the  same  veiled  lo^faflfeis  eyes  with  which  he 
had  welcomed  Rostov,  he  endeavoured  toieidiven  the  conversation.  With 
characteristic  French  courtesy  one  of  theriFrdftfch  officers  dawhed  to  Ros¬ 
tov,  as  he  sat  in  stubborn  silence,  and  said  to  him  that  h&Md  probably 
come  to  Tilsit  to  see  the  Emperor.  .fffilSBfc-ic'  c^SR'llBri! 

‘No,  I  came  on  business,’  was  Rostov&short  reply.  Reutov  had  been 
out  of  humour  from  the  moment  whence  detected  the  dissatisfaction  on 
the  face  of  Boris,  and  as  is  always  the' case  .with  persojisb^bo  are  ill- 
humoured,  it  seemed  to  him  that  every  crje  .'looked  at  hi'mr^ath  hostile 
eyes,  and  that  he  was  in  every  one’s  Avay.  And  in  faetdaTw'as  in  every 
one’s  way,  and  he  was  the  only  person  left>ou(  of  the  general ^conversa¬ 
tion,  as  it  sprang  up  again.  And  what  is  he  sittiAgArb  ^ie,'' fon?  was  the 
question  asked  by  the  eyes  of  the  guests  turned  upooBhnne  He  igot  up 
and  went  up  to  Boris.  •  u  n  mils  feteil  ibrtn 

‘I’m  in  your  way,  though,’  he  said  to  him  in  dfananltetene ;  ‘let  us 
have  a  talk  about  my  business,  and  I’ll  go  away.’  beaiiPSj^w  ad 

‘Oh,  no,  not  the  least,’  said  Boris,  ‘But  if  you  are;  ti'Bwija  atne  to  my 
room  and  lie  down  and  rest.’  dvh  ^y^ifMaod  .• 

‘Well,  really  .  .  .’  Te  feigfrrfoqii 

They  went  into  the  little  room  where  Boris  sleptlcfe(&$ci$,f  (without 
sitting  down,  began  speaking  at  once  with  irritation^aa^i^ita^l^  ‘Boris 
were  in  some  way  to  blame  in  the  matter.  He  told  hith^K^ftiisov’s 
scrape,  asking  whether  he  would  and  could  through  his'^fti^^.ihtiefcede 
with  the  Emperor  in  Denisov’s  favour,  and  through the 
letter.  When  they  were  alone  together,  Rostov  was  for  tlWHhs&btime 
distinctly  aware  that  he  felt  an  awkwardness  in  lookih|^&$'^ftHhe 
face.  Boris  crossing  one  leg  over  the  other,  and  strolofffg^’ffie  ^fender 
fingers  of  his  right  hand  with  his  left,  listened  to  Rosto^^Ss^^^neral 
listens  to  a  report  presented  by  a  subordinate,  at  one  time%a!vp'^\\'ky, 
at  the  next  looking  Rostov  straight  in  the  face  with  the  saftfty\wi‘' 


ok 

-  r-^ed 

vT-mT 
«vd  mid 

ms 


in  his  eyes.  Every  time  he  did  so,  Rostov  felt  ill  at  easejTar? 
his  eyes. 

‘I  have  heard  of  affairs  of  the  sort,  and  I  know  that 
very  severe  in  such  cases.  I  think  it  had  better  not  be  take^^m^tq  bis 
majesty.  To  my  mind,  it  would  be  better  to  apply  directly  ,(9  tlfe.  ^m- 
mander  of  the  corps.  .  .  .  But  generally  speaking,  I  believe  .  •  ..j 

‘Then  you  don’t  care  to  do  anything,  so  say  so!’  Rostqy  almo  s) 
shouted,  not  looking  Boris  in  the  face. 

Boris  smiled. 

‘On  the  contrary,  I  will  do  what  I  can,  only  I  imagine  .  = 


WAR  AND  PEACE  381 

At  that  moment  they  heard  the  voice  of  Zhilinsky  at  the  door,  calling 
Boris. 

‘Well,  go  along,  go,  go  .  .  .’  said  Rostov,  and  refusing  supper  and 
remaining  alone  in  the  little  room,  he  walked  up  and  down  for  a  long 
while,  listening  to  the  light-hearted  French  chatter  in  the  next  room. 


XX 

# 

Rostov  had  arrived  at  Tilsit  on  the  day  least  suitable  for  interceding  in 
Denisov’s  behalf.  It  was  out  of  the  question  for  him  to  go  himself  to 
the  general  in  attendance,  since  he  was  wearing  civilian  dress,  and  had 
come  to  Tilsit  without  permission  to  do  so,  and  Boris,  even  had  he  been 
willing,  could  not  have  done  so  on  the  day  following  Rostov’s  arrival. 
On  that  day,  the  27th  of  June,  the  preliminaries  of  peace  were  signed. 
The  Emperors  exchanged  orders:  Alexander  received  the  Legion  of  Hon¬ 
our,  and  Napolon  the  Order  of  St.  Andrey  of  the  first  degree,  and  that 
day  had  been  fixed  for  the  dinner  to  be  given  by  a  battalion  of  French 
guards  to  the  Preobrazhensky  battalion.  The  Emperors  were  to  be 
present  at  this  banquet.  Rostov  felt  so  uncomfortable  and  ill  at  ease 
with  Boris,  that  when  the  latter  peeped  in  at  him  after  supper  he  pre¬ 
tended  to  be  asleep,  and  the  next  day  he  left  early  in  the  morning  to 
avoid  seeing  him.  In  a  frock  coat  and  round  hat,  Nikolay  strolled  about 
the  town,  staring  at  the  French  and  their  uniforms,  examining  the  streets 
and  the  houses  where  the  Russian  and  the  French  Emperors  were  stay¬ 
ing.  In  the  market-place  he  saw  tables  set  out  and  preparations  for  the 
Oanquet;  in  the  streets  he  saw  draperies  hung  across  with  flags  of  the 
Russian  and  French  colours,  and  huge  monograms  of  A  and  N.  In  the 
windows  of  the  houses,  too,  there  were  flags  and  monograms. 

|  ‘Boris  doesn’t  care  to  help  me,  and  I  don’t  care  to  apply  to  him.  That 
question’s  closed,’  thought  Nikolay;  ‘everything’s  over  between  us,  but 
I’m  not  going  away  from  here  without  having  done  all  I  can  for  Denisov, 
md,  above  all,  getting  the  letter  given  to  the  Emperor.  To  the  Emperor? 
.  .  He  is  here!’  thought  Rostov,  who  had  unconsciously  gone  back  to 
he  house  occupied  by  Alexander. 

Saddle  horses  were  standing  at  the  entrance,  and  the  suite  were  riding 
ip,  evidently  getting  ready  for  the  Emperor  to  come  out. 

‘Any  minute  I  may  see  him,’  thought  Rostov.  'If  only  I  could  give 
lim  the  letter  directly,  and  tell  him  all  .  .  .  could  they  really  arrest  me 
or  my  frock  coat?  Impossible.  He  would  understand  on  which  side  the 
rutla  lay.  He  understands  everything,  he  knows  everything.  Who  can  be 
uster  and  more  magnanimous  than  he?  Besides,  even  if  they  were  to 
.rrest  me  for  being  here,  what  would  it  matter?’  he  thought,  looking  at 
n  officer  who  was  going  into  the  house.  ‘Why,  people  go  in,  I  see.  Oh! 
t’s  all  nonsense.  I’ll  go  and  give  the  letter  to  the  Emperor  myself;  so 
nuch  the  worse  for  Drubetskoy  who  has  driven  me  to  it.’  And  all  at 
uce,  with  a  decision  he  would  never  have  expected  of  himself,  Rostov, 


382  WARANDPEACE 

fingering  the  letter  in  his  pocket,  went  straight  into  the  house  where  the 
Emperor  was  staying. 

‘No,  this  time  I  won’t  miss  my  opportunity  as  I  did  after  Austerlitz,’ 
he  thought,  expecting  every  minute  to  meet  the  Emperor,  and  feeling  a 
rush  of  blood  to  the  heart  at  the  idea.  ‘I  will  fall  at  his  feet  and  will 
beseech  him.  He  will  lift  me  up,  hear  me  out,  and  thank  me  too.  “I  am 
happy  when  I  can  do  good,  but  to  cancel  injustice  is  the  greatest  happi¬ 
ness,”  ’  Rostov  fancied  the  Emperor  would  say  to  him.  And  he  passed 
up  the  stairs  regardless  of  the  inquisitive  eyes  that  were  turned  upon  hifn. 
The  broad  staircase  led  straight  upwards  from  the  entry;  on  the  right 
was  a  closed  door.  Below,  under  the  stairs,  was  a  door  to  the  rooms 
on  the  ground  floor. 

‘Whom  are  you  looking  for?’  some  one  asked  him. 

‘To  give  a  letter,  a  petition,  to  his  majesty,’  said  Nikolay,  with  a 
quiver  in  his  voice. 

‘A  petition — to  the  officer  on  duty,  this  way;  please’  (he  was  motioned 
to  the  door  below).  ‘Only  it  won’t  receive  attention.’ 

Hearing  this  indifferent  voice,  Rostov  felt  panic-stricken  at  what  he 
was  doing ;  the  idea  that  he  might  meet  the  Emperor  at  any  minute  was 
so  fascinating  and  consequently  so  terrible,  that  he  was  ready  to  fly;  | 
but  an  attendant  meeting  him  opened  the  door  to  the  officer’s  room  for 
him,  and  Rostov  went  in. 

A  short,  stout  man  of  about  thirty  in  white  breeches,  high  boots,  and 
in  a  batiste  shirt,  apparently  only  just  put  on,  was  standing  in  this  room. 
A  valet  was  buttoning  behind  him  some  fine-looking,  new,  silk-embroid¬ 
ered  braces,  which  for  some  reason  attracted  Rostov’s  notice.  The  stout 
man  was  conversing  with  some  one  in  the  adjoining  room. 

‘A  good  figure  and  in  her  first  bloom,’  he  was  saying,  but  seeing  Rostov 
he  broke  off  and  frowned. 

‘What  do  you  want?  A  petition?  .  .  .’ 

‘What  is  it?’  asked  some  one  in  the  next  room. 

‘Another  petition,’  answered  the  man  in  the  braces. 

‘Tell  him  to  come  later.  He’ll  be  coming  out  directly;  we  must  go.’ 

‘Later,  later,  to-morrow.  It’s  too  late.  .  .  .’ 

Rostov  turned  away  and  would  have  gone  out,  but  the  man  in  the: 
braces  stopped  him. 

‘From  whom  is  it?  Who  are  you?’ 

‘From  Major  Denisov,’  answered  Rostov. 

‘Who  are  you — an  officer?’ 

‘A  lieutenant,  Count  Rostov.’ 

‘What  audacity!  Send  it  through  the  proper  channel.  And  go  along 
with  you,  go.  .  .  .’  And  he  began  putting  on  the  uniform  the  valet 
handed  him. 

Rostov  went  out  into  the  hall  again,  and  noticed  that  by  this  time 
there  were  a  great  many  officers  and  generals  in  full  dress,  and  he  had 
to  pass  through  their  midst. 

Cursing  his  temerity,  ready  to  faint  at  the  thought  that  he  might  any 


i 


WAR  AND  PEACE  383 

minute  meet  the  Emperor  and  be  put  to  shame  before  him  and  placed 
under  arrest,  fully  aware  by  now  of  all  the  indecorum  of  his  action,  and 
regretting  it,  Rostov  was  making  his  way  out  of  the  house  with  down¬ 
cast  eyes,  through  the  crowd  of  the  gorgeously  dressed  suite,  when  a 
familiar  voice  called  to  him,  and  a  hand  detained  him. 

‘Well,  sir,  what  are  you  doing  here  in  a  frock  coat?’  asked  the  bass 
voice. 

It  was  a  cavalry  general  who  had  won  the  Emperor’s  special  favour 
during  this  campaign,  and  had  formerly  been  in  command  of  the  division 
in  which  Rostov  was  serving. 

Rostov  began  in  dismay  to  try  and  excuse  himself,  but  seeing  the  good- 
naturedly  jocose  face  of  the  general,  he  moved  on  one  side,  and  in  an 
excited  voice  told  him  of  the  whole  affair,  begging  him  to  intercede  for 
Denisov,  whom  the  general  knew. 

The  general  on  hearing  Rostov’s  story  shook  his  head  gravely.  ‘I’m 
sorry,  very  sorry  for  the  gallant  fellow;  give  me  the  letter.’ 

Rostov  had  scarcely  time  to  give  him  the  letter  and  tell  him  all  about 
Denisov’s  scrape,  when  the  clank  of  rapid  footsteps  with  spurs  was 
heard  on  the  stairs,  and  the  general  left  his  side  and  moved  up  to  the 
steps.  The  gentlemen  of  the  Emperor’s  suite  ran  downstairs  and  went 
to  their  horses.  The  postillion,  the  same  one  who  had  been  at  Austerlitz, 
led  up  the  Emperor’s  horse,  and  on  the  stairs  was  heard  a  light  footstep, 
which  Rostov  knew  at  once.  Forgetting  the  danger  of  being  recognised, 
Rostov  moved  right  up  to  the  steps  together  w'ith  some  curious  persons 
from  the  town;  and  again  after  two  years  he  saw  the  features  he  adored: 
the  same  face,  the  same  glance,  the  same  walk,  the  same  combination  of 
majesty  and  mildness.  .  .  .  And  the  feeling  of  enthusiasm  and  devotion 
to  the  Emperor  rose  up  again  in  Rostov’s  heart  with  all  its  old  force. 
The  Emperor  wore  the  uniform  of  the  Preobrazhensky  regiment,  white 
elkskin  breeches  and  high  boots,  and  a  star  which  Rostotf  did  not  recog¬ 
nise  (it  was  the  star  of  the  Legion  of  Honour).  He  came  out  on  the 
steps,  holding  his  hat  under  his  arm,  and  putting  on  his  glove.  He  stopped, 
looking  round  and  seeming  to  shed  brightness  around  him  with  his 
glance.  To  some  one  of  the  generals  he  said  a  few  words.  He  recognised, 
itoo,  the  former  commander  of  Rostov’s  division,  smiled  to  him,  and 
summoned  him  to  him. 

All  the  suite  stood  back,  and  Rostov  saw  the  general  talking  at  some 
length  to  the  Emperor. 

The  Emperor  said  a  few  words  to  him,  and  took  a  step  towards  his 
horse.  Again  the  crowd  of  the  suite  and  the  street  gazers,  among  whom 
was  Rostov,  moved  up  closer  to  the  Emperor.  Standing  still  with  his 
hand  on  the  saddle,  the  Emperor  turned  to  the  cavalry  general  and  said 
aloud  with  the  obvious  intention  of  being  heard  by  all:  ‘I  cannot,  general, 
and  I  cannot  because  the  law  is  mightier  than  I  am,’  and  he  put  his  foot 
in  the  stirrup.  The  general  bent  his  head  respectfully;  the  Emperor  took 
his  seat  and  galloped  up  the  street.  Rostov,  wild  with  enthusiasm,  ran 
after  him  with  the  crowd. 


384 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


XXI 

In  the  public  square  towards  which  the  Tsar  rode  there  stood,  facing 
each  other,  the  battalion  of  the  Preobrazhensky  regiment  on  the  right, 
and  the  battalion  of  the  French  guards  in  bearskin  caps  on  the  left. 

While  the  Emperor  was  riding  up  to  one  flank  of  the  battalions,  who 
presented  arms,  another  crowd  of  horsemen  was  galloping  up  to  the 
opposite  flank,  and  at  the  head  of  them  Rostov  recognised  Napoleon. 
That  figure  could  be  no  one  else.  He  galloped  up,  wearing  a  little  hat, 
the  ribbon  of  St.  Andrey  across  his  shoulder,  and  a  blue  uniform  open 
over  a  white  vest.  He  was  riding  a  grey  Arab  horse  of  extremely  fine 
breed,  with  a  crimson,  gold-embroidered  saddle-cloth.  Riding  up  to 
Alexander,  he  raised  his  hat,  and  at  that  movement  Rostov,  with  his 
cavalryman’s  eye,  could  not  help  noticing  that  Napoleon  had  a  bad 
and  uncertain  seat  on  horseback.  The  battalions  shouted  hurrah,  and 
vive  V  Em  per  cur !  Napoleon  said  something  to  Alexander.  Both  Em¬ 
perors  dismounted  from  their  horses  and  took  each  other  by  the  hands. 
Napoleon’s  face  wore  an  unpleasantly  hypocritical  smile.  Alexander  was 
saying  something  to  him  with  a  cordial  expression. 

In  spite  of  the  kicking  of  the  horses  of  the  French  gendarmes,  who 
were  keeping  back  the  crowd,  Rostov  watched  every  movement  of  the 
Emperor  Alexander  and  of  Bonaparte,  and  never  took  his  eyes  off  them.  | 
What  struck  him  as  something  unexpected  and  strange  was  that  Alex-  ! 
ander  behaved  as  though  Bonaparte  were  his  equal,  and  that  Bonaparte  i 
in  his  manner  to  the  Russian  Tsar  seemed  perfectly  at  ease,  as  though 
this  equal  and  intimate  relation  with  a  monarch  were  something  natural 
and  customary  with  him. 

Alexander  and  Napoleon,  with  a  long  tail  of  suite,  moved  towards  the 
right  flank  of  the  Preobrazhensky  battalion,  close  up  to  the  crowd  which  1 
was  standing  there.  The  crowd  found  itself  unexpectedly  so  close  to  the 
Emperors,  that  Rostov,  who  stood  in  the  front  part  of  it,  began  to  be 
afraid  he  might  be  recognised. 

‘Sire,  I  ask  your  permission  to  give  the  Legion  of  Honour  to  the  bravest 
of  your  soldiers,’  said  a  harsh,  precise  voice,  fully  articulating  every 
letter. 

It  was  little  Bonaparte  speaking,  looking  up  straight  into  Alexander’s 
eyes.  Alexander  listened  attentively  to  what  was  said  to  him,  and  bending 
his  head  smiled  amiably. 

‘To  him  who  bore  himself  most  valiantly  in  this  last  war,’  added  Napo¬ 
leon,  emphasising  each  syllable,  and  with  an  assurance  and  composure, 
revolting  to  Rostov,  scanning  the  rows  of  Russian  soldiers  drawn  up 
before  him,  all  presenting  arms,  and  all  gazing  immovably  at  the  face 
of  their  own  Emperor. 

‘Will  your  majesty  allow  me  to  ask  the  opinion  of  the  colonel?’  said 
Alexander,  and  he  took  a  few  hurried  steps  towards  Prince  Kozlovsky, 
the  commander  of  the  battalion.  Bonaparte  was  meanwhile  taking  the 


WARANDPEACE  385 

glove  off  his  little  white  hand,  and,  tearing  it,  he  threw  it  away.  An 
adjutant,  rushing  hurriedly  forward  from  behind,  picked  it  up.  ‘Give  it 
to  whom?’  the  Emperor  Alexander  asked  of  Kozlovsky  in  Russian,  in 
a  low  voice. 

‘As  your  majesty  commands.’ 

The  Emperor  frowned,  with  a  look  of  displeasure,  and,  looking  round, 
said:  ‘Well,  we  must  give  him  an  answer.’ 

Kozlovsky  scanned  the  ranks  with  a  resolute  air,  taking  in  Rostov,  too, 
in  that  glance. 

‘Won’t  it  be  me!’  thought  Rostov. 

‘Lazarev!’  the  colonel  called  with  a  scowling  face;  and  Lazarev,  the 
soldier  who  was  the  best  shot  in  firing  at  the  range,  stepped  smartly 
forward. 

‘Where  are  you  off  to?  Stand  still!’  voices  w’hispered  to  Lazarev,  who 
did  not  know  where  he  was  to  go.  Lazarev  stopped  short,  with  a  sidelong 
scared  look  at  his  colonel,  and  his  face  quivered,  as  one  so  often  sees  in 
soldiers  called  up  in  front  of  the  ranks. 

Napoleon  gave  a  slight  backward  turn  of  his  head,  and  a  slight  motion 
of  his  little  fat  hand,  as  though  seeking  something  with  it.  The  members 
of  his  suite,  who  guessed  the  same  second  what  was  wanted,  were  all  in  a 
bustle;  they  whispered  together,  passing  something  from  one  to  another, 
and  a  page — the  same  one  Rostov  had  seen  the  previous  evening  at 
Boris’s  quarters — ran  forward,  and  respectfully  bowing  over  the  out¬ 
stretched  hand  and  not  keeping  it  one  instant  waiting,  put  in  it  an  order 
on  a  red  ribbon.  Napoleon,  without  looking  at  it,  pressed  two  fingers 
together;  the  order  was  between  them.  Napoleon  approached  Lazarev, 
who  stood  rolling  his  eyes,  and  still  gazing  obstinately  at  his  own 
Emperor  only.  Napoleon  looked  round  at  the  Emperor  Alexander,  as 
though  to  show  that  what  he  was  doing  now  he  was  doing  for  the  sake 
of  his  ally.  The  little  white  hand,  with  the  order  in  it,  just  touched  the 
button  of  the  soldier  Lazarev.  It  was  as  though  Napoleon  knew  that  it 
was  enough  for  his,  Napoleon’s,  hand  to  deign  to  touch  the  soldier’s 
breast,  for  that  soldier  to  be  happy,  rewarded,  and  distinguished  from 
every  one  in  the  world.  Napoleon  merely  laid  the  cross  on  Lazarev’s 
breast,  and,  dropping  his  hand,  turned  to  Alexander,  as  though  he  knew 
that  cross  would  be  sure  to  stick  on  Lazarev’s  breast.  The  cross  did,  in 
fact,  stick  on. 

Officious  hands,  Russian  and  French,  were  instantaneously  ready  to 
;  support  it,  to  fasten  it  to  his  uniform. 

Lazarev  looked  darkly  at  the  little  man  with  white  hands  who  was 
doing  something  to  him,  and  still  standing  rigidly,  presenting  arms,  he 
looked  again  straight  into  Alexander’s  face,  as  though  he  were  asking 
ihim:  ‘Was  he  to  go  on  standing  there,  or  was  it  his  pleasure  for  him  to 
go  now,  or  perhaps  to  do  something  else?’  But  no  order  was  given  him, 
I  and  he  remained  for  a  good  while  still  in  the  same  rigid  position. 

The  Emperors  mounted  their  horses  and  rode  away.  The  Preobrazhen- 


386  WAR  AND  PEACE 

sky  battalion  broke  up,  and,  mingling  with  the  French  guards,  sat  down 

to  the  tables  prepared  for  them. 

Lazarev  was  put  in  the  place  of  honour.  French  and  Russian  officers 
embraced  him,  congratulated  him,  and  shook  hands  with  him.  Crowds  of 
officers  and  common  people  flocked  up  simply  to  look  at  Lazarev.  There 
was  a  continual  hum  of  laughter  and  French  and  Russian  chatter  round 
the  tables  in  the  square.  Two  officers  with  flushed  faces  passeddoy  Rostov, 
looking  cheerful  and  happy. 

‘What  do  you  say  to  the  banquet,  my  boy?  All  served  on  silver,’  one 
was  saying.  ‘Seen  Lazarev?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘They  say  the  Preobrazhenskies  are  to  give  them  a  dinner  to-morrow.’ 

‘I  say,  what  luck  for  Lazarev!  Twelve  hundred  francs  pension  for  life.’ 

‘Here’s  a  cap,  lads!’  cried  a  Preobrazhensky  soldier,  putting  on  a 
French  soldier’s  fur  cap. 

‘It’s  awfully  nice,  first-rate!’ 

‘Have  you  heard  the  watchword?’  said  an  officer  of  the  guards  to 
another.  ‘The  day  before  yesterday  it  was  “Napoleon,  France,  bravoure” ; 
to-day  it’s  “Alexandre,  Rnssie,  grandeur.”  One  day  our  Emperor  gives 
it,  and  next  day  Napoleon.  To-morrow  the  Emperor  is  to  send  the  St. 
George  to  the  bravest  of  the  French  guards.  Can’t  be  helped!  Must  re¬ 
spond  in  the  same  way.’ 

Boris,  with  his  comrade  Zhilinsky,  had  come  too  to  look  at  the  banquet. 
On  his  way  back  Boris  noticed  Rostov,  who  was  standing  at  the  corner 
of  a  house.  ‘Rostov!  good  day;  we  haven’t  seen  each  other,’  he  said,  and 
could  not  refrain  from  asking  him  what  was  the  matter,  so  strangely  ! 
gloomy  and  troubled  was  the  face  of  Rostov. 

‘Nothing,  nothing,’  answered  Rostov. 

‘Are  you  coming  in?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

Rostov  stood  a  long  while  in  the  corner,  looking  at  the  fete  from  a 
distance.  His  brain  was  seething  in  an  agonising  confusion,  which  he 
could  not  work  out  to  any  conclusion.  Horrible  doubts  were  stirring  in 
his  soul.  He  thought  of  Denisov  with  his  changed  expression,  his  sub¬ 
mission,  and  all  the  hospital  with  torn-off  legs  and  arms,  with  the  filth; 
and  disease.  So  vividly  he  recalled  that  hospital  smell  of  corpse  that  he 
looked  round  to  ascertain  where  the  stench  came  from.  Then  he  thought 
of  that  self-satisfied  Bonaparte,  with  his  white  hands — treated  now  with 
cordiality  and  respect  by  the  Emperor  Alexander.  For  what,  then,  had 
those  legs  and  arms  been  torn  off,  those  men  been  killed?  Then  he 
thought  of  Lazarev  rewarded,  and  Denisov  punished  and  unpardoned. 
He  caught  himself  in  such  strange  reflections  that  he  was  terrified  at  them., 

Hunger  and  the  savoury  smell  of  the  Preobrazhensky  dinner  roused 
him  from  this  mood;  he  must  get  something  to  eat  before  going  away. 
He  went  to  an  hotel  which  he  had  seen  in  the  morning.  In  the  hotel  he 
found  such  a  crowd  of  people,  and  of  officers  who  had  come,  as  he  had, 
in  civilian  dress,  that  he  had  difficulty  in  getting  dinner.  Two  officers  of; 


WARANDPEACE  387 

his  own  division  joined  him  at  table.  The  conversation  naturally  turned 
on  the  peace.  The  two  officers,  Rostov’s  comrades,  like  the  greater  part 
of  the  army,  were  not  satisfied  with  the  peace  concluded  after  Friedland. 
They  said  that  had  they  kept  on  a  little  longer  it  would  have  meant 
Napoleon’s  downfall;  that  his  troops  had  neither  provisions  nor  am¬ 
munition.  Nikolay  ate  in  silence  and  dra  :k  heavily.  He  finished  two 
bottles  of  wine  by  himself.  The  inward  ferment  working  within  him  still 
fretted  him,  and  found  no  solution.  He  dreaded  giving  himself  up  to  his 
thoughts,  and  could  not  get  away  from  them.  All  of  a  sudden,  on  one  of 
the  officers  saying  that  it  was  humiliating  to  look  at  the  French,  Rostov 
began  shouting  with  a  violence  that  was  quite  unprovoked,  and  conse¬ 
quently  greatly  astounded  the  officers. 

‘And  how  can  you  judge  what  would  be  best!’  he  shouted,  with  his 
face  suddenly  suffused  with  a  rush  of  blood.  ‘How  can  you  judge  of  the 
action  of  the  Emperor?  What  right  have  we  to  criticise  him?  We  cannot 
comprehend  the  aims  or  the  actions  of  the  Emperor!’ 

‘But  I  didn’t  say  a  word  about  the  Emperor,’  the  officer  said  in  justi¬ 
fication  of  himself,  unable  to  put  any  other  interpretation  on  Rostov’s 
violence  than  that  he  was  drunk. 

But  Rostov  did  not  heed  him. 

‘We  are  not  diplomatic  clerks,  w7e  are  soldiers,  and  nothing  more,’  he 
went  on.  ‘Command  us  to  die — then  we  die.  And  if  we  are  punished,  it 
follows  we’re  in  fault;  it’s  not  for  us  to  judge.  If  it’s  his  Majesty  the 
Emperor’s  pleasure  to  recognise  Bonaparte  as  emperor,  and  to  conclude 
an  alliance  with  him,  then  it  must  be  the  right  thing.  If  we  were  once 
to  begin  criticising  and  reasoning  about  everything,  nothing  would  be 
left  holy  to  us.  In  that  way  we  shall  be  saying  there  is  no  God,  nothing,’ 
cried  Nikolay,  bringing  his  fist  down  on  the  table.  His  remarks  seemed 
utterly  irrelevant  to  his  companions,  but  followed  quite  consistently 
from  the  train  of  his  own  ideas.  ‘It’s  our  business  to  do  our  duty,  to 
hack  them  to  pieces,  and  not  to  think;  that’s  all  about  it,’  he  shouted. 

‘And  to  drink,’  put  in  one  of  the  officers,  who  had  no  desire  to  quarrel. 

‘Yes,  and  to  drink,’  assented  Nikolay.  ‘Hi,  you  there!  Another  bottle!  ’ 
he  roared. 


PART  VI 


I 

In  the  year  1808  the  Emperor  Alexander  visited  Erfurt  for  another  in¬ 
terview  with  the  Emperor  Napoleon;  and  in  the  highest  Petersburg  so¬ 
ciety  a  great  deal  was  said  of  the  great  significance  of  this  meeting. 

In  1809  the  amity  between  the  two  sovereigns  of  the  world,  as  Na¬ 
poleon  and  Alexander  used  to  be  called,  had  become  so  close  that  when 
Napoleon  declared  war  that  year  with  Austria,  a  Russian  corps  crossed 
the  frontier  to  co-operate  with  their  old  enemy  Bonaparte  against  their 
old  ally,  the  Austrian  Emperor;  so  close  that  in  the  highest  society  there 
was  talk  of  a  possible  marriage  between  Napoleon  and  one  of  the  sisters 
of  the  Emperor  Alexander.  But,  apart  from  foreign  policy,  the  attention 
of  Russian  society  was  at  that  time  drawn  with  special  interest  to  the 
internal  changes  taking  place  in  all  departments  of  the  government. 

Life  meanwhile,  the  actual  life  of  men  with  their  real  interests  of  health 
and  sickness,  labour  and  rest,  with  their  interests  of  thought,  science, 
poetry,,  music,  love,  affection,  hatred,  passion,  went  its  way,  as  always, 
independently,  apart  from  the  political  amity  or  enmity  of  Napoleon 
Bonaparte,  and  apart  from  all  possible  reforms. 

Prince  Andrey  had  spent  two  years  without  a  break  in  the  country.  All 
those  projects  which  Pierre  had  attempted  on  his  estates,  and  changing 
continually  from  one  enterprise  to  another,  had  never  carried  out  to  any 
real  result — all  those  projects  had  been  carried  out  by  Prince  Andrey  with¬ 
out  display  to  any  one  and  without  any  perceptible  exertion.  He  possessed 
in  the  highest  degree  the  quality  Pierre  lacked,  that  practical  tenacity 
which,  without  fuss  or  any  great  effort  on  his  part,  set  things  in  working 
order. 

On  one  estate  of  his,  three  hundred  serfs  were  transformed  into  free 
cultivators  (it  was  one  of  the  first  examples  in  Russia),  in  others  forced 
labour  was  replaced  by  payment  of  rent.  On  Bogutcharovo  a  trained  mid¬ 
wife  had  been  engaged  at  his  expense  to  assist  the  peasant-women  in  child¬ 
birth,  and  a  priest,  at  a  fixed  salary,  was  teaching  the  children  of  the  peas¬ 
ants  and  house  servants  to  read  and  write. 

,  Half  his  time  Prince  Andrey  spent  at  Bleak  Hills  with  his  father  and 
his  son,  who  was  still  in  the  nursery.  The  other  half  he  passed  at  his 
Bogutcharovo  retreat,  as  his  father  called  his  estate.  In  spite  of  the  in¬ 
difference  to  all  the  external  events  of  the  world  that  he  had  shown  to 
Pierre,  he  studiously  followed  them,  received  many  books,  and,  to  his 
own  surprise,  when  people  coming  fresh  from  Petersburg,  the  very  vortex 

388 


WAR  AND  PEACE  389 

of  life,  visited  him  or  his  father,  he  noticed  that  those  people,  in  knowledge 
of  all  that  was  passing  in  home  and  foreign  politics,  were  far  behind  him, 
though  he  had  never  left  the  country. 

Besides  looking  after  his  estates,  and  much  general  reading  of  the  most 
varied  kind,  Prince  Andrey  was  busily  engaged  at  this  time  upon  a  critical 
survey  of  our  two  late  disastrous  campaigns  and  the  composition  of  a 
proposal  for  reforms  in  our  army  rules  and  regulations. 

In  the  spring  of  1809  Prince  Andrey  set  off  to  visit  the  Ryazan  estates, 
the  heritage  of  his  son,  whose  trustee  he  was. 

Warmed  by  the  spring  sunshine  he  sat  in  the  carriage,  looking  at  the 
first  grass,  the  first  birch  leaves  and  the  first  flecks  of  white  spring  clouds 
floating  over  the  bright  blue  of  the  sky.  He  was  thinking  of  nothing,  but 
looking  about  him,  light-hearted  and  thoughtless. 

They  crossed  the  ford  where  he  had  talked  with  Pierre  a  year  before. 
They  drove  through  a  muddy  village,  by  threshing  floors,  and  patches  of 
green  corn;  down  hill  by  a  drift  of  snow  still  lying  near  the  bridge,  up  hill 
along  a  clay  road  hollowed  out  by  the  rain,  by  strips  of  stubble-field,  with 
copse  turning  green  here  and  there;  and  drove  at  last  into  a  birch  forest 
that  lay  on  both  sides  of  the  road.  In  the  forest  it  was  almost  hot,  the  wind 
could  not  be  felt.  The  birches,  all  studded  with  sticky,  green  leaves,  did 
not  stir,  and  lilac-coloured  flowers  and  the  first  grass  lifted  the  last  year’s 
leaves  and  peeped  out  green  from  under  them.  Tiny  fir-trees,  dotted  here 
and  there  among  the  birches,  brought  a  jarring  reminder  of  winter  with 
their  coarse,  unchanging  green.  The  horses  neighed  as  they  entered  the 
forest  and  were  visibly  heated. 

Pyotr  the  footman  said  something  to  the  coachman;  the  coachman 
assented.  But  apparently  the  coachman’s  sympathy  was  not  enough  for 
Pyotr.  He  turned  round  on  the  box  to  his  master. 

‘Your  excellency,  how  soft  it  is!’  he  said,  smiling  respectfully. 

‘Eh?’ 

‘It  is  soft,  your  excellency.’ 

‘What  does  he  mean?’  wondered  Prince  Andrey.  ‘Oh,  the  weather,  most 
likely,’  he  thought,  looking  from  side  to  side.  ‘And,  indeed,  everything’s 
green  already  .  .  .  how  soon!  And  the  birch  and  the  wild  cherry  and  the 
alder  beginning  to  come  out.  .  .  .  But  I  haven’t  noticed  the  oak.  Yes, 
here  he  is,  the  oak!  ’ 

At  the  edge  of  the  wood  stood  an  oak.  Probably  ten  times  the  age  of  the 
birch-trees  that  formed  the  bulk  of  the  forest,  it  was  ten  times  the  thick¬ 
ness  and  twice  the  height  of  any  birch-tree.  It  was  a  huge  oak,  double  a 
man’s  span,  with  branches  broken  off,  long  ago  it  seemed,  and  with  bark 
torn  off,  and  seared  with  old  scars.  With  its  huge,  uncouth,  gnarled  arms 
and  fingers  sprawling  unsymmetrically,  it  stood  an  aged,  angry,  and  scorn¬ 
ful  monster  among  the  smiling  birches.  Only  the  few  dead-looking,  ever¬ 
green  firs  dotted  about  the  forest,  and  this  oak,  refused  to  yield  to  the  spell 
of  spring,  and  would  see  neither  spring  nor  sunshine. 

‘Spring  and  love  and  happiness!’  that  oak  seemed  to  say.  ‘Are  you  not 
sick  of  that  ever-same,  stupid,  and  meaningless  cheat?  Always  the  same, 


390  WAR  AND  PEACE 

and  always  a  cheat!  There  is  no  spring,  nor  sunshine,  nor  happiness.  See 
yonder  stand  the  cramped,  dead  fir-trees,  ever  the  same,  and  here  I  have 
flung  my  torn  and  broken  fingers  wherever  they  have  grown  out  of  my 
back  or  my  sides.  As  they  have  grown,  so  I  stand,  and  I  put  no  faith  in 
your  hopes  and  deceptions.’ 

Prince  Andrey  looked  round  several  times  at  that  oak  as  though  he 
expected  something  from  it.  There  were  flowers  and  grass  under  the  oak 
too,  but  still  it  stood,  scowling,  rigid,  weird  and  grim,  among  them. 

‘Yes,  he’s  right,  a  thousand  times  right,  the  old  oak,’  thought  Prince 
Andrey.  ‘Others,  young  creatures,  may  be  caught  anew  by  that  deception, 
but  we  know  life — our  life  is  over!  ’  A  whole  fresh  train  of  ideas,  hopeless, 
but  mournfully  sweet,  stirred  up  in  Prince  Andrey’s  soul  in  connection 
with  that  oak.  During  this  journey  he  thought  over  his  whole  life  as  it 
were  anew,  and  came  to  the  same  hopeless  but  calming  conclusion,  that 
it  was  not  for  him  to  begin  anything  fresh,  that  he  must  live  his  life,  con¬ 
tent  to  do  no  harm,  dreading  nothing  and  desiring  nothing. 


II 

Prince  Andrey’s  duties  as  trustee  of  his  son’s  Ryazan  estates  necessi¬ 
tated  an  interview  with  the  marshal  of  the  district.  This  marshal  was 
Count  Ilya  Andreivitch  Rostov,  and  in  the  middle  of  May  Prince  Andrey 
went  to  see  him. 

It  was  by  now  the  hot  period  of  spring.  The  forest  was  already  in  full 
leaf.  It  was  dusty,  and  so  hot  that  at  the  sight  of  water  one  longed  to  bathe. 

Prince  Andrey  drove  along  the  avenue  leading  to  the  Rostovs’  house  at 
Otradnoe,  depressed  and  absorbed  in  considering  what  questions  he  must 
ask  the  marshal  about  his  business.  Behind  some  trees  on  the  right  he 
heard  merry  girlish  cries,  and  caught  sight  of  a  party  of  girls  running 
across  the  avenue  along  which  his  coach  was  driving.  In  front  of  all  the 
rest  there  ran  towards  the  coach  a  black -haired,  very  slender,  strangely 
slender,  black-eyed  girl  in  a  yellow  cotton  gown.  On  her  head  was  a  white 
pocket-handkerchief,  from  under  which  strayed  locks  of  her  loose  hair. 
The  girl  was  shouting  something,  but  perceiving  a  stranger,  she  ran  back 
laughing,  without  glancing  at  him. 

Prince  Andrey  for  some  reason  felt  a  sudden  pang.  The  day  was  so 
lovely,  the  sun  so  bright,  everything  around  him  so  gay,  and  that  slim  and 
pretty  girl  knew  nothing  of  his  existence,  and  cared  to  know  nothing,  and 
was  content  and  happy  in  her  own  life — foolish  doubtless — but  gay  and 
happy  and  remote  from  him.  What  was  she  so  glad  about?  What  was  she 
thinking  of?  Not  of  army  regulations;  not  of  the  organisation  of  the 
Rayazan  rent-paying  peasants.  ‘What  is  she  thinking  about,  and  why  is 
she  so  happy?’  Prince  Andrey  could  not  help  wondering  with  interest. 

Count  Ilya  Andreivitch  was  living  in  the  year  1809  at  Otradnoe,  exactly 
as  he  had  always  done  in  previous  years ;  that  is  to  say,  entertaining  almost 
the  whole  province  with  hunts,  theatricals,  dinner  parties  and  concerts. 


WAR  AND  PEACE  391 

He  was  delighted  to  see  Prince  Andrey,  as  he  always  was  to  see  any  new 
guest,  and  almost  forced  him  to  stay  the  night. 

Prince  Andrey  spent  a  tedious  day,  entertained  by  his  elderly  host  and 
hostess  and  the  more  honoured  among  the  guests,  of  whom  the  count’s 
house  was  full  in  honour  of  an  approaching  name-day.  Several  times  in  the 
course  of  it,  Bolkonsky  glanced  at  Natasha,  continually  laughing  and  full 
of  gaiety  among  the  younger  members  of  the  company,  and  asked  him¬ 
self  each  time,  ‘What  is  she  thinking  of?  What  is  she  so  glad  about?’ 

In  the  evening,  alone  in  a  new  place,  he  was  for  a  long  while  unable  to 
sleep.  He  read  for  a  time,  then  put  out  his  candle,  and  afterwards  lighted 
it  again.  It  was  hot  in  the  bedroom  with  the  shutters  closed  on  the  inside. 
He  felt  irritated  with  this  foolish  old  gentleman  (so  he  mentally  called 
Count  Rostov)  who  had  detained  him,  declaring  that  the  necessary  deeds 
had  not  yet  come  from  the  towm,  and  he  was  vexed  with  himself  for 
staying. 

Prince  Andrey  got  up  and  went  to  the  window  to  open  it.  As  soon  as  he 
opened  the  shutter,  the  moonlight  broke  into  the  room  as  though  it  had 
been  waiting  a  long  while  outside  on  the  watch  for  this  chance.  He  opened 
the  window.  The  night  was  fresh  and  bright  and  still.  Just  in  front  of  the 
window  stood  a  row  of  pollard-trees,  black  on  one  side,  silvery  bright  on 
the  other.  Under  the  trees  were  rank,  moist,  bushy,  growing  plants  of 
some  kind,  with  leaves  and  stems  touched  here  and  there  with  silver. 
Further  away,  beyond  the  black  trees,  was  the  roof  of  something  glisten¬ 
ing  with  dew;  to  the  right  was  a  great,  leafy  tree,  with  its  trunk  and 
branches  brilliantly  white,  and  above  it  the  moon,  almost  full,  in  a 
clear,  almost  starless,  spring  sky.  Prince  Andrey  leaned  his  elbow  on  the 
window,  and  his  eyes  rested  on  that  sky. 

His  room  was  on  the  second  story;  there  were  people  in  the  room  over 
his  head,  and  awake  too.  He  heard  girls’  chatter  overhead. 

‘Only  this  once  more,’  said  a  girlish  voice,  which  Prince  Andrey  recog¬ 
nised  at  once. 

‘But  when  are  you  coming  to  bed?’  answered  another  voice. 

‘I’m  not  coming!  I  can’t  sleep;  what’s  the  use?  Come,  for  the  last 
time.  .  . 

Two  feminine  voices  sang  a  musical  phrase,  the  finale  of  some  song. 

‘Oh,  it’s  exquisite!  Well,  now  go  to  sleep,  and  there’s  an  end  of  it.’ 

‘You  go  to  sleep,  but  I  can’t,’  responded  the  first  voice,  coming  nearer 
to  the  window.  She  was  evidently  leaning  right  out  of  the  window,  for  he 
could  hear  the  rustle  of  her  garments  and  even  her  breathing.  All  was 
hushed  and  stonily  still,  like  the  moon  and  its  lights  and  shadows.  Prince 
Andrey  dared  not  stir  for  fear  of  betraying  his  unintentional  presence. 

‘Sonya!  Sonya!  ’  he  heard  the  first  voice  again.  ‘Oh,  how  can  you  sleep! 
Do  look  how  exquisite!  Oh,  how  exquisite!  Do  wake  up,  Sonya!  ’  she  said, 
almost  with  tears  in  her  voice.  ‘Do  you  know  such  an  exquisite  night  has 
never,  never  been  before.’ 

Sonya  made  some  reluctant  reply. 

‘No,  do  look  what  a  moon!  .  .  .  Oh,  how  lovely  it  is!  Do  come  here. 


392  WAR  AND  PEACE 

Darling,  precious,  do  come  here.  There,  do  you  see?  One  has  only  to  squat 
on  one’s  heels  like  this — see — and  to  hold  one’s  knees — as  tight,  as  tight 
as  one  can — give  a  great  spring  and  one  would  fly  away.  .  .  .  Like  this 
, — see !  ’ 

‘Mind,  you’ll  fall.’ 

He  heard  sounds  of  a  scuffle  and  Sonya’s  voice  in  a  tone  of  vexation: 
‘Why,  it’s  past  one  o’clock.’ 

‘Oh,  you  only  spoil  it  all  for  me.  Well,  go  to  bed  then,  go  along.’ 

All  was  hushed  again;  but  Prince  Andrey  knew  she  was  still  sitting 
there.  He  heard  at  times  a  soft  rustle,  and  at  times  a  sigh. 

‘O  my  God!  my  God!  what  does  it  mean?’  she  cried  suddenly.  ‘To  bed 
then,  if  it  must  be  so!  ’  and  she  closed  the  window  with  a  slam. 

‘And  nothing  to  do  with  my  existence!’  thought  Prince  Andrey  while 
he  had  been  listening  to  her  talk,  for  some  reason  hoping  and  dreading  she 
might  say  something  about  him.  ‘And  she  again!  As  though  it  were  on 
purpose!’  he  thought.  All  at  once  there  stirred  within  his  soul  such  a 
wholly  unexpected  medley  of  youthful  hopes  and  ideas,  running  counter 
to  the  whole  tenor  of  his  life,  that  he  made  haste  to  fall  asleep,  feeling  in¬ 
capable  of  seeing  clearly  into  his  own  state  of  mind. 


Ill 

Next  day  Prince  Andrey  took  leave  of  the  count  alone  and  set  off  on  his 
way  home,  without  waiting  for  the  ladies  to  appear. 

It  was  the  beginning  of  June  when  Prince  Andrey,  on  his  return  journey, 
drove  again  into  the  birch  forest,  in  which  the  old,  gnarled  oak  had  made 
upon  him  so  strange  and  memorable  an  impression.  The  ringing  of  the 
bells  did  not  carry  so  far  now  in  the  forest  as  six  weeks  before.  Everything 
was  fully  out,  thick,  and  shut  in.  And  the  young  firs,  dotted  about  the 
forest,  did  not  break  the  general  beauty,  but,  subdued  to  the  same  charac¬ 
ter  as  the  rest,  were  softly  green  with  their  feathery  bunches  of  young 
needles. 

The  whole  day  had  been  hot;  a  storm  was  gathering,  but  only  a  small 
rain-cloud  had  sprinkled  the  dust  of  the  road  and  the  sappy  leaves.  The 
left  side  of  the  forest  was  dark,  lying  in  shadow.  The  right  side,  glistening 
with  the  raindrops,  gleamed  in  the  sunlight,  faintly  undulating  in  the 
wind.  Everything  was  in  flower,  the  nightingales  twittered  and  carolled, 
now  close,  now  far  away. 

‘Yes,  it  was  here,  in  this  forest,  I  saw  that  oak,  with  whom  I  was  in 
sympathy,’  thought  Prince  Andrey.  ‘But  where  is  he?’  he  thought  again 
as  he  gazed  at  the  left  side  of  the  road,  and,  all  unaware  and  unrecognising, 
he  was  admiring  the  very  oak  he  was  seeking.  The  old  oak,  utterly  trans¬ 
formed,  draped  in  a  tent  of  sappy  dark  green,  basked  faintly,  undulating 
in  the  rays  of  the  evening  sun.  Of  the  knotted  fingers,  the  gnarled  excres¬ 
cences,  the  aged  grief  and  mistrust — nothing  was  to  be  seen.  Through  the 
rough,  century-old  bark,  where  there  were  no  twigs,  leaves  had  burst  out 


WARANDPEACE  393 

so  sappy,  so  young,  that  it  was  hard  to  believe  that  aged  creature  had 
borne  them. 

‘Yes,  that  is  the  same  tree,’  thought  Prince  Andrey,  and  all  at  once 
there  came  upon  him  an  irrational,  spring  feeling  of  joy  and  of  renewal. 
All  the  best  moments  of  his  life  rose  to  his  memory  at  once.  Austerlitz, 
with  that  lofty  sky,  and  the  dead,  reproachful  face  of  his  wife,  and  Pierre 
on  the  ferry,  and  the  girl,  thrilled  by  the  beauty  of  the  night,  and  that 
night  and  moon — it  all  rushed  at  once  into  his  mind. 

‘No,  life  is  not  over  at  thirty-one,’  Prince  Andrey  decided  all  at  once, 
finally  and  absolutely.  ‘It’s  not  enough  for  me  to  know  all  there  is  in  me, 
every  one  must  know  it  too;  Pierre  and  that  girl,  who  wanted  to  fly  away 
into  the  sky;  every  one  must  know  me  so  that  my  life  may  not  be  spent 
only  on  myself;  they  must  not  live  so  apart  from  my  life,  it  must  be 
reflected  in  all  of  them  and  they  must  all  share  my  life  with  me!  ’ 

On  getting  home  after  his  journey,  Prince  Andrey  made  up  his  mind  to 
go  to  Petersburg  in  the  autumn,  and  began  inventing  all  sorts  of  reasons 
for  this  decision.  A  whole  chain  of  sensible,  logical  reasons,  making  it 
essential  for  him  to  visit  Petersburg,  and  even  to  re-enter  the  service,  was 
at  every  moment  ready  at  his  disposal.  He  could  not  indeed  comprehend 
now  how  he  could  ever  have  doubted  of  the  necessity  of  taking  an  active 
share  in  life,  just  as  a  month  before  he  could  not  have  understood  how  the 
idea  of  leaving  the  country  could  ever  occur  to  him.  It  seemed  clear  to 
him  that  all  his  experience  of  life  would  be  wasted  and  come  to  naught, 
if  he  did  not  apply  it  in  practice  and  take  an  active  part  in  life  again.  He 
could  not  understand  indeed  how  on  a  basis  of  such  poor  arguments  it 
could  have  seemed  so  incontestable  to  him  that  he  would  be  lowering 
himself,  if  after  the  lessons  he  had  received  from  life,  he  were  to  put  faith 
again  in  the  possibility  of  being  useful  and  in  the  possibility  of  happiness 
and  of  love.  Reason  now  gave  its  whole  support  to  the  other  side.  After  his 
journey  to  Ryazan,  Prince  Andrey  began  to  weary  of  life  in  the  country; 
his  former  pursuits  ceased  to  interest  him,  and  often  sitting  alone  in  his 
study,  he  got  up,  went  to  the  looking-glass  and  gazed  a  long  while  at  his 
own  face.  Then  he  turned  away  to  the  portrait  of  Liza,  who,  with  her 
curls  tied  up  a  la  grecque,  looked  gaily  and  tenderly  out  of  the  gold  frame 
at  him.  She  did  not  now  say  those  terrible  words  to  him;  she  looked  curi¬ 
ously  and  merrily  at  him.  And,  clasping  his  hands  behind  him,  Prince 
Andrey  would  walk  a  long  while  up  and  down  his  room,  frowning  and 
smiling  by  turns,  as  he  brooded  over  those  irrational  ideas,  that  could  not 
be  put  into  words,  and  were  secret  as  a  crime — the  ideas  connected  with 
Pierre,  with  glory,  with  the  girl  at  the  window,  with  the  oak,  with  woman’s 
beauty,  and  love,  which  had  changed  the  whole  current  of  his  life.  And 
if  any  one  came  into  his  room  at  such  moments,  he  would  be  particularly 
short,  severely  decided  and  disagreeably  logical. 

‘Mon  cher’  Princess  Marya  would  say  coming  in  at  such  a  moment, 
‘Nikolushka  cannot  go  out  for  a  walk  to-day;  it  is  very  cold.’ 

‘If  it  were  hot,’  Prince  Andrey  would  answer  his  sister  with  peculiar 


394  WARANDPEACE 

dryness  on  such  occasions,  'then  he  would  go  out  with  only  his  smock 
on ;  but  as  it  is  cold,  you  must  put  him  on  the  warm  clothes  that  have  been 
designed  for  that  object.  That’s  what  follows  from  its  being  cold,  and  not 
staying  at  home  when  the  child  needs  fresh  air,’  he  would  say,  with  an 
exaggerated  logicality,  as  it  were  punishing  some  one  for  that  secret, 
illogical  element  working  within  him. 

On  such  occasions  Princess  Marya  thought  what  a  chilling  effect  so 
much  intellectual  work  had  upon  men. 


IV 

Prince  Andrey  arrived  in  Petersburg  in  the  August  of  1809.  It  was  the 
period  when  the  young  Speransky  was  at  the  zenith  of  his  fame  and  his 
reforms  were  being  carried  out  with  the  utmost  vigour.  In  that  very  month 
the  Tsar  was  thrown  out  of  his  carriage,  hurt  his  foot,  and  was  laid  up  for 
three  weeks  at  Peterhof,  seeing  Speransky  every  day  and  no  one  else.  At 
that  period  there  were  in  preparation  the  two  famous  decrees  that  so 
convulsed  society,  abolishing  the  bestowal  of  grades  by  court  favour  and 
establishing  examinations  for  obtaining  the  ranks  of  collegiate  assessors 
and  state  councillors.  But  besides  these  reforms,  a  whole  political  con¬ 
stitution  was  under  discussion  destined  to  transform  the  whole  legal, 
administrative  and  financial  system  of  government  from  the  Privy  Coun¬ 
cil  to  the  district  tribunals.  At  this  time  the  vague,  liberal  ideals  with 
which  the  Emperor  Alexander  had  ascended  the  throne  were  taking  shape 
and  being  carried  into  practice.  Those  ideals  he  had  striven  to  realise  with 
the  aid  of  Tchartorizhsky,  Novosiltsov,  Kotchubey,  and  Stroganov,  whom 
he  used  himself  to  call  in  fun  his  ‘comite  du  salut  publique.’  Now  all  were 
replaced  by  Speransky  on  the  civil  side  and  Araktcheev  on  the  military. 

Soon  after  his  arrival,  Prince  Andrey,  as  a  kammerherr,  presented  him¬ 
self  at  court  and  at  a  levee.  The  Tsar,  meeting  him  on  two  occasions,  did 
not  deign  to  bestow  a  single  word  upon  him.  Prince  Andrey  had  fancied 
even  before  then  that  he  was  antipathetic  to  the  Tsar;  that  the  Tsar  dis¬ 
liked  his  face  and  his  whole  personality.  In  the  cold,  repellent  glance  with 
which  the  Tsar  looked  at  him,  Prince  Andrey  found  further  confirmation 
of  this  supposition.  Courtiers  explained  the  Tsar’s  slight  to  Prince  Andrey 
by  saying  that  his  majesty  was  displeased  at  Bolkonsky’s  having  retired 
from  active  service  since  1805. 

‘I  know  myself  that  one  has  no  control  over  one’s  likes  and  dislikes,’ 
thought  Prince  Andrey,  ‘and  so  it  is  of  no  use  to  think  of  presenting  my 
note  on  army  reform  in  person  to  the  Tsar,  but  the  thing  will  speak  for 
itself.’  He  sent  word  about  his  note  to  an  old  field-marshal,  a  friend  of 
his  father’s.  The  field-marshal  fixed  an  hour  to  see  him,  received  him 
cordially,  and  promised  to  lay  it  before  the  Tsar.  A  few  days  later,  Prince 
Andrey  received  notice  that  he  was  to  call  upon  the  minister  of  war, 
Count  Araktcheev. 


WAR  AND  PEACE  395 

At  nine  o’clock  in  the  morning  on  the  day  appointed,  Prince  Andrey 
entered  Count  Araktcheev’s  reception-room. 

Prince  Andrey  did  not  know  Araktcheev  personally  and  had  never  seen 
him,  but  all  that  he  knew  about  him  had  inspired  him  with  little  respect 
for  the  man. 

‘He  is  the  minister  of  war,  a  person  the  Tsar  trusts,  and  no  one  need 
have  any  concern  with  his  personal  qualities;  he  has  been  commissioned 
to  look  at  my  note,  consequently  he  is  the  only  person  who  can  get  it 
adopted,’  thought  Prince  Andrey,  as  he  waited  among  many  persons  of 
importance  and  unimportance  in  Count  Araktcheev’s  anteroom. 

During  the  years  of  his  service — for  the  most  part  as  an  adjutant — 
Prince  Andrey  had  seen  the  anterooms  of  many  great  personages,  and  the 
various  characteristic  types  of  such  anterooms  were  very  readily  recog¬ 
nised  by  him.  Count  Araktcheev’s  anteroom  had  quite  a  special  character. 
The  faces  of  the  persons  of  no  consequence  who  were  awaiting  their  turns 
for  an  audience  with  Count  Araktcheev  betrayed  a  feeling  of  humiliation 
and  servility;  the  faces  of  those  of  superior  rank  all  wore  an  expression  of 
general  discomfort,  concealed  under  a  mask  of  ease  and  ridicule,  of  them¬ 
selves  and  their  position  and  the  person  they  were  waiting  to  see.  Some 
of  them  walked  up  and  down  plunged  in  thought;  others  were  laughing 
and  whispering  together,  and  Prince  Andrey  caught  the  nickname  Sila 
Andreitch  (Sila  meaning  Force  or  Violence),  and  the  words  ‘the  gover¬ 
nor’ll  give  it  you,’  referring  to  Count  Araktcheev.  One  general  (a  person 
of  great  consequence),  unmistakably  chagrined  at  being  kept  waiting  so 
long,  sat  with  crossed  legs,  disdainfully  smiling  to  himself. 

But  as  soon  as  the  door  opened,  all  faces  instantly  betrayed  one  feeling 
only — terror. 

Prince  Andrey  asked  the  adjutant  on  duty  to  mention  his  name  again, 
but  he  received  a  sarcastic  stare,  and  was  told  his  turn  would  come  in  due 
course.  After  several  persons  had  been  let  in  and  let  out  of  the  minister’s 
room  by  the  adjutant,  an  officer  was  admitted  at  the  dreadful  door,  whose 
abject  and  panic-stricken  face  had  struck  Prince  Andrey.  The  officer’s 
audience  lasted  a  long  while.  Suddenly  the  roar  of  a  harsh  voice  was  heard 
through  the  door,  and  the  officer,  with  a  white  face  and  trembling  lips, 
came  out,  and  clutching  at  his  head,  crossed  the  anteroom.  After  that, 
Prince  Andrey  was  conducted  to  the  door,  and  the  adjutant  in  a  whisper 
said:  ‘To  the  right,  at  the  window.’ 

Prince  Andrey  went  into  a  plain,  neat  study,  and  saw  at  the  table  a  man 
of  forty  with  a  long  waist,  with  a  long,  closely-cropped  head,  deep 
wrinkles,  scowling  brows  over  brown-green,  dull  eyes,  and  a  red,  over¬ 
hanging  nose.  Araktcheev  turned  his  head  towards  him,  without  looking 
at  him. 

‘What  is  it  you  are  petitioning  for?’  asked  Araktcheev. 

‘There  is  nothing  that  I  am  .  .  .  petitioning  for,  your  excellency/ 
Prince  Andrey  pronouhced  softly.  Araktcheev’s  eyes  turned  to  him. 

‘Sit  down,’  said  Araktcheev.  ‘Prince  Bolkonsky?’ 


396  WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘I  have  no  petition  to  make,  but  his  Majesty  the  Tsar  has  graciously 
sent  to  your  excellency  a  note  submitted  by  me - ’ 

‘Be  so  good  as  to  see,  my  dear  sir;  I  have  read  your  note,’  Araktcheev 
interrupted,  uttering  only  the  first  words  civilly,  again  looking  away  from 
him,  and  relapsing  more  and  more  into  a  tone  of  grumbling  contempt.  ‘Is 
it  new  army  regulations  you  propose?  There  are  regulations  in  plenty; 
no  one  will  carry  out  the  old  ones.  Nowadays  every  one’s  drawing  up  regu¬ 
lations;  it’s  easier  writing  than  doing.’ 

'I  have  come  by  the  desire  of  his  Majesty  the  Tsar  to  learn  from  your 
excellency  how  you  propose  to  deal  with  my  project,’  said  Prince  Andrey 
courteously. 

‘I  have  proposed  a  resolution  in  regard  to  your  note,  and  have  for¬ 
warded  it  to  the  committee.  I  do  not  approve,’  said  Araktcheev,  getting 
up  and  taking  a  paper  out  of  the  writing-table.  ‘Here.’  He  gave  it  to  Prince 
Andrey.  Right  across  the  note  had  been  scrawled,  without  punctuation  or 
capital  letters  and  with  words  misspelt :  ‘Superficially  compiled  seeing  that 
it’s  drawn  up  in  imitation  of  the  French  army  regulations  and  needlessly 
departing  from  the  standing  orders.’ 

‘To  what  committee  has  the  note  been  referred?’  asked  Prince  Andrey. 

‘To  the  Committee  on  Army  Regulations,  and  I  have  proposed  your 
honour  being  enrolled  among  its  members.  Only  without  salary.’ 

Prince  Andrey  smiled. 

‘I  am  not  seeking  a  salary.’ 

‘A  member  without  salary,’  repeated  Araktcheev.  ‘I  wish  you  good  day. 
Hey!  call!  who’s  the  next?’  he  shouted,  as  he  bowed  to  Prince  Andrey. 


V 

While  awaiting  the  announcement  of  his  name  having  been  put  on  the 
committee,  Prince  Andrey  looked  up  old  acquaintances,  especially  among 
those  persons  whom  he  knew  to  be  in  power,  and  so  able  to  be  of  use 
to  him.  He  experienced  now  in  Petersburg  a  sensation  akin  to  what  he 
had  known  on  the  eve  of  a  battle,  when  he  was  fretted  by  restless  curi¬ 
osity  and  irresistibly  attracted  to  those  higher  spheres,  where  the  future 
was  in  preparation,  that  future  on  which  hung  the  fate  of  millions.  From 
the  angry  irritability  of  the  elder  generation,  from  the  curiosity  of  the 
uninitiated  and  the  reserve  of  the  initiated,  from  the  hurry  and  anxious 
absorption  of  every  one,  from  the  multiplicity  of  committees  and  com¬ 
missions — he  was  learning  of  new  ones  every  day — he  felt  that  now,  in 
the  year  1809,  there  was  in  preparation  here  in  Petersburg  some  vast 
political  contest,  and  the  commander-in-chief  in  it  was  a  mysterious 
personage  whom  he  did  not  know,  but  imagined  to  be  a  man  of  genius — 
Speransky. 

And  this  movement  of  reform,  of  which  he  knew  vaguely,  and  Speran¬ 
sky,  the  moving  spirit  of  it,  began  to  interest  him  so  keenly  that  his. 


WARANDPEACE  397 

proposed  reform  of  the  army  regulations  very  soon  fell  into  a  subordinate 
position  in  his  mind. 

Prince  Andrey  happened  to  be  most  favourably  placed  for  obtaining 
a  good  reception  in  the  highest  and  most  various  circles  of  the  Petersburg 
society  of  that  day.  The  reforming  party  welcomed  him  warmly,  and 
sought  him  out,  in  the  first  place,  because  he  had  the  reputation  of  being 
clever  and  very  well  read,  and  secondly  because  he  had  already  gained 
the  reputation  of  being  a  liberal  by  the  emancipation  of  his  serfs.  The 
party  of  the  dissatisfied  older  generation  welcomed  him  simply  as  the 
son  of  his  father,  and  reckoned  upon  his  sympathy  in  their  disapproval 
of  the  reforms.  The  feminine  world,  society,  received  him  cordially  be¬ 
cause  he  was  a  wealthy  match  of  high  rank,  and  a  person  almost  new, 
encircled  by  a  halo  of  romance  from  his  narrow  escape  from  death  and 
the  tragic  loss  of  his  young  wife.  Moreover  the  general  verdict  of  all  who 
had  known  him  previously  was  that  he  had  greatly  changed  for  the 
better  during  the  last  five  years,  had  grown  softer  and  more  manly;  that 
he  had  lost  his  old  affectation,  pride,  and  sarcastic  irony,  and  had  gained 
the  serenity  that  comes  with  years.  People  talked  of  him,  were  interested 
in  him,  and  eager  to  see  him. 

The  day  after  his  interview  with  Count  Araktcheev,  Prince  Andrey 
was  at  a  soiree  at  Count  Kotchubey’s.  He  described  to  the  latter  his 
interview  with  Sila  Andreitch.  (This  was  the  name  by  which  Kotchubey 
spoke  of  Araktcheev  with  that  vague  note  of  jeering  in  his  voice  which 
Prince  Andrey  had  noticed  in  the  anteroom  of  the  minister  of  w?ar.) 

‘Mon  cher,  even  in  this  affair  you  can’t  do  without  Mihail  Mihalovitch. 
He  has  a  hand  in  everything.  I’ll  speak  to  him.  He  promised  to  come  in 
the  evening  .  .  .’ 

‘But  what  has  Speransky  to  do  with  the  army  regulations?’  asked 
Prince  Andrey. 

Kotchubey  shook  his  head,  smiling,  as  though  wondering  at  Bolkon¬ 
sky’s  simplicity. 

‘We  were  talking  to  him  about  you  the  other  day,’  Kotchubey  con¬ 
tinued;  ‘about  your  free  cultivators  .  .  .’ 

‘Yes,  so  it  was  you,  prince,  who  freed  your  serfs?’  said  an  old  gentle¬ 
man  of  Catherine’s  court,  turning  disdainfully  to  Bolkonsky. 

‘The  little  estate  brought  me  no  income  as  it  was,’  answered  Bolkon¬ 
sky,  trying  to  minimise  what  he  had  done  to  the  old  gentleman,  to  avoid 
irritating  him  needlessly. 

‘You  are  afraid  of  being  late,’  said  the  old  gentleman,  looking  at 
Kotchubey. 

‘There’s  one  thing  I  don’t  understand,’  pursued  the  old  gentleman. 
‘Who  is  to  till  the  land  if  they  are  set  free?  It’s  easy  to  pass  laws,  but 
hard  work  to  govern.  It’s  just  the  same  as  now;  I  ask  you,  count,  who 
will  preside  over  the  courts  when  all  have  to  pass  examinations?’ 

‘Those  who  pass  the  examinations,  I  suppose,’  answered  Kotchubey, 
crossing  his  legs  and  looking  about  him. 

‘Here  I  have  Pryanitchnikov  in  my  department,  a  capital  man,  a 


398  WAR  AND  PEACE 

priceless  man,  but  he  is  sixty;  how  is  he  to  go  in  for  examinations?  .  . 

‘Yes,  that’s  a  difficult  question,  considering  that  education  is  so  re¬ 
stricted,  but  .  . 

Count  Kotchubey  did  not  finish  his  sentence;  he  got  up,  and  taking 
Prince  Andrey  by  the  arm,  went  to  meet  a  tall,  bald,  fair-haired  man  of 
forty,  who  had  just  come  in.  He  had  a  large,  open  forehead,  and  his  long 
face  was  of  a  strange,  exceptional  whiteness;  he  wore  a  blue  frock  coat 
and  had  a  cross  at  his  neck  and  a  star  on  the  left  side  of  his  breast.  It 
was  Speransky.  Prince  Andrey  recognised  him  at  once,  and  that  thrill 
passed  through  him  that  comes  at  the  great  moments  of  one’s  life. 
Whether  it  was  a  thrill  of  respect,  of  envy,  of  anticipation,  he  did  not 
know.  Speransky 's  whole  figure  had  a  peculiar  character  by  which  he 
could  be  distinguished  immediately.  Never  in  any  one  of  the  circles  in 
which  Prince  Andrey  had  moved  had  he  seen  such  calm  and  self-confi¬ 
dence  as  was  manifest  in  this  man’s  heavy  and  ungainly  movements. 
Never  in  any  one  had  he  seen  a  glance  so  resolute,  and  yet  so  soft,  as 
now  in  those  half-closed  and  moist-looking  eyes;  never  had  he  seen  such 
firmness  as  in  that  smile  that  meant  nothing.  Never  had  he  heard  a  voice 
so  delicate,  smooth,  and  soft;  but  what  struck  him  most  of  all  was  the 
tender  whiteness  of  the  face,  and  still  more  the  hands,  which  were  rather 
broad,  but  extremely  plump,  soft,  and  white.  Such  whiteness  and  softness 
Prince  Andrey  had  seen  only  in  the  faces  of  soldiers  who  had  been  a  long 
while  in  hospital. 

This  was  Speransky,  the  secretary  of  state,  the  Tsar’s  confidential 
adviser,  who  had  accompanied  him  to  Erfurt,  and  there  had  more  than 
once  seen  and  talked  with  Napoleon.  Speransky’s  eyes  did  not  shift  from 
one  face  to  another,  as  one’s  eyes  unconsciously  do  on  first  coming  into 
a  large  company,  and  he  was  in  no  hurry  to  speak.  He  spoke  slowly,  with 
conviction  that  he  would  be  listened  to,  and  looked  only  at  the  person 
to  whom  he  was  speaking.  Prince  Andrey  watched  every  word  and  gesture 
of  Speransky’s  with  peculiar  intentness.  As  is  often  the  case  with  men, 
particularly  with  those  who  criticise  their  fellows  severely,  Prince  Andrey 
on  meeting  a  new  person,  especially  one  like  Speransky,  whom  he  knew 
by  reputation,  had  always  a  hope  of  finding  in  him  a  full  perfection  of 
human  qualities. 

Speransky  said  to  Kotchubey  that  he  was  sorry  that  he  had  not  been 
able  to  come  earlier,  because  he  had  been  detained  at  the  palace.  He  did 
not  say  that  the  Tsar  had  kept  him.  And  this  affectation  of  modesty  did 
not  escape  Prince  Andrey.  When  Kotchubey  mentioned  Prince  Andrey’s 
name  to  him,  Speransky  slowly  transferred  his  eyes  to  Bolkonsky,  with 
the  same  smile  on  his  face,  and  gazed  for  a  moment  at  him  in  silence. 

‘I  am  very  glad  to  make  your  acquaintance;  I  have  heard  of  you,  as 
every  one  has,’  said  he. 

Kotchubey  said  a  few  words  about  the  reception  Araktcheev  had  given 
Bolkonsky.  Speransky’s  smile  broadened. 

‘The  chairman  of  the  Committee  of  Army  Regulations  is  a  friend  of 
mine — M.  Magnitsky,’  he  said,  articulating  fully  every  word  and  every 


WAR  AND  PEACE  399 

syllable,  ‘and,  if  you  wish  it,  I  can  make  you  acquainted  with  him.’  (He 
paused  at  the  full  stop.)  ‘I  expect  that  you  would  meet  with  sympathy  in 
him  and  a  desire  to  assist  in  anything  reasonable.’ 

A  circle  formed  at  once  round  Speransky,  and  the  same  old  gentleman, 
who  had  talked  of  his  clerk,  Pryanitchnikov,  addressed  a  question  to 
Speransky. 

Taking  no  part  in  the  conversation,  Prince  Andrey  watched  every 
gesture  of  Speransky — this  man,  only  a  little  time  before  an  insignificant 
divinity  student,  who  now  held  in  his  hands — those  plump  white  hands — 
the  fate  of  Russia,  as  Bolkonsky  thought.  Prince  Andrey  was  struck  by 
the  extraordinary  contemptuous  composure  with  which  Speransky 
answered  the  old  gentleman.  He  seemed  to- drop  him  his  condescending 
words  from  an  immeasurable  height  above  him.  When  the  old  gentleman 
began  talking  too  loud,  Speransky  smiled  and  said  that  he  could  not 
judge  of  the  advantage  or  disadvantage  of  what  the  Tsar  saw  fit  to 
command. 

After  talking  for  a  little  whiie  in  the  general  circle,  Speransky  got 
up,  and  going  to  Prince  Andrey,  drew  him  away  to  the  other  end  of  the 
room.  It  was  evident  that  he  thought  it  well  to  interest  himself  in  Bol¬ 
konsky. 

‘I  have  not  had  time  for  a  word  with  you,  prince,  in  the  engrossing 
conversation  into  which  I  was  dragged  by  that  excellent  old  gentleman,’ 
he  said,  with  a  smile  of  bland  contempt,  by  which  he  seemed  to  take  for 
granted  that  Prince  Andrey  and  himself  were  at  one  in  recognising  the 
insignificance  of  the  people  with  whom  he  had  just  been  talking.  This 
flattered  Prince  Andrey.  ‘I  have  known  you  for  a  long  while:  first  from 
your  action  with  the  serfs,  the  first  instance  of  the  kind  among  us,  an 
example  which  one  would  desire  to  find  many  following;  and,  secondly, 
from  your  being  one  of  those  kammerherrs  who  have  not  considered  them¬ 
selves  wronged  by  the  new  decree  in  regard  to  promotion  by  court 
favour,  that  has  provoked  so  much  criticism  and  censure.’ 

‘Yes,’  said  Prince  Andrey,  ‘my  father  did  not  care  for  me  to  take 
advantage  of  that  privilege;  I  began  the  service  from  the  lower  grades.’ 

‘Your  father,  a  man  of  the  older  generation,  is  undoubtedly  above 
the  level  of  our  contemporaries,  who  condemn  this  measure,  though  it  is 
Amply  an  act  of  natural  justice.’ 

‘I  imagine  there  is  some  basis  though  even  for  that  condemnation,’ 
;aid  Prince  Andrey,  trying  to  resist  the  influence  of  Speransky,  of  which 
le  began  to  be  aware.  He  disliked  agreeing  with  him  in  everything;  he 
.ried  to  oppose  him.  Prince  Andrey,  who  usually  spoke  so  well  and  so 
•eadily,  felt  a  difficulty  even  in  expressing  himself  as  he  talked  with 
Speransky.  He  was  too  much  occupied  in  observing  the  personality  of 
he  celebrated  man. 

‘In  the  interests  of  personal  ambition  perhaps,’  Speransky  slowly  put 
n  his  word. 

‘And  to  some  extent  in  the  interests  of  the  state,’  said  Prince  Andrey. 

‘How  do  you  mean?  .  .  .’  said  Speransky  slowly,  dropping  his  eyes. 


400  WARANDPEACE 

‘I  am  an  admirer  of  Montesquieu,’  said  Prince  Andrey.  ‘And  his  theory 
that  the  principle  of  monarchies  is  honour  seems  to  me  incontestable. 
Certain  rights  and  privileges  of  the  nobility  appear  to  me  to  be  means 
of  maintaining  that  sentiment.’ 

The  smile  vanished  from  Speransky’s  white  face,  and  his  countenance 
gained  greatly  by  its  absence.  Probably  Prince  Andrey ’s  idea  seemed  to 
him  an  interesting  one. 

‘If  you  look  at  the  question  from  that  point  of  view,’  he  began,  pro¬ 
nouncing  French  with  obvious  difficulty,  and  speaking  even  more  de¬ 
liberately  than  he  had  done  when  speaking  Russian,  but  still  with  per¬ 
fect  composure.  He  said  that  honour,  Vhonneur,  cannot  be  supported  by 
privileges  prejudicial  to  the  working  of  the  government  service;  that 
honour,  Vhonneur,  is  either  a  negative  concept  of  avoidance  of  repre¬ 
hensible  actions  or  a  certain  source  of  emulation  in  obtaining  the  com¬ 
mendation  and  rewards  in  which  it  finds  expression. 

His  arguments  were  condensed,  simple,  and  clear.  ‘The  institution  that 
best  maintains  that  honour,  the  source  of  emulation,  is  an  institution 
akin  to  the  Legion  of  Honour  of  the  great  Emperor  Napoleon,  which 
does  not  detract  from  but  conduces  to  the  successful  working  of  the 
government  service,  and  not  a  class  or  court  privilege.’ 

‘I  do  not  dispute  that,  but  there  is  no  denying  that  the  court  privileges 
did  attain  the  same  object,’  said  Prince  Andrey.  ‘Every  courtier  thought 
himself  bound  to  do  credit  to  his  position.’ 

‘But  you  did  not  care  to  profit  by  it,  prince,’  said  Speransky,  showing 
with  a  smile  that  he  wished  to  conclude  with  civility  an  argument  em¬ 
barrassing  for  his  companion.  ‘If  you  will  do  me  the  honour  to  call  on 
Wednesday,  then  I  shall  have  seen  Magnitsky,  and  shall  have  something 
to  tell  you  that  may  interest  you,  and  besides  I  shall  have  the  pleasure 
of  more  conversation  with  you.’  Closing  his  eyes,  he  bowed,  and  trying 
to  escape  unnoticed,  he  went  out  of  the  drawing-room  without  saying 
good-bye,  a  la  jrangaise. 


VI 

During  the  first  part  of  his  stay  in  Petersburg,  Prince  Andrey  found  all 
the  habits  of  thought  he  had  formed  in  his  solitary  life  completely  ob¬ 
scured  by  the  trifling  cares  which  engrossed  him  in  Petersburg. 

In  the  evening  on  returning  home  he  noted  down  in  his  memorandum- 
book  four  or  five  unavoidable  visits  or  appointments  for  fixed  hours. 
The  mechanism  of  life,  the  arrangement  of  his  day,  so  as  to  be  in  time 
everywhere,  absorbed  the  greater  part  of  his  vital  energy.  He  did  noth¬ 
ing,  thought  of  nothing  even,  and  had  no  time  to  think,  but  only  talked, 
and  talked  successfully,  of  what  he  had  had  time  to  think  about  in  the 
past  in  the  country. 

He  sometimes  noticed  with  dissatisfaction  that  it  happened  to  him  to 
repeat  the  same  remarks  on  the  same  day  to  different  audiences.  But  he 


WARANDPEACE  4or 

was  so  busy  for  whole  days  together  that  he  had  no  time  to  reflect  that 
he  was  thinking  of  nothing.  Just  as  at  their  first  meeting  at  Kotchubey’s, 
Speransky  had  a  long  and  confidential  talk  with  Prince  Andrey  on 
Wednesday  at  his  own  home,  where  he  received  Bolkonsky  alone  and 
made  a  great  impression  on  him. 

Prince  Andrey  regarded  the  immense  mass  of  men  as  contemptible 
and  worthless  creatures,  and  he  had  such  a  longing  to  find  in  some  other 
man  the  living  pattern  of  that  perfection  after  which  he  strove  himself, 
that  he  was  ready  to  believe  that  in  Speransky  he  had  found  this  ideal 
of  a  perfectly  rational  and  virtuous  man.  Had  Speransky  belonged  to  the 
same  world  as  Prince  Andrey,  had  he  been  of  the  same  breeding  and  moral 
traditions,  Bolkonsky  would  soon  have  detected  the  weak,  human,  un¬ 
heroic  sides  of  his  character;  but  this  logical  turn  of  mind  was  strange 
to  him  and  inspired  him  with  the  more  respect  from  his  not  fully  under¬ 
standing  it.  Besides  this,  Speransky,  either  because  he  appreciated  Prince 
Andrey’s  abilities  or  because  he  thought  it  as  well  to  secure  his  adherence, 
showed  off  his  calm,  impartial  sagacity  before  Prince  Andrey,  and  flat¬ 
tered  him  with  that  delicate  flattery  that  goes  hand  in  hand  with  conceit, 
and  consists  in  a  tacit  assumption  that  one’s  companion  and  oneself  are 
the  only  people  capable  of  understanding  all  the  folly  of  the  rest  of  the 
world  and  the  sagacity  and  profundity  of  their  own  ideas. 

In  the  course  of  their  long  conversation  on  Wednesday  evening  Sper¬ 
ansky  said  more  than  once:  ‘Among  us  everything  that  is  out  of  the  com¬ 
mon  rut  of  tradition  is  looked  at,’  .  .  .  or  with  a  smile:  ‘But  we  want  the 
wolves  to  be  well  fed  and  the  sheep  to  be  unhurt.’  ...  or:  ‘They  can’t 
grasp  that’  .  .  .  and  always  with  an  expression  that  said:  ‘We,  you  and 
I,  we  understand  what  they  are  and  who  we  are.’ 

This  first  long  conversation  with  Speransky  only  strengthened  the 
feeling  with  which  Prince  Andrey  had  seen  him  for  the  first  time.  He  saw 
in  him  a  man  of  vast  intellect  and  sober,  accurate  judgment,  who  had 
attained  power  by  energy  and  persistence,  and  was  using  it  for  the  good 
of  Russia  only.  In  Prince  Andrey’s  eyes  Speransky  was  precisely  the  man 
— finding  a  rational  explanation  for  all  the  phenomena  of  life,  recognising 
as  of  importance  only  what  was  rational  and  capable  of  applying  the 
standard  of  reason  to  everything— that  he  would  have  liked  to  be  him¬ 
self.  Everything  took  a  form  so  simple,  so  clear  in  Speransky’s  exposition 
of  it  that  Prince  Andrey  could  not  help  agreeing  with  him  on  every  subject. 
If  he  argued  and  raised  objections  it  was  simply  with  the  express  object  of 
being  independent  and  not  being  entirely  swayed  by  Speransky’s  ideas. 
Everything  was  right,  everything  was  as  it  should  b?0  yet  one  thing  dis¬ 
concerted  Prince  Andrey.  That  was  the  cold,  mirror-like  eye  of  Speransky, 
which  seemed  to  refuse  all  admittance  to  his  soul,  and  his  flabby,  white 
hand,  at  which  Prince  Andrey  instinctively  looked,  as  one  usually  does 
look  at  the  hands  of  men  who  have  power.  That  mirror-like  eye  and  that 
flabby  hand  vaguely  irritated  Prince  Andrey.  He  was  disagreeably  struck 
too  by  the  excessive  contempt  for  other  people  that  he  observed  in  Speran¬ 
sky,  and  by  the  variety  of  the  lines  of  argument  he  employed  in  support  of 


4°2  WARANDPEACE 

his  views.  He  made  use  of  every  possible  weapon  of  thought,  except 
analogy,  and  his  transitions  from  one  line  of  defence  to  another  seemed 
to  Prince  Andrey  too  violent.  At  one  time  he  took  his  stand  as  a  practical 
man  and  found  fault  with  idealists,  then  he  took  a  satirical  line  and 
jeered  sarcastically  at  his  opponents,  then  maintained  a  strictly  logical 
position,  or  flew  off  into  the  domain  of  metaphysics.  (This  last  resource 
was  one  he  was  particularly  fond  of  using  in  argument.)  He  raised  the 
question  into  the  loftiest  region  of  metaphysics,  passed  to  definitions  of 
space,  of  time,  and  of  thought,  and  carrying  off  arguments  to  confute 
his  opponent,  descended  again  to  the  plane  of  the  original  discussion. 
What  impressed  Prince  Andrey  as  the  leading  characteristic  of  Speran- 
sky’s  mind  was  his  unhesitating,  unmovable  faith  in  the  power  and  au¬ 
thority  of  the  reason.  It  was  plain  that  Speransky’s  brain  could  never 
admit  the  idea — so  common  with  Prince  Andrey — that  one  can  never 
after  all  express  all  one  thinks.  It  had  never  occurred  to  him  to  doubt 
whether  all  he  thought  and  all  he  believed  might  not  be  meaningless 
nonsense.  And  that  peculiarity  of  Speransky’s  mind  was  what  attracted 
Prince  Andrey  most. 

During  the  first  period  of  his  acquaintance  with  Speransky,  Prince 
Andrey  had  a  passionate  and  enthusiastic  admiration  for  him,  akin  to 
what  he  had  once  felt  for  Bonaparte.  The  very  fact  that  Speransky  was 
the  son  of  a  priest,  which  enabled  many  foolish  persons  to  regard  him  with 
vulgar  contempt,  as  a  member  of  a  despised  class,  made  Prince  Andrey 
peculiarly  delicate  in  dealing  with  his  own  feeling  for  Speransky,  and 
unconsciously  strengthened  it  in  him. 

On  that  first  evening  that  Bolkonsky  spent  with  him,  they  talked  of 
the  commission  for  the  revision  of  the  legal  code;  and  Speransky  described 
ironically  to  Prince  Andrey  how  the  commission  had  been  sitting  for  one 
hundred  and  fifty  years,  had  cost  millions,  and  had  done  nothing,  and 
how  Rosenkampf  had  pasted  labels  on  all  the  various  legislative  codes. 

‘And  that’s  all  the  state  has  got  for  the  millions  it  has  spent!  ’  said  he. 
‘We  want  to  give  new  judicial  powers  to  the  Senate,  and  we  have  no  laws. 
That’s  why  it  is  a  sin  for  men  like  you,  prince,  not  to  be  in  the  government.’ 

Prince  Andrey  observed  that  some  education  in  jurisprudence  was 
necessary  for  such  work,  and  that  he  had  none. 

‘But  no  one  has,  so  what  would  you  have?  It’s  a  circulus  viciosus,  which 
one  must  force  some  way  out  of.’ 

Within  a  week  Prince  Andrey  was  a  member  of  the  committee  for  the 
reconstruction  of  the  army  regulations,  and — a  thing  he  would  never 
have  expected — -he  was  also  chairman  of  a  section  of  the  commission 
for  the  revision  of  the  legal  code.  At  Speransky’s  request  he  took  the  first 
part  of  the  civil  code  under  revision;  and  with  the  help  of  the  Napoleonic 
Code  and  the  Code  of  Justinian  he  worked  at  the  revision  of  the  section 
Personal  Rights. 


WAR  'AND  PEACE 


4°3 


VII 

Two  years  before,  at  the  beginning  of  1808,  Pierre  had  returned  to 
Petersburg  from  his  visits  to  his  estates,  and  by  no  design  of  his  own 
had  taken  a  leading  position  among  the  freemasons  in  Petersburg.  He 
organised  dining  and  funeral  lodges,  enrolled  new  members,  took  an 
active  part  in  the  formation  of  different  lodges,  and  the  acquisition  of 
authentic  acts.  He  spent  his  money  on  the  construction  of  temples,  and, 
to  the  best  of  his  powers,  made  up  the  arrears  of  alms,  a  matter  in  which 
the  majority  of  members  were  niggardly  and  irregular.  At  his  own  ex¬ 
pense,  almost  unaided,  he  maintained  the  poorhouse  built  by  the  order 
in  Petersburg. 

Meanwhile  his  life  ran  on  in  the  old  way,  yielding  to  the  same  tempta¬ 
tions  and  the  same  laxity.  He  liked  a  good  dinner  and  he  liked  strong 
drink;  and,  though  he  thought  it  immoral  and  degrading  to  yield  to  them, 
he  was  unable  to  resist  the  temptations  of  the  bachelor  society  in  which 
he  moved. 

Yet  even  in  the  whirl  of  his  active  work  and  his  dissipations,  Pierre 
•began,  after  the  lapse  of  a  year,  to  feel  more  and  more  as  though  the 
ground  of  freemasonry  on  which  he  had  taken  his  stand  was  slipping  away 
under  his  feet  the  more  firmly  he  tried  to  rest  on  it.  At  the  same  time  he 
felt  that  the  further  the  ground  slipped  from  under  his  feet,  the  more 
close  was  his  bondage  to  the  order.  When  he  had  entered  the  brotherhood 
he  had  felt  like  a  man  who  confidently  puts  his  foot  down  on  the  smooth 
surface  of  a  bog.  Having  put  one  foot  down,  he  had  sunk  in;  and  to  con¬ 
vince  himself  of  the  firmness  of  the  ground  on  which  he  stood,  he  had 
put  the  other  foot  down  on  it  too,  and  had  sunk  in  further,  had  stuck 
in  the  mud,  and  now  was  against  his  own  will  struggling  knee-deep  in 
the  bog. 

Osip  Alexyevitch  was  not  in  Petersburg.  (He  had  withdrawn  from  all 
participation  in  the  affairs  of  the  Petersburg  lodge,  and  now  never  left 
Moscow.)  All  the  brothers  who  were  members  of  the  lodge  were  people 
Pierre  knew  in  daily  life,  and  it  was  difficult  for  him  to  see  in  them  simply 
brothers  in  freemasonry,  and  not  Prince  B.,  nor  Ivan  Vasilyevitch  D., 
whom  he  knew  in  private  life  mostly  as  persons  of  weak  and  worthless 
character.  Under  their  masonic  aprons  and  emblems  he  could  not  help 
seeing  the  uniforms  and  the  decorations  they  were  striving  after  in 
mundane  life.  Often  after  collecting  the  alms  and  reckoning  up  twenty 
to  thirty  roubles  promised — and  for  the  most  part  left  owing — from  some 
ten  members,  of  whom  half  were  as  -well-off  as  Pierre  himself,  he  thought 
of  the  masonic  vow  by  which  every  brother  promised  to  give  up  all  his 
belongings  for  his  neighbour;  and  doubts  stirred  in  his  soul,  from  which 
he  tried  to  escape. 

He  divided  all  the  brothers  he  knew  into  four  classes.  In  the  first 
class  he  reckoned  brothers  who  took  no  active  interest  in  the  affairs  of 

1 


4°4  WAR  AND  PEACE 

the  lodges  nor  in  the  service  of  humanity,  but  were  occupied  exclusively 
with  the  scientific  secrets  of  the  order,  with  questions  relating  to  the 
threefold  designation  of  God,  or  the  three  first  elements  of  things— 
sulphur,  mercury,  and  salt — or  the  significance  of  the  square  and  all  the 
figures  of  the  Temple  of  Solomon.  Pierre  respected  this  class  of  masons, 
to  which  the  elder  brothers  principally  belonged — in  it  Pierre  reckoned 
Osip  Alexyevitch — but  he  did  not  share  their  interests.  His  heart  was 
not  in  the  mystic  side  of  freemasonry. 

In  the  second  class  Pierre  included  himself,  and  brothers  like  himself, 
wavering,  seeking,  and  not  yet  finding  in  freemasonry  a  straight  and  fully 
understood  path  for  themselves,  but  still  hoping  to  find  it. 

In  the  third  class  he  reckoned  brothers — they  formed  the  majority — 
who  saw  in  freemasonry  nothing  but  an  external  form  and  ceremonial,  and 
valued  the  strict  performance  of  that  external  form  without  troubling 
themselves  about  its  import  or  significance.  Such  were  Villarsky,  and 
the  Grand  Master  of  the  lodge  indeed. 

The  fourth  class,  too,  included  a  great  number  of  the  brothers  espe¬ 
cially  among  those  who  had  entered  the  brotherhood  of  late.  These  were 
men  who,  as  far  as  Pierre  could  observe,  had  no  belief  in  anything,  nor 
desire  of  anything,  but  had  entered  the  brotherhood  simply  for  the  sake 
of  getting  into  touch  with  the  wealthy  young  men,  powerful  through  their, 
connections  or  their  rank,  who  were  numerous  in  the  lodge. 

Pierre  began  to  feel  dissatisfied  with  what  he  was  doing.  Freemasonry, 
at  least  as  he  knew  it  here,  seemed  to  him  sometimes  to  rest  simply  upon 
formal  observances.  He  never  dreamed  of  doubting  of  freemasonry  itself, 
but  began  to  suspect  that  Russian  freemasonry  had  got  on  to  a  false  track, 
and  was  deviating  from  its  original  course.  And  so  towards  the  end  of 
the  year  Pierre  went  abroad  to  devote  himself  to  the  higher  mysteries 
of  the  order. 

It  was  in  the  summer  of  1809  that  Pierre  returned  to  Petersburg.  From 
the  correspondence  that  passed  between  freemasons  in  Russia  and  abroad, 
it  was  known  that  Bezuhov  had  succeeded  in  gaining  the  confidence  of 
many  persons  in  high  positions  abroad;  that  he  had  been  initiated  into 
many  mysteries,  had  been  raised  to  a  higher  grade,  and  was  bringing 
back  with  him  much  that  would  conduce  to  the  progress  of  freemasonry  < 
in  Russia.  The  Petersburg  freemasons  all  came  to  see  him,  tried  to  in-  i 
gratiate  themselves  with  him,  and  all  fancied  that  he  had  something  in 
reserve  that  he  was  preparing  for  them. 

A  solemn  assembly  of  the  lodge  of  the  second  order  was  arranged,  at 
which  Pierre  promised  to  communicate  the  message  he  had  to  give  the 
Petersburg  brothers  from  the  highest  leaders  of  the  order  abroad.  The 
assembly  was  a  full  one.  After  the  usual  ceremonies  Pierre  got  up  and 
began  to  speak: 

‘Dear  brothers/  he  began,  blushing  and  hesitating,  with  a  written  1 
speech  in  his  hand,  ‘it  is  not  enough  to  guard  our  secrets  in  the  seclusion 


WARANDPEACE  405 

of  the  lodge, — what  is  needed  is  to  act  ...  to  act.  .  .  .  We  are  falling 
into  slumber,  and  we  need  to  act.’ 

Pierre  opened  his  manuscript  and  began  to  read. 

‘For  the  propagation  of  the  pure  truth  and  the  attainment  of  virtue,’ 
he  read,  ‘we  must  purify  men  from  prejudice,  diffuse  principles  in  har¬ 
mony  with  the  spirit  of  the  times,  undertake  the  education  of  the  younger 
generation,  ally  ourselves  by  indissoluble  ties  with  the  most  enlightened 
men,  boldly,  and  at  the  same  time  prudently,  overcome  superstition, 
infidelity,  and  folly,  and  form  of  those  devoted  to  us  men  linked  together 
by  a  common  aim  and  possessed  of  power  and  authority. 

‘For  the  attainment  of  this  aim  we  must  secure  to  virtue  the  pre¬ 
ponderance  over  vice;  we  must  strive  that  the  honest  man  may  obtain 
his  eternal  reward  even  in  this  world.  But  in  those  great  projects  we  are 
very  gravely  hindered  by  existing  political  institutions.  What  is  to  be 
done  in  the  existing  state  of  affairs?  Are  we  to  welcome  revolutions,  to 
overthrow  everything,  to  repel  violence  by  violence?  .  .  .  No,  we  are 
very  far  from  that.  Every  reform  by  violence  is  to  be  deprecated,  because 
it  does  little  to  correct  the  evil  while  men  remain  as  they  are,  and  because 
wisdom  has  no  need  of  violence. 

‘The  whole  plan  of  our  order  should  be  founded  on  the  training  of 
men  of  character  and  virtue,  bound  together  by  unity  of  conviction  and 
aim, — the  aim  of  suppressing  vice  and  folly  everywhere  by  every  means, 
and  protecting  talent  and  virtue,  raising  deserving  persons  out  of  the 
dust  and  enrolling  them  in  our  brotherhood.  Only  then  will  our  order 
obtain  the  power  insensibly  to  tie  the  hands  of  the  promoters  of  disorder, 
and  to  control  them  without  their  being  aware  of  it.  In  a  word,  we  want 
to  found  a  form  of  government  holding  universal  sway,  which  should  be 
diffused  over  the  whole  world  without  encroaching  on  civil  obligations; 
under  which  all  other  governments  could  continue  in  their  ordinary  course 
and  do  all,  except  what  hinders  the  great  aim  of  our  order,  that  is,  the 
triumph  of  virtue  over  vice.  This  aim  is  that  of  Christianity  itself.  It  has 
taught  men  to  be  holy  and  good,  and  for  their  own  profit  to  follow  the 
precept  and  example  of  better  and  wiser  men. 

‘In  times  when  all  was  plunged  in  darkness,  exhortation  alone  was  of 
course  enough;  the  novelty  of  truth  gave  it  peculiar  force,  but  nowadays 
far  more  powerful  means  are  necessary  for  us.  Now  a  man  guided  by  his 
senses  needs  to  find  in  virtue  a  charm  palpable  to  the  senses.  The  passions 
cannot  be  uprooted;  we  must  only  attempt  to  direct  them  to  a  noble 
object,  and  so  every  one  should  be  able  to  find  satisfaction  for  his  passions 
within  the  bounds  of  virtue,  and  our  order  should  provide  means  to  that 
end.  As  soon  as  we  have  a  certain  number  of  capable  men  in  every  state, 
each  of  them  training  again  two  others,  and  all  keeping  in  close  co¬ 
operation,  then  everything  will  be  possible  for  our  order,  which  has  already 
done  much  in  secret  for  the  good  of  humanity.’ 

This  speech  did  not  merely  make  a  great  impression,  it  produced  a  thrill 
of  excitement  in  the  lodge.  The  majority  of  the  brothers,  seeing  in  this 
speech  dangerous  projects  of  ‘illuminism,’  to  Pierre’s  surprise  received  it 


40 6  WARANDPEACE 

coldly.  The  Grand  Master  began  to  raise  objections  to  it;  Pierre  began 
to  expound  his  own  views  with  greater  and  greater  heat.  It  was  long 
since  there  had  been  so  stormy  a  meeting.  The  lodge  split  up  into  parties; 
one  party  opposed  Pierre,  accusing  him  of  ‘illuminism’;  the  other  sup¬ 
ported  him.  Pierre  was  for  the  first  time  at  this  meeting  impressed  by 
the  endless  multiplicity  of  men’s  minds,  which  leads  to  no  truth  being  ever 
seen  by  two  persons  alike. 

Even  those  among  the  members  who  seemed  to  be  on  his  side  inter¬ 
preted  him  in  their  own  way,  with  limitations  and  variations,  to  which 
he  could  not  agree.  What  Pierre  chiefly  desired  was  always  to  transmit 
his  thought  to  another  exactly  as  he  conceived  it  himself. 

At  the  conclusion  of  the  sitting,  the  Grand  Master  spoke  with  ill-will 
and  irony  to  Bezuhov  of  his  hasty  temper;  and  observed  that  it  was 
not  love  of  virtue  alone,  but  a  passion  for  strife,  that  had  guided  him 
in  the  discussion. 

Pierre  made  him  no  reply,  but  briefly  inquired  whether  his  proposal 
would  be  accepted.  lie  was  told  that  it  would  not  be;  and  without  waiting 
for  the  usual  formalities,  he  left  the  lodge  and  went  home. 


VIII 

Again  Pierre  was  overtaken  by  that  despondency  he  so  dreaded.  For 
three  days  after  the  delivery  of  his  speech  at  the  lodge  he  lay  on  a  sofa 
at  home,  seeing  no  one,  and  going  nowhere. 

At  this  time  he  received  a  letter  from  his  wife  who  besought  him  to 
see  her,  wrote  of  her  unhappiness  on  his  account,  and  her  desire  to  devote 
her  whole  life  to  him. 

At  the  end  of  the  letter  she  informed  him  that  in  a  day  or  two  she 
would  arrive  in  Petersburg  from  abroad. 

The  letter  was  followed  up  by  one  of  the  freemasons  whom  Pierre 
respected  least  bursting  in  upon  his  solitude.  Turning  the  conversation 
upon  Pierre’s  matrimonial  affairs,  he  gave  him,  by  way  of  brotherly 
counsel,  his  opinion  that  his  severity  to  his  wife  was  wrong,  and  that 
Pierre  was  departing  from  the  first  principles  of  freemasonry  in  not 
forgiving  the  penitent.  At  the  same  time  his  mother-in-law,  Prince  Vas¬ 
sily’s  wife,  sent  to  him,  beseeching  him  to  visit  her,  if  only  for  a  few 
minytes,  to  discuss  a  matter  of  great  importance.  Pierre  saw  there  was 
a  conspiracy  against  him,  that  they  meant  to  reconcile  him  with  his 
wife,  and  he  did  not  even  dislike  this  in  the  mood  in  which  he  then  was. 
Nothing  mattered  to  him;  Pierre  regarded  nothing  in  life  as  a  matter 
of  great  consequence,  and  under  the  influence  of  the  despondency  which 
had  taken  possession  of  him,  he  attached  no  significance  either  to  his  own 
freedom  or  to  having  his  own  way  by  punishing  his  wife. 

‘No  one  is  right,  no  one  is  to  blame,  and  so  she,  too,  is  not  to  blame,’ 
he  thought.  If  Pierre  did  not  at  once  give  his  consent  to  being  reunited 
to  his  wife,  it  was  simply  because  in  the  despondent  state  into  which  he 


WAR  AND  PEACE  407 

had  lapsed,  he  was  incapable  of  taking  any  line  of  action.  Had  his  wife 
come  to  him,  he  could  not  now  have  driven  her  away.  Could  it  matter, 
beside  the  questions  that  were  absorbing  Pierre,  whether  he  lived  with 
his  wife  or  not? 

Without  answering  either  his  wife  or  his  mother-in-law,  Pierre  at  once 
set  off  late  in  the  evening,  and  drove  to  Moscow  to  see  Osip  Alexyevitch. 

This  is  what  Pierre  wrote  in  his  diary. 

‘Moscow,  November  17. — I  have  only  just  come  from  seeing  my  bene¬ 
factor,  and  I  hasten  to  note  down  all  I  have  been  feeling.  Osip  Alexyevitch 
lives  in  poverty,  and  has  been  for  three  years  past  suffering  from  a  painful 
disease  of  the  bladder.  No  one  has  ever  heard  from  him  a  groan  or  a 
word  of  complaint.  From  morning  till  late  at  night,  except  at  the  times 
when  he  partakes  of  the  very  plainest  food,  he  is  working  at  science. 
He  received  me  graciously,  and  made  me  sit  down  on  the  bed  on  which 
he  was  lying.  I  made  him  the  sign  of  the  Knights  of  the  East  and  of 
Jerusalem;  he  responded  with  the  same,  and  asked  me  with  a  gentle 
smile  what  I  had  learned  and  gained  in  the  Prussian  and  Scottish  lodges. 
I  told  him  everything  as  best  I  could,  repeating  to  him  the  principles  of 
action  I  had  proposed  in  our  Petersburg  lodge,  and  telling  him  of  the 
unfavourable  reception  given  me,  and  the  rupture  between  me  and  the 
brothers.  Osip  Alexyevitch,  after  some  silent  thought,  laid  all  his  own 
view  of  the  subject  before  me,  which  immediately  threw  light  on  all  the 
past  and  all  the  course  that  lies  before  me.  He  surprised  me  by  asking 
whether  I  remembered  the  threefold  aim  of  the  order — ( 1 )  the  preserva¬ 
tion  and  study  of  the  holy  mystery;  (2)  the  purification  and  reformation 
of  self  for  its  reception;  and  (3)  the  improvement  of  the  human  race 
through  striving  for  such  purification.  Which,  he  asked,  was  the  first  and 
greatest  of  those  three  aims?  Undoubtedly  self-reformation  and  self- 
purification.  It  is  only  towards  that  aim  that  we  can  always  strive  inde¬ 
pendently  of  all  circumstances.  But  at  the  same  time  it  is  just  that  aim 
which  requires  of  us  the  greatest  effort,  and  therefore,  led  astray  by 
pride,  we  let  that  aim  drop,  and  either  strive  to  penetrate  to  the  mystery 
which  we  are  unworthy  in  our  impurity  to  receive,  or  seek  after  the 
reformation  of  the  human  race,  while  we  are  ourselves  setting  an  example 
of  vice  and  abomination.  “Uluminism”  is  not  a  pure  doctrine  precisely 
because  it  is  seduced  by  worldly  activity  and  puffed  up  with  pride.  On 
this  ground  Osip  Alexyevitch  censured  my  speech  and  all  I  am  doing. 
At  the  bottom  of  my  heart  I  agreed  with  him.  Talking  of  my  domestic 
affairs,  he  said  to  me:  “The  first  duty  of  a  mason,  as  I  have  told  you,  is 
the  perfection  of  himself.  But  often  we  imagine  that  by  removing  all  the 
difficulties  of  our  life,  we  may  better  attain  this  aim.  It  is  quite  the  con- 
i  trary,  sir,”  he  said  to  me:  “it  is  only  in  the  midst  of  the  cares  of  the 
world  that  we  can  reach  the  three  great  aims — (1)  self-knowledge,  for 
a  man  can  know  himself  only  by  comparison;  (2)  greater  perfection, 
which  can  only  be  obtained  by  conflict;  and  (3)  the  attainment  of  the 
.  chief  virtue — love  of  death.  Only  the  corruptions  of  life  can  show  us 
all  its  vanity,  and  strengthen  our  innate  love  for  death,  or  rather  regenera- 


408  WAR  AND  PEACE 

tion  into  new  life.”  These  words  were  the  more  remarkable  as  Osip 
Alexyevitch,  in  spite  of  his  grievous  physical  sufferings,  is  never  weary  of 
life,  though  he  loves  death,  for  which  he  does  not,  in  spite  of  all  the 
purity  and  loftiness  of  his  inner  man,  yet  feel  himself  prepared.  Then  my 
benefactor  explained  to  me  fully  the  significance  of  the  great  square  of 
creation,  and  pointed  out  that  the  third  and  the  seventh  number  are  the 
basis  of  everything.  He  counselled  me  not  to  withdraw  from  co-operation 
with  the  Petersburg  brothers,  and  while  undertaking  duties  only  of  the 
second  order  in  the  lodge,  to  endeavour  to  draw  the  brothers  away  from 
the  seductions  of  pride,  and  to  turn  them  into  the  true  path  of  self- 
knowledge  and  self-perfection.  Moreover,  for  myself  personally,  he  ad¬ 
vised  me  first  of  all  to  keep  a  watch  over  myself,  and  with  that  aim  he 
gave  me  a  manuscript-book,  the  one  in  which  I  am  writing  now,  and  am 
to  note  down  all  my  actions  in  the  future.’ 

‘Petersburg,  November  23.- — I  am  reconciled  with  my  wife.  My  mother- 
in-law  came  to  me  in  tears,  and  said  that  Ellen  was  here,  and  that  she 
besought  me  to  hear  her;  that  she  was  innocent,  that  she  was  miserable 
at  my  desertion  of  her,  and  a  great  deal  more.  I  knew  that  if  I  once  let 
myself  see  her,  I  should  not  be  able  to  refuse  to  accede  to  her  wishes.  In 
my  uncertainty,  I  did  not  know  to  whose  help  and  advice  to  have  recourse. 
If  my  benefactor  had  been  here,  he  would  have  told  me  what  to  do.  I 
retired  to  my  own  room,  read  over  the  letters  of  Osip  Alexyevitch,  recalled 
my  conversations  with  him,  and  from  all  that  I  reached  the  conclusion 
that  I  ought  not  to  refuse  a  suppliant,  and  ought  to  hold  out  a  helping 
hand  to  every  one,  and,  above  all,  to  a  person  so  closely  connected  with 
me,  and  that  I  must  bear  my  cross.  But  if  I  forgive  her  for  the  sake  of 
doing  right,  at  least  let  my  reunion  with  her  have  a  spiritual  end  only. 
So  I  decided,  and  so  I  wrote  to  Osip  Alexyevitch.  I  said  to  my  wife  that 
I  begged  her  to  forget  all  the  past,  that  I  begged  her  to  forgive  whatever 
wrong  I  might  have  done  her,  and  that  I  had  nothing  to  forgive  her.  It 
was  a  joy  to  me  to  tell  her  that.  May  she  never  know  how  painful  it  was 
to  me  to  see  her  again!  I  have  installed  myself  in  the  upper  rooms  in  this 
great  house,  and  I  am  conscious  of  a  happy  feeling  of  beginning  anew.’ 


IX 

At  that  time,  as  always  indeed,  the  exalted  society  that  met  at  court 
and  at  the  great  balls  was  split  up  into  several  circles,  each  of  which 
had  its  special  tone.  The  largest  among  them  was  the  French  circle — 
supporting  the  Napoleonic  alliance — the  circle  of  Count  Rumyantsev 
and  Caulaincourt.  In  this  circle  Ellen  took  a  leading  position,  as  soon 
as  she  had  established  herself  in  her  husband’s  house  in  Petersburg.  She 
received  the  members  of  the  French  embassy,  and  a  great  number  of 
people,  noted  for  their  wit  and  their  politeness,  and  belonging  to  that 
political  section. 

Ellen  had  been  at  Erfurt  at  the  time  of  the  famous  meeting  of  the 


WARANDPEACE  409 

Emperors;  and  had  there  formed  close  ties  with  all  the  notable  figures 
in  Europe  belonging  to  the  Napoleonic  circle.  In  Erfurt  she  had  been 
brilliantly  successful.  Napoleon  himself,  seeing  her  at  the  theatre,  had 
asked  who  she  was,  and  admired  her  beauty.  Her  triumphs  in  the  character 
of  a  beautiful  and  elegant  woman  did  not  surprise  Pierre,  for  with  years 
she  had  become  even  more  beautiful  than  before.  But  what  did  surprise 
him  was  that  during  the  last  two  years  his  wife  had  succeeded  in  gaining 
a  reputation  as  ‘a  charming  woman,  as  witty  as  she  is  beautiful,’  as  was 
said  of  her.  The  distinguished  Prince  de  Ligne  wrote  her  letters  of  eight 
pages.  Bilibin  treasured  up  his  mots  to  utter  them  for  the  first  time  before 
Countess  Bezuhov.  To  be  received  in  Countess  Bezuhov’s  salon  was 
looked  upon  as  a  certificate  of  intellect.  Young  men  read  up  subjects 
before  one  of  Ellen’s  soirees,  so  as  to  be  able  to  talk  of  something  in  her 
salon,  and  secretaries  of  the  embassy,  and  even  ambassadors,  confided 
diplomatic  secrets  to  her,  so  that  Ellen  was  in  a  way  a  power.  It  was 
with  a  strange  feeling  of  perplexity  and  alarm  that  Pierre,  who  knew  she 
was  very  stupid,  sometimes  at  her  dinners  and  soirees,  listened  to  con¬ 
versation  about  politics,  poetry,  and  philosophy.  At  these  soirees  he  ex¬ 
perienced  a  sensation  such  as  a  conjuror  must  feel  who  expects  every 
moment  that  his  trick  will  be  discovered.  But  either  because  stupidity 
was  just  what  was  needed  for  the  successful  management  of  such  a  salon, 
or  because  those  who  were  deceived  took  pleasure  in  the  deception,  the 
cheat  was  not  discovered,  and  the  reputation  of  ‘a  charming  woman’ 
clung  so  persistently  to  Elena  Vassilyevna  Bezuhov,  that  she  could  utter 
the  vulgarest  and  stupidest  speeches,  and  every  one  was  just  as  enthusi¬ 
astic  over  every  word,  and  eagerly  found  in  it  a  profound  meaning  of 
which  she  did  not  dream  herself. 

Pierre  was  exactly  the  husband  needed  by  this  brilliant  society  woman. 
He  was  that  absent-minded,  eccentric,  grand  seigneur  of  a  husband,  who 
got  in  nobody’s  way  and  far  from  spoiling  the  general  impression  of  the 
highest  tone  in  her  drawing-room,  formed  by  his  contrast  with  his  wife’s 
elegance  and  tact  an  advantageous  foil  to  her.  Pierre’s  continual  con¬ 
centration  on  immaterial  interests  during  the  last  two  years,  and  his 
genuine  contempt  for  everything  else,  gave  him  in  his  wife’s  circle,  which 
did  not  interest  him,  that  tone  of  unconcern,  indifference,  and  benevolence 
towards  all  alike,  which  cannot  be  acquired  artificially,  and  for  that 
reason  commands  involuntary  respect.  He  entered  his  wife’s  drawing¬ 
room  as  though  it  were  a  theatre,  was  acquainted  with  every  one,  equally 
affable  to  all,  and  to  all  equally  indifferent.  Sometimes  he  took  part  in 
conversation  on  some  subject  that  interested  him,  and  then,  without 
any  consideration  whether  the  ‘gentlemen  of  the  embassy’  were  present 
or  not,  he  mumbled  out  his  opinions,  which  were  by  no  means  always  in 
harmony  with  the  received  catchwords  of  the  time.  But  the  public  esti¬ 
mate  of  the  eccentric  husband  of  ‘the  most  distinguished  woman  in  Peters¬ 
burg’  was  now  so  well  established  that  no  one  took  his  sallies  seriously. 

Among  the  numerous  young  men,  who  were  daily  to  be  seen  in  Ellen’s 
house,  Boris  Drubetskoy,  who  had  by  now  achieved  marked  success  in 


4io  WARANDPEACE 

the  service,  was,  after  Ellen's  return  from  Erfurt,  the  most  intimate 
friend  of  the  Bezuhov  household.  Ellen  used  to  call  him  ‘mon  page,’  and 
treated  him  like  a  child.  Her  smile  for  him  was  the  same  smile  she 
bestowed  on  all,  but  it  was  sometimes  distasteful  to  Pierre  to  see  that 
smile.  Boris  behaved  to  Pierre  with  a  marked,  dignified,  and  mournful 
respectfulness.  This  shade  of  respectfulness  too  disturbed  Pierre.  He  had 
suffered  so  much  three  years  before  from  the  mortification  caused  him 
by  his  wife,  that  now  he  secured  himself  from  all  possibility  of  similar 
mortification;  in  the  first  place,  by  being  his  wife’s  husband  only  in 
name,  and  secondly,  by  not  allowing  himself  to  suspect  anything.  ‘No, 
now  she  has  become  a  blue-stocking,  she  has  renounced  for  ever  her 
former  errors,’  he  said  to  himself.  ‘There  has  never  been  an  instance  of 
a  blue-stocking  giving  way  to  tender  passions,’  he  repeated  to  himself; 
a  maxim  he  had  picked  up  somewhere  and  implicitly  believed.  But,  strange 
to  say,  the  presence  of  Boris  in  his  wife’s  drawing-room  (and  he  was 
almost  always  there)  had  a  physical  effect  on  Pierre;  it  seemed  to  make 
all  his  limbs  contract,  and  destroyed  the  unconsciousness  and  freedom  of 
his  movement. 

‘Such  a  strange  antipathy,’  thought  Pierre;  ‘and  at  one  time  I  really 
liked  him  very  much.’ 

In  the  eyes  of  the  world,  Pierre  was  a  great  lord,  the  rather  blind  and 
absurd  husband  of  a  distinguished  wife;  a  clever  eccentric,  who  did 
nothing  but  who  was  no  trouble  to  any  one,  a  good-natured,  capital  fellow. 
In  Pierre’s  soul  all  this  while  a  complex  and  laborious  process  of  inner 
development  was  going  on  that  revealed  much  to  him  and  led  him  to 
many  spiritual  doubts  and  joys. 


X 

He  kept  up  his  diary  and  this  was  what  he  was  writing  in  it  at  that  time' 
‘November  24. — I  got  up  at  eight  o’clock,  read  the  Scriptures,  then 
went  to  my  duties’  ( Pierre  by  the  advice  of  Osip  Alexyevitch  was  serving 
on  one  of  the  government  committees),  ‘came  back  to  dinner,  dined 
alone  (the  countess  had  a  lot  of  guests  whom  I  did  not  care  for),  ate  and 
drank  with  moderation,  and  after  dinner  copied  out  passages  for  the 
brothers.  In  the  evening  I  went  down  to  the  countess,  and  told  a  ridiculous 
story  about  B.,  and  only  bethought  myself  that  I  ought  not  to  have 
done  so,  when  every  one  was  laughing  loudly  at  it. 

‘I  went  to  bed  with  a  calm  and  happy  spirit.  Great  Lord,  help  me  to 
walk  in  Thy  paths:  (1)  to  flee  anger  by  gentleness  and  deliberation;  (2) 
to  flee  lust  by  self-restraint  and  loathing,  (3)  to  escape  from  the  turmoil 
of  the  world  without  cutting  myself  off  from  (a)  the  duties  of  my  political 
work,  ( b )  the  cares  of  my  household,  (c)  relations  with  my  friends,  and 
(d)  the  management  of  my  finances.’ 

‘November  27.— I  got  up  late  and  lay  a  long  while  in  bed  after  I  was 
awake,  giving  way  to  sloth.  My  God,  help  me  and  strengthen  me  that  I 


WARANDPEACE  411 

may  walk  in  Thy  ways.  Read  the  Scriptures,  but  without  proper  feeling. 
Brother  Urusov  came:  talked  of  the  cares  of  this  world.  He  told  me  of 
the  Tsar’s  new  projects.  I  was  beginning  to  criticise  them,  but  remembered 
my  principles  and  the  words  of  my  benefactor,  that  a  true  mason  ought 
to  be  zealous  in  working  for  the  state,  when  his  aid  is  required,  but 
should  look  on  quietly  at  what  he  is  not  called  upon  to  assist  in.  My 
tongue  is  my  enemy.  Brothers  G.  V.  and  O.  visited  me;  there  was  a  con¬ 
versation  preliminary  to  the  reception  of  a  new  brother.  They  lay  upon 
me  the  duty  of  rhetor.  I  feel  weak  and  unworthy.  Then  there  was  talk 
of  the  interpretation  of  the  seven  pillars  and  steps  of  the  Temple,  of  the 
seven  sciences,  the  seven  virtues,  the  seven  vices,  the  seven  gifts  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  Brother  O.  was  very  eloquent.  In  the  evening  the  reception 
took  place.  The  new  decoration  of  the  building  added  a  good  deal  to  the 
magnificence  of  the  spectacle.  Boris  Drubetskoy  was  admitted.  I  had  prop- 
posed  him,  and  I  was  the  rhetor.  A  strange  feeling  troubled  me  all  the 
time  I  was  with  him  in  the  dark  temple.  I  detected  in  myself  a  feeling 
of  hatred,  which  I  studiously  strove  to  overcome.  And  I  could  sincerely 
have  desired  to  save  him  from  evil  and  to  lead  him  into  the  way  of  truth, 
but  evil  thoughts  of  him  never  left  me.  The  thought  came  to  me  that  his 
object  in  entering  the  brotherhood  was  simply  to  gain  the  intimacy  and 
favour  of  men  in  our  lodge.  Apart  from  the  fact  that  he  several  times  asked 
me  whether  N.  or  S.  were  not  members  of  our  lodge  (a  question  I  could 
not  answer),  he  is  incapable,  so  far  as  my  observation  goes,  of  feeling  a 
reverence  for  our  holy  order,  and  is  too  much  occupied,  and  too  well  satis¬ 
fied  with  the  outer  man,  to  care  much  for  the  improvement  of  the  spiritual 
man.  I  had  no  grounds  for  doubting  of  him,  but  he  seemed  to  me  in¬ 
sincere;  and  all  the  time  I  stood  face  to  face  with  him  in  the  dark  temple 
I  kept  fancying  he  was  smiling  contemptuously  at  my  words,  and  I  should 
have  liked  really  to  stab  his  bare  chest  with  the  sword  I  held  pointed 
at  it.  I  could  not  be  eloquent,  and  could  not  sincerely  communicate  my 
doubts  to  the  brothers  and  the  Grand  Master.  O  Great  Architect  of 
Nature,  help  me  to  find  the  true  path  that  leads  out  of  the  labyrinth  of 
falsehood!  ’ 

After  this  three  pages  of  the  diary  were  left  blank,  and  then  had  been 
written: 

‘I  had  a  long  and  instructive  conversation  with  brother  V.,  who  advised 
me  not  to  abandon  brother  A.  Much  was  revealed  to  me,  unworthy  as  I 
am.  Adonai  is  the  name  of  the  creator  of  worlds.  Elohim  is  the  name  of 
the  ruler  of  all.  The  third  name,  the  name  unutterable,  has  the  significance 
of  the  All.  Talks  with  brother  V.  strengthen  and  refresh  me  and  confirm 
me  in  the  path  of  virtue.  In  his  presence  there  is  no  room  for  doubt, 
t  see  clearly  the  distinction  between  the  poor  doctrine  of  mundane  science 
md  our  sacred,  all-embracing  teaching.  Human  sciences  dissect  every- 
hing  to  understand  it,  and  destroy  everything  to  analyse  it.  In  the 
;acred  science  of  our  order  all  is  one,  all  is  known  for  its  combination  and 
ife.  The  trinity — the  three  elements  of  things — are  sulphur,  mercury,  and 
.alt.  Sulphur  is  of  an  oily  and  fiery  nature;  in  its  combination  with  salt 


412  WARANDPEACE 

by  its  fiery  quality  it  arouses  a  craving  in  it,  by  means  of  which  it  attracts 
mercury,  fastens  upon  it,  holds  it,  and  in  combination  with  it  forms 
various  substances.  Mercury  is  the  unsubstantial,  floating,  spiritual  es¬ 
sence — Christ,  the  Holy  Ghost,  Him.’ 

‘December  3.- — I  waked  up  late,  read  the  Scripture,  but  was  unmoved 
by  it.  Afterwards  I  went  down  and  walked  up  and  down  the  big  hall. 

I  tried  to  meditate;  but  instead  of  that  my  imagination  brought  before 
me  an  incident  which  occurred  four  years  ago.  Dolohov,  meeting  me  after 
my  duel  in  Moscow,  said  to  me  that  he  hoped  I  was  now  enjoying  com¬ 
plete  mental  peace  in  spite  of  my  wife’s  absence.  At  the  time  I  made  him 
no  answer.  Now  I  recalled  all  the  details  of  that  interview,  and  in  my 
mind  made  him  the  most  vindictive  ^nd  biting  retorts.  I  recovered  myself 
and  drove  away  that  idea,  only  when  I  had  caught  myself  in  a  passion  of 
anger;  but  I  did  not  repent  of  it  sufficiently.  Afterwards  Boris  Drubetskoy 
came  and  began  describing  various  incidents.  The  moment  he  came  in 
I  felt  amazed  at  his  visit  and  said  something  horrid  to  him.  He  retorted. 

I  got  hot,  and  said  a  great  deal  to  him  that  was  disagreeable  and  even 
rude.  He  did  not  reply,  and  I  checked  myself  only  when  it  was  too  late. 
My  God,  I  cannot  get  on  with  him  at  all.  It  is  myself  too  that  is  to  blame 
for  it.  I  set  myself  above  him,  and  so  I  become  far  inferior  to  him,  for  he  is 
lenient  to  my  rudeness,  while  I  nourish  a  contempt  for  him.  My  God,  grant 
me  that  in  his  presence  I  may  see  more  clearly  my  own  vileness  and  act 
so  that  it  may  be  profitable  to  him  too.  After  dinner  I  went  to  sleep,  and 
just  as  I  was  falling  asleep,  I  distinctly  heard  a  voice  saying  in  my  left 
ear:  “Thy  day.” 

‘I  dreamed  I  was  walking  along  in  the  dark  and  was  all  of  a  sudden 
surrounded  by  dogs,  but  I  went  on  undismayed;  all  at  once  one  small 
dog  seized  me  by  the  thigh  with  its  teeth  and  would  not  let  go.  I  tried 
to  strangle  it  with  my  hands.  And  as  soon  as  I  tore  it  off,  another,  a  bigger  , 
one,  began  to  bite  me.  I  lifted  it  up,  and  the  more  I  lifted  it  up,  the  bigger  ■ 
and  heavier  it  became.  And  suddenly  brother  A.  came  up,  and  taking  , 
me  by  the  arm,  led  me  away  with  him  and  brought  me  into  a  building,  to 
enter  which  we  had  to  pass  over  a  narrow  plank.  I  stepped  on  it,  and  the  ( 
plank  bent  and  gave  way,  and  I  began  clambering  on  the  fence,  which  I 
just  managed  to  get  hold  of  with  my  hands.  After  great  efforts  I  dragged 
my  body  up,  so  that  my  legs  were  hanging  over  on  one  side  and  my  body  1 
on  the  other.  I  looked  round  and  saw  brother  A.  standing  on  the  fence  I 
and  pointing  out  to  me  a  great  avenue  and  garden,  and  in  the  garden  a 
great  and  beautiful  building.  I  waked  up.  Lord,  Great  Architect  of  Nature, 
help  me  to  tear  away  these  dogs — my  evil  passions  and  especially  the 
last — that  unites  in  itself  the  violence  of  all  the  former  ones,  and  aid 
me  to  enter  that  temple  of  virtue,  of  which  I  was  vouchsafed  a  vision  in 
my  sleep.’ 

‘December  7. — I  dreamed  that  Osip  Alexyevitch  was  sitting  in  myl 
house,  and  I  was  very  glad  to  see  him  and  eager  to  entertain  him.  But  in  l 
my  dream  I  kept  chattering  away  incessantly  with  other  people,  and  all 
at  once  I  bethought  myself  that  this  could  not  be  to  his  liking  and  1 


WARANDPEACE  413 

wanted  to  come  close  to  him  and  to  embrace  him.  But  as  soon  as  I 
approached  him,  I  saw  that  his  face  was  transformed,  and  had  grown 
young,  and  he  said  something  to  me  softly,  some  doctrine  of  our  order, 
but  so  softly  that  I  could  not  catch  it.  Then  we  all  seemed  to  go  out  of  the 
room,  and  something  strange  happened.  We  were  sitting  or  lying  on  the 
floor.  He  was  telling  me  something.  But  in  my  dream  I  longed  to  show 
him  my  devotional  feeling,  and,  not  listening  to  his  words,  I  began  pictur¬ 
ing  to  myself  the  state  of  my  own  inner  man,  and  the  grace  of  God 
sanctifying  me.  And  tears  came  into  my  eyes,  and  I  was  glad  that  he 
noticed  it.  But  he  glanced  at  me  with  vexation,  and  jumped  up,  breaking 
off  his  conversation  with  me.  I  was  abashed  and  asked  him  whether  what 
he  had  been  saying  did  not  concern  me.  But  he  made  no  reply,  but  gave 
me  a  friendly  look,  and  then  all  of  a  sudden  we  found  ourselves  in  my 
bedroom,  where  stood  a  big  double  bed.  He  lay  down  on  the  edge  of  it, 
and  I  seemed  to  be  filled  with  a  desire  to  embrace  him  and  to  lie  down 
too.  And  in  my  dream  he  asked  me,  “Tell  me  the  truth,  what  is  your 
chief  temptation?  Do  you  know  it?  I  believe  that  you  do  know  it.” 
Abashed  at  this  question,  I  answered  that  sloth  was  my  besetting  tempta¬ 
tion.  He  shook  his  head  incredulously.  And  even  more  abashed,  I  told 
him  that  though  I  was  living  here  with  my  wife,  I  was  not  living  with  her 
as  a  husband.  To  this  he  replied  that  I  had  no  right  to  deprive  my  wife 
of  my  embraces,  and  gave  me  to  understand  that  this  was  my  duty.  But 

I  answered  that  I  should  be  ashamed  of  it,  and  suddenly  everything 
vanished.  And  I  waked  up,  and  in  my  mind  there  was  the  text  of  scripture: 
“And  the  life  was  the  light  of  man,  and  the  light  shineth  in  the  darkness, 
and  the  darkness  comprehendeth  it  not.” 

‘The  face  of  Osip  Alexyevitch  had  been  youthful  and  bright-looking. 
That  day  I  received  a  letter  from  my  benefactor,  in  which  he  wrote  to 
me  of  my  conjugal  duties. 

‘December  9. — I  had  a  dream  from  which  I  waked  up  with  a  throbbing 
heart.  I  dreamed  I  was  in  Moscow  in  my  own  house,  in  the  big  divan- 
room,  and  Osip  Alexyevitch  came  out  of  the  drawing-room.  I  dreamed 
that  I  knew  at  once  that  the  process  of  regeneration  had  begun  in  him, 
ind  I  rushed  to  meet  him.  I  kissed  his  face  and  his  hands,  while  he  said: 
‘Do  you  notice  that  my  face  is  different?”  I  looked  at  him,  still  holding 
lim  in  my  arms,  and  I  dreamed  that  I  saw  that  his  face  was  young,  but 
le  had  no  hair  on  his  head  and  his  features  were  quite  different.  And  I 
Ireamed  that  I  said  to  him:  “I  should  have  recognised  you  if  I  had  met 
mu  by  chance”;  and  thought  as  I  said  it,  “Am  I  telling  the  truth?” 
Vnd  all  at  once  I  saw  him  lying  like  a  dead  body;  then  he  gradually 
ame  to  himself  again  and  went  with  me  into  the  big  study,  holding  a 
>ig  folio  book  of  manuscript.  And  I  dreamed  I  said:  “I  wrote  that.”  And 
ie  answered  me  by  an  inclination  of  the  head.  I  opened  the  book,  and  on 

II  the  pages  were  fine  drawings.  And  in  my  dream  I  knew  that  these 
•ictures  depicted  the  soul’s  love  adventures  with  its  beloved.  And  I  saw 

beautiful  presentment  of  a  maiden  in  transparent  garments  and  with  a 
ransparent  body  flying  up  to  the  clouds.  And  I  seemed  to  know  that  this 


414  WAR  AND  PEACE 

maiden  was  nothing  else  but  the  figure  of  the  Song  of  Songs.  And  in  my 
dream,  as  I  looked  at  these  pictures,  I  felt  I  was  doing  wrong  and  could 
not  tear  myself  away  from  them.  Lord,  help  me!  My  God,  if  Thy  for¬ 
saking  me  is  Thy  doing,  then  Thy  will  be  done;  but  if  I  am  myself  the 
cause,  teach  me  what  I  am  to  do.  I  perish  from  my  vileness  as  though 
Thou  wast  utterly  forsaking  me.’ 


XI 

. 

The  Rostovs’  pecuniary  position  had  not  improved  during  the  two  years 
they  had  spent  in  the  country.  Although  Nikolay  Rostov  had  kept  firmly 
to  his  resolution,  and  was  still  living  in  a  modest  way  in  an  obscure  regi¬ 
ment,  spending  comparatively  little,  the  manner  of  life  at  Otradnoe,  and 
still  more  Mitenka’s  management  of  affairs,  were  such  that  debts  went  on 
unchecked,  growing  bigger  every  year.  The  sole  resource  that  presented 
itself  to  the  old  count  as  the  obvious  thing  to  do  was  to  enter  the  govern¬ 
ment  service,  and  he  had  come  to  Petersburg  to  seek  a  post,  and  at  the 
same  time,  as  he  said,  to  let  his  poor  wenches  enjoy  themselves  for  the 
last  time. 

Soon  after  the  Rostovs’  arrival  in  Petersburg,  Berg  made  Vera  an  offer, 
and  his  offer  was  accepted.  Although  in  Moscow  the  Rostovs  belonged 
to  the  best  society — themselves  unaware  of  the  fact,  and  never  troubling 
themselves  to  consider  what  society  they  belonged  to — yet  in  Petersburg 
their  position  was  an  uncertain  and  indefinite  one.  In  Petersburg  they 
were  provincials;  and  were  not  visited  by  the  very  people  who  in  Moscow 
had  dined  at  the  Rostovs’  expense  without  their  inquiring  to  what  society 
they  belonged. 

The  Rostovs  kept  open  house  in  Petersburg,  just  as  they  used  to  do 
in  Moscow;  and  at  their  suppers  people  of  the  most  diverse  sorts  could  ! 
be  seen  together — country  neighbours,  old  and  not  well-to-do  country  : 
gentlemen  with  their  daughters,  and  the  old-maid-of-honour,  Madame 
Peronsky,  Pierre  Bezuhov,  and  the  son  of  their  district  postmaster,  who 
was  in  an  office  in  Petersburg.  Of  the  men  who  were  constantly  at  the 
Rostovs’  house  in  Petersburg,  the  most  intimate  friends  of  the  family  j 
were  very  soon  Boris,  Pierre,  who  had  been  met  in  the  street  by  the  old 
count  and  dragged  home  by  him,  and  Berg,  who  spent  whole  days  with  f 
the  Rostovs,  and  paid  the  elder  of  the  young  countesses,  Vera,  every  at- ; 
tention  a  young  man  can  pay  who  intends  to  make  a  proposal. 

Not  in  vain  had  Berg  shown  everybody  his  right  hand  that  had  been 
wounded  at  Austerlitz,  and  the  sword  quite  unnecessarily  held  in  his  ( 
left.  He  had  related  this  episode  to  everybody  so  persistently  and  with 
such  an  air  of  importance,  that  every  one  had  come  to  believe  in  the  i 
utility  and  merit  of  the  feat,  and  Berg  had  received  two  decorations  for 
Austerlitz. 

In  the  war  in  Finland,  too,  he  had  succeeded  in  distinguishing  himself. 


WAR  AND  PEACE  415 

He  had  picked  up  a  fragment  of  a  grenade,  by  which  an  adjutant  had 
been  killed  close  to  the  commander-in-chief,  and  had  carried  this  fragment 
to  his  commander.  Again,  as  after  Austerlitz,  he  talked  to  every  one  at 
such  length  and  with  such  persistency  about  this  incident  that  people 
ended  by  believing  that  this,  too,  was  something  that  ought  to  have  been 
done,  and  Berg  received  two  decorations  for  the  Finnish  war  too.  In 
1809  he  was  a  captain  in  the  guards  with  decorations  on  his  breast,  and 
was  filling  some  particularly  profitable  posts  in  Petersburg. 

Though  there  were  some  sceptics  who  smiled  when  Berg’s  merits  were 
mentioned  before  them,  it  could  not  be  denied  that  Berg  was  a  gallant 
officer,  punctual  in  the  discharge  of  his  duties,  in  excellent  repute  with 
the  authorities,  and  a  conscientious  young  man  with  a  brilliant  career 
before  him  and  a  secure  position,  indeed,  in  society. 

Four  years  before,  on  meeting  a  German  comrade  in  the  parterre  of  a 
Moscow  theatre,  Berg  had  pointed  out  to  him  Vera  Rostov,  and  said  to 
him  in  German,  ‘That  girl  will  be  my  wife.’  From  that  moment  he  had 
made  up  his  mind  to  marry  her.  Now  in  Petersburg,  after  duly  considering 
the  Rostovs’  position  and  his  own,  he  decided  that  the  time  had  come 
and  made  his  offer. 

Berg's  proposal  was  received  at  first  with  a  hesitation  by  no  means 
flattering  for  him.  It  seemed  a  strange  idea  at  first  that  the  son  of  an 
obscure  Livonian  gentleman  should  propose  for  the  hand  of  a  Countess 
Rostov.  But  Berg’s  leading  characteristic  was  an  egoism  so  naive  and 
good-natured  that  the  Rostovs  unconsciously  began  to  think  that  it  must 
be  a  good  thing  since  he  was  himself  so  firmly  convinced  that  it  wrould  be 
a  good  thing,  and  indeed  a  very  good  thing.  The  Rostovs  were,  moreover, 
seriously  embarrassed  in  their  pecuniary  affairs,  a  fact  of  which  the  suitor 
could  not  but  be  aware;  and  what  was  the  chief  consideration,  Vera  was 
now  four-and-twenty,  and  had  been  brought  out  everywhere;  and,  in  spite 
of  the  fact  that  she  was  undeniably  good-looking  and  sensible,  no  one  had 
hitherto  made  her  an  offer.  The  offer  was  accepted. 

‘You  see,’  Berg  said  to  a  comrade,  whom  he  called  his  friend — only 
because  he  knew  all  people  do  have  friends — ‘you  see,  I  have  taken 
everything  into  consideration,  and  I  should  not  have  got  married  if  I  had 
not  thought  it  well  over,  or  if  it  had  been  unsuitable  in  any  way.  But  at 
present  my  papa  and  mamma  are  well  provided  for,  I  have  secured  them 
the  lease  of  that  place  in  the  Ostsee  district,  and  I  can  live  in  Petersburg 
,  with  my  pay  and  her  fortune  and  my  careful  habits.  We  can  get  along 
nicely.  I'm  not  marrying  for  money,  I  consider  that  ungentlemanlv,  but 
the  wife  ought  to  bring  her  share  and  the  husband  his.  I  have  my  position 
in  the  service;  she  has  connections  and  some  small  means.  That’s  worth 
I  something  nowadays,  isn’t  it?  And  what’s  the  chief  consideration,  she’s 
a  handsome,  estimable  girl,  and  she  loves  me.  .  . 

Berg  blushed  and  smiled. 

‘And  I  love  her  because  she  has  a  character  that  is  reasonable  and  very 
1  nice.  Her  sister  now — though  they  are  of  the  same  family — is  utterly 
different,  and  her  character  is  disagreeable,  and  she  has  none  of  that 


416  WARANDPEACE 

intelligence,  but  something  you  know  ...  I  don’t  like.  .  .  .  But  my 
betrothed  .  .  .  You  must  come  and  see  us;  come  to  .  .  .’  Berg  went 
on;  he  was  going  to  say  ‘to  dinner,’  but  on  second  thoughts  he  said  ‘to 
tea,’  and  putting  out  his  tongue  he  blew  a  little  ring  of  tobacco  smoke 
that  embodied  for  him  all  his  dreams  of  happiness. 

The  first  feeling  of  hesitation  aroused  in  the  parents  by  Berg’s  proposal 
had  been  followed  by  the  festivity  and  rejoicing  in  the  family  usual  on 
such  occasions,  but  the  rejoicing  was  apparent  and  not  genuine. 

A  certain  embarrassment  and  shamefacedness  could  be  detected  in 
the  feelings  of  the  relations  in  regard  to  this  marriage.  It  was  as  though 
their  conscience  smote  them  for  not  having  been  very  fond  of  Vera  and 
of  being  so  ready  now  to  get  her  off  their  hands.  The  old  count  was  more 
disconcerted  over  it  than  any  one.  He  would  most  likely  have  been  unable 
to  say  what  made  him  feel  so,  but  his  financial  difficulties  were  at  the 
root  of  the  matter.  He  absolutely  did  not  know  what  he  had,  how  much 
his  debts  amounted  to,  and  what  he  would  be  in  a  position  to  give  for 
Vera’s  dowry.  Each  of  his  daughters  had  at  their  birth  been  assigned  a 
portion,  consisting  of  an  estate  with  three  hundred  serfs  on  it.  But  one 
of  those  estates  had  by  now  been  sold,  and  the  other  had  been  mortgaged, 
and  the  interest  was  so  much  in  arrears  that  it  would  have  to  be  sold,  so 
that  to  give  this  estate  was  impossible.  There  was  no  money  either. 

Berg  had  been  betrothed  more  than  a  month,  and  it  was  only  a  week 
before  the  date  fixed  for  the  wedding,  but  the  count  was  still  unable  to 
come  to  a  decision  on  the  subject  of  the  dowry,  and  had  not  spoken  of  it 
to  his  wife.  At  one  time  the  count  thought  of  making  over  the  Ryazan 
estate  to  Vera,  then  he  thought  of  selling  his  forest,  then  of  borrowing 
money  on  a  note  of  hand. 

A  few  days  before  the  wedding,  Berg  went  early  in  the  morning  into 
the  count’s  study,  and  with  an  agreeable  smile,  respectfully  invited  his 
father-in-law  to  let  him  know  what  fortune  would  be  given  with  the 
Countess  Vera.  The  count  was  so  much  disconcerted  by  this  long-foreseen 
inquiry  that,  without  thinking,  he  said  the  first  thing  that  came  into  his 
head. 

‘I  like  your  being  businesslike  about  it,  I  like  it;  you  will  be  quite 
satisfied  .  .  .’ 

And  clapping  Berg  on  the  shoulder,  he  got  up,  intending  to  cut  short 
the  conversation.  But  Berg,  smiling  blandly,  announced  that  if  he  were 
not  to  know  for  certain  what  would  be  given  with  Vera,  and  to  receive 
at  least  part  of  the  dowry  in  advance,  he  would  be  obliged  to  break  off 
the  marriage.  ‘Because,  you  must  consider,  count,  if  I  -were  to  allow 
myself  to  marry  now  without  having  a  definite  security  for  the  main¬ 
tenance  of  my  wife  I  should  be  acting  like  a  scoundrel  .  .  .’ 

The  conversation  ended  by  the  count,  in  his  anxiety  to  be  generous 
and  to  avoid  further  requests,  saying  that  he  would  give  him  a  note  of 
hand  for  eighty  thousand.  Berg  smiled  gently,  kissed  the  count  on  the 
shoulder,  and  said  that  he  was  very  grateful,  but  could  not  make  his 
arrangements  in  his  new  life  without  receiving  thirty  thousand  in  ready 


WARANDPEACE  417 

money.  ‘Twenty  thousand  at  least,  count,’  he  added,  ‘and  then  a  note  of 
hand  simply  for  sixty  thousand.’ 

‘Yes,  yes,  very  good,’  said  the  count  hurriedly.  ‘Only  excuse  me,  my 
dear  boy,  I’ll  give  you  twenty  thousand  and  the  note  of  hand  for  eighty 
thousand  as  well.  That’s  all  right,  kiss  me.’ 


XII 

Natasha  was  sixteen,  and  it  was  the  yeat  1809,  that  year  to  which  she 
had  reckoned  up  on  her  fingers  with  Boris,  after  she  had  kissed  him  four 
years  before.  Since  then  she  had  not  once  seen  him.  When  Boris  was 
mentioned  she  would  speak  quite  freely  of  it  before  Sonya  and  her  mother, 
treating  it  as  a  settled  thing  that  all  that  had  passed  between  them  was 
childish  nonsense,  not  worth  talking  of  and  long  ago  forgotten.  But  in 
the  most  secret  recesses  of  her  soul  the  question  whether  her  engagement 
to  Boris  were  really  a  mere  jest  or  a  solemn,  binding  promise  worried  her. 

Ever  since  Boris  had  left  Moscow  in  1805  to  go  into  the  army  he  had 
not  once  seen  the  Rostovs.  Several  times  he  had  been  in  Moscow,  and 
in  travelling  had  passed  not  far  from  Otradnoe,  but  he  had  not  once  been 
at  the  Rostovs’. 

It  had  sometimes  occurred  to  Natasha  that  he  did  not  want  to  see  her, 
and  her  surmises  had  been  confirmed  by  the  mournful  tone  in  which  he 
was  referred  to  by  her  elders. 

‘Old  friends  are  soon  forgotten  nowadays,’  the  countess  would  say 
after  Boris  had  been  mentioned. 

Anna  Mihalovna  had  taken  in  these  latter  days  to  seeing  less  of  the 
Rostovs.  There  was  a  marked  dignity,  too,  in  her  manner  with  them, 
and  she  spoke  on  every  occasion  with  thankfulness  and  enthusiasm  of 
her  son’s  great  abilities  and  brilliant  career.  When  the  Rostovs  arrived 
in  Petersburg  Boris  came  to  call  on  them. 

It  was  not  without  emotion  that  he  came  to  see  them.  His  reminis¬ 
cences  of  Natasha  were  Boris’s  most  poetic  memories.  But  at  the  same 
time  he  came  to  call  on  them  firmly  resolved  to  make  her  and  her  rela¬ 
tions  feel  that  the  childish  vows  between  Natasha  and  him  could  have  no 
binding  force  for  her  or  for  him.  Pie  had  a  brilliant  position  in  society, 
thanks  to  his  intimacy  with  Countess  Bezuhov;  a  brilliant  position  in  the 
service,  thanks  to  the  protection  of  a  great  person  whose  confidence  he 
had  completely  won ;  and  he  was  beginning  to  make  plans  for  marrying 
one  of  the  richest  heiresses  in  Petersburg,  plans  which  might  very  easily 
be  realised.  When  Boris  went  into  the  Rostovs’  drawing-room,  Natasha 
was  in  her  own  room.  On  hearing  of  his  arrival  she  almost  ran  with  a 
flushed  face  into  the  drawing-room,  radiant  with  a  smile  that  was  more 
than  cordial. 

Boris  had  thought  of  Natasha  as  the  little  girl  he  had  known  four 
j  years  before  in  a  short  frock,  with  black  eyes  glancing  under  her  curls, 
and  a  desperate,  childish  giggle;  and  so,  when  a  quite  different  Natasha 


4i3  WARANDPEACE 

came  in,  he  was  taken  aback  and  his  face  expressed  surprise  and  admira¬ 
tion.  His  expression  delighted  Natasha. 

‘Well,  would  you  know  your  mischievous  little  playmate?’  said  the 
countess.  Boris  kissed  Natasha’s  hand,  and  said  he  was  surprised  at  the 
change  in  her. 

‘How  pretty  you  have  grown!  ’ 

‘I  should  hope  so!’  was  the  answer  in  Natasha’s  laughing  eyes. 

‘And  does  papa  look  older?’  she  asked. 

Natasha  sat  still,  taking  no  part  in  the  talk  between  Boris  and  her 
mother.  Silently  and  minutely  she  scrutinised  the  young  man  who  had 
been  her  suitor  in  her  childhood.  He  felt  oppressed  by  that  persistent, 
friendly  gaze,  and  glanced  once  or  twice  at  her. 

The  uniform,  the  spurs,  the  tie,  the  way  Boris  had  brushed  his  hair, — 
it  was  all  fashionable  and  comme  il  jaut.  That  Natasha  noticed  at  once. 
He  sat  a  little  sideways  on  a  low  chair  beside  the  countess,  with  his  right 
hand  smacking  the  exquisitely  clean  and  perfectly  fitting  glove  on  his 
left.  He  talked  with  a  peculiar,  refined  compression  of  the  lips  about  the 
divisions  of  the  best  society  in  Petersburg;  with  faint  irony  referred  to 
old  days  in  Moscow  and  old  Moscow  acquaintances.  Not  unintention¬ 
ally,  as  Natasha  felt,  he  mentioned  some  of  the  highest  aristocracy, 
alluded  to  the  ambassador’s  ball,  at  which  he  had  been  present,  and  to 
invitations  from  N.  N.  and  from  S.  S. 

Natasha  sat  the  whole  time  without  speaking,  looking  up  from  under 
her  brows  at  him.  Her  eyes  made  Boris  more  and  more  uneasy  and  em¬ 
barrassed.  He  looked  round  more  frequently  at  Natasha,  and  broke  off 
in  his  sentences.  After  staying  no  more  than  ten  minutes  he  got  up  and 
took  leave.  Still  the  same  curious,  challenging,  and  rather  ironical  eyes 
gazed  at  him.  After  his  first  visit,  Boris  said  to  himself  that  Natasha  was 
as  attractive  to  him  as  she  had  been  in  the  past,  but  that  he  must  not  give 
way  to  his  feelings,  because  to  marry  her— a  girl  almost  without  fortune 
— would  be  the  ruin  of  his  career,  and  to  renew  their  old  relations  without 
any  intention  of  marriage  would  be  dishonourable.  Boris  resolved  to  avoid 
meeting  Natasha ;  but  in  spite  of  this  resolution  he  came  a  few  days  later, 
and  began  to  come  often,  and  to  spend  whole  days  at  the  Rostovs’.  He 
fancied  that  it  was  essential  for  him  to  have  a  frank  explanation  with 
Natasha,  to  tell  her  that  all  the  past  must  be  forgotten,  that  in  spite  of 
everything  .  .  .  she  could  not  be  his  wife,  that  he  had  no  means,  and 
that  they  would  never  consent  to  her  marrying  him.  But  he  always 
failed  to  do  so,  and  felt  an  awkwardness  in  approaching  the  subject. 
Every  day  he  became  more  and  more  entangled.  Natasha — so  her  mother 
and  Sonya  judged— seemed  to  be  in  love  with  Boris,  as  in  the  past.  She 
sang  for  him  her  favourite  songs,  showed  him  her  album,  made  him  write 
in  it,  would  not  let  him  refer  to  the  past,  making  him  feel  how  delightful 
she  considered  the  present ;  and  every  day  he  went  home  in  a  whirl  with¬ 
out  having  said  what  he  meant  to  say,  not  knowing  what  he  was  doing, 
why  he  had  come,  and  how'  it  would  end.  Boris  gave  up  visiting  Ellen, 


419 


WAR  AND  PEACE 
received  reproachful  notes  every  day  from  her,  and  still  spent  whole  days 
together  at  the  Rostovs’. 


XIII 

One  evening  the  old  countess  in  her  bed-jacket,  without  her  false  curls, 
and  with  only  one  poor  wisp  of  hair  peeping  out  from  under  her  white 
cotton  nightcap,  was  bowing  down  on  the  carpet,  sighing  and  moaning  as 
she  repeated  her  evening  prayers.  Her  door  creaked,  and  Natasha,  also  in 
a  bed-jacket,  ran  in,  bare-legged,  with  her  feet  in  slippers,  and  her  hair 
in  curl  papers.  The  countess  looked  round  and  frowned.  She  was  repeat¬ 
ing  her  last  prayer.  ‘Can  it  be  this  couch  will  be  my  bier?’  Her  devo¬ 
tional  mood  was  dispelled.  Natasha,  flushed  and  eager,  stopped  suddenly 
short  in  her  rapid  movement  as  she  saw7  her  mother  at  her  prayers.  She 
half-sat  down  and  unconsciously  put  out  her  tongue  at  herself.  Seeing 
that  her  mother  was  still  praying,  she  ran  on  tiptoe  to  the  bed;  and 
rapidly  slipping  one  little  foot  against  the  other,  pushed  off  her  slippers 
and  sprang  on  to  that  couch  which  the  countess  in  her  prayer  feared 
might  become  her  bier.  That  couch  was  a  high  feather-bed,  with  five 
pillows,  each  smaller  than  the  one  below.  Natasha  skipped  in,  sank  into 
the  feather-bed,  rolled  over  towards  the  side,  and  began  snuggling  up 
under  the  quilt,  tucking  herself  up,  bending  her  knees  up  to  her  chin, 
kicking  out  and  giving  a  faintly  audible  giggle  as  she  alternately  hid  her 
face  under  the  quilt  and  peeped  out  at  her  mother.  The  countess  had 
finished  her  prayers,  and  was  approaching  her  bed  with  a  stern  face,  but 
seeing  that  Natasha  was  playing  bo-peep  with  her  she  smiled  her  good- 
natured,  weak  smile. 

‘Come,  come,  come!’  said  the  mother. 

‘Mamma,  may  I  speak;  yes?’  said  Natasha.  ‘Come,  under  the  chin, 
one,  and  now  another,  and  enough.’  And  she  clutched  at  her  mother’s 
neck  and  kissed  her  favourite  place  on  her  chin.  In  Natasha’s  behaviour 
to  her  mother  there  was  a  superficial  roughness  of  manner,  but  she  had  a 
natural  tact  and  knack  of  doing  things,  so  that,  however  she  snatched  her 
mother  in  her  arms,  she  always  managed  so  that  she  was  not  hurt,  nor 
uncomfortable,  nor  displeased  by  it. 

‘Well,  w7hat  is  it  to-night?’  said  her  mother,  settling  herself  in  the 
pillows  and  waiting  for  Natasha,  who  had  already  rolled  over  twice,  to 
lie  down  by  her  side  under  the  bedclothes,  to  put  out  her  arms  and 
assume  a  serious  expression. 

These  visits  of  Natasha  to  her  mother  at  night  before  the  count  came 
home  from  the  club  were  one  of  the  greatest  pleasures  both  of  mother 
and  daughter. 

‘What  is  it  to-night?  And  I  want  to  talk  to  you  .  .  .’  Natasha  put  her 
hand  on  her  mother’s  lips. 

‘About  Boris  ...  I  know,’  she  said  seriously;  ‘that’s  what  I  have 

! 


420  WAR  AND  PEACE 

come  about.  Don’t  say  it;  I  know.  No,  do  say  it!’  She  took  her  hand 
away.  ‘Say  it,  mamma!  He’s  nice,  eh?’ 

‘Natasha,  you  are  sixteen!  At  your  age  I  was  married.  You  say  Boris 
is  nice.  He  is  very  nice,  and  I  love  him  like  a  son!  But  what  do  you  want? 
.  .  .  What  are  you  thinking  about?  You  have  quite  turned  his  head,  I 
can  see  that  .  .  .’ 

As  she  said  this,  the  countess  looked  round  at  her  daughter.  Natasha 
was  lying,  looking  steadily  straight  before  her  at  one  of  the  mahogany 
sphinxes  carved  on  a  corner  of  the  bedstead,  so  that  the  countess  could 
only  see  her  daughter’s  face  in  profile.  Her  face  impressed  the  countess 
by  its  strikingly  serious  and  concentrated  expression. 

Natasha  was  listening  and  considering. 

‘Well,  so  what  then?’  she  said. 

‘You  have  completely  turned  his  head,  and  what  for?  What  do  you 
want  of  him?  You  know  you  can’t  marry  him.’ 

‘Why  not?’  said  Natasha,  with  no  change  in  her  attitude. 

‘Because  he’s  so  young,  because  he’s  poor,  because  he’s  a  relation  .  .  . 
because  you  don’t  care  for  him  yourself.’ 

‘How  do  you  know  that?’ 

‘I  know.  It’s  not  right,  my  darling/ 

‘But  if  I  want  to  .  .  .’  said  Natasha. 

‘Leave  off  talking  nonsense,’  said  the  countess. 

‘But  if  I  want  to  .  .  .’ 

‘Natasha,  I  am  serious  .  .  .’ 

Natasha  did  not  let  her  finish ;  she  drew  the  countess’s  large  hand  to 
her,  and  kissed  it  on  the  upper  side,  and  then  on  the  palm,  then  turned  it 
over  again  and  began  kissing  it  on  the  knuckle  of  the  top  joint  of  the 
finger,  then  on  the  space  between  the  knuckles,  then  on  a  knuckle  again, 
whispering:  ‘January,  February,  March,  April,  May.’ 

■‘Speak,  mamma;  why  are  you  silent?  Speak,’  she  said,  looking  round 
at  her  mother,  who  was  gazing  tenderly  at  her  daughter,  and  apparently 
in  gazing  at  her  had  forgotten  all  she  meant  to  say. 

‘This  won’t  do,  my  dear.  It’s  not  every  one  who  will  understand  your 
childish  feelings  for  one  another,  and  seeing  him  on  such  intimate  terms 
with  you  may  prejudice  you  in  the  eyes  of  other  young  men  who  visit  us, 
and  what  is  of  more  consequence,  it’s  making  him  wretched  for  nothing. 
He  had  very  likely  found  a  match  that  would  suit  him,  some  wealthy 
girl,  and  now  he’s  half-crazy.’ 

‘Half-crazy?’  repeated  Natasha. 

‘I’ll  tell  you  what  happened  in  my  own  case.  I  had  a  cousin  .  .  .’ 

‘I  know — Kirilla  Matveitch;  but  he’s  old.’ 

‘He  was  not  always  old.  But  I  tell  you  what,  Natasha,  I’ll  speak  to 
Boris.  He  mustn’t  come  so  often  .  . 

‘Why  mustn’t  he,  if  he  wants  to?’ 

‘Because  I  know  it  can’t  come  to  anything.’ 

‘How  do  you  know?  No,  mamma,  don’t  speak  to  him.  What  nonsense!  ’ 
said  Natasha,  in  the  tone  of  a  man  being  robbed  of  his  property.  ‘Well,  I 


WAR  AND  PEACE  421 

won’t  marry  him,  so  let  him  come,  if  he  enjoys  it  and  I  enjoy  it.’  Natasha 
looked  at  her  mother,  smiling.  ‘Not  to  be  married,  but — just  so,’  she 
repeated. 

‘How  so,  my  dear?’ 

‘Oh,  just  so.  I  see  it’s  very  necessary  I  shouldn’t  marry  him,  but  .  .  . 
just  so.’ 

‘Just  so,  just  so,’  repeated  the  countess,  and  shaking  all  over,  she  went 
off  into  a  good-natured,  unexpectedly  elderly  laugh. 

‘Don’t  laugh,  stop,’  cried  Natasha;  ‘you’re  shaking  all  the  bed.  You’re 
awfully  like  me,  just  another  giggler  .  .  .  Stop  .  .  .’  She  snatched  both 
the  countess’s  hands,  kissed  one  knuckle  of  the  little  finger,  for  June,  and 
went  on  kissing— July,  August — on  the  other  hand.  ‘Mamma,  is  he  very 
much  in  love?  What  do  you  think?  Were  men  as  much  in  love  with  you? 
And  he’s  very  nice,  very,  very  nice!  Only  not  quite  to  my  liking — he’s  so 
narrow,  somehow,  like  a  clock  on  the  wall.  .  .  .  Don’t  you  understand? 
.  .  .  Narrow,  you  know,  grey,  light-coloured  .  . 

‘What  nonsense  you  talk!’  said  the  countess. 

Natasha  went  on: 

‘Don’t  you  really  understand?  Nikolenka  would  understand  .  .  . 
Bezuhov  now — he’s  blue,  dark  blue  and  red,  and  he’s  quadrangular.’ 

‘You’re  flirting  with  him,  too,’  said  the  countess,  laughing. 

‘No,  he’s  a  freemason,  I  have  heard.  He’s  jolly,  dark  blue  and  red; 
how  am  I  to  explain  to  you  .  .  .’ 

‘Little  countess,’  they  heard  the  count’s  voice  through  the  door,  ‘you’re 
not  asleep?’  Natasha  skipped  up,  snatched  up  her  slippers,  and  ran 
barefoot  to  her  own  room.  For  a  long  while  she  could  not  go  to  sleep.  She 
kept  musing  on  no  one’s  being  able  to  understand  all  she  understood  and 
all  that  was  in  her. 

‘Sonya?’  she  wondered,  looking  at  her  friend  asleep,  curled  up  like  a 
kitten  with  her  great  mass  of  hair.  ‘No,  how  could  she!  She’s  virtuous. 
She’s  in  love  with  Nikolenka  and  doesn’t  care  to  know  anything  more. 
Mamma,  even  she  doesn’t  understand.  It’s  wonderful  how  clever  I  am  and 
how  .  .  .  she  is  charming,’  she  went  on,  speaking  of  herself  in  the  third 
person,  and  fancying  that  it  was  some  very  clever,  the  very  cleverest  and 
finest  of  men,  who  was  saying  it  of  her  .  .  .  ‘There  is  everything,  every¬ 
thing  in  her,’  this  man  continued,  ‘extraordinarily  clever,  charming  and 
then  pretty,  extraordinarily  pretty,  graceful.  She  swims,  rides  capitally, 
and  a  voice! — a  marvellous  voice,  one  may  say!’  She  hummed  her 
favourite  musical  phrase  from  an  opera  of  Cherubini,  flung  herself  into 
bed,  laughed  with  delight  at  the  thought  that  she  would  soon  be  asleep, 
called  to  Dunyasha  to  blow  out  the  candle;  and  before  Dunyasha  had 
left  her  room  she  had  already  passed  into  another  still  happier  world  of 
dreams,  where  everything  was  as  easy  and  as  beautiful  as  in  reality,  and 
was  only  better  because  it  was  all  different. 

Next  day  the  countess  sent  for  Boris,  and  talked  to  him,  and  from 
that  day  he  ga'  e  up  visiting  at  the  Rostovs’. 


4-2 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


XIV 

On  the  31st  of  December,  on  the  eve  of  the  new  year  1810,  a  ball  was 
given  by  a  grand  personage  who  had  been  a  star  of  the  court  of  Catherine. 
The  Tsar  and  the  diplomatic  corps  were  to  be  present  at  this  ball. 

The  well-known  mansion  of  this  grandee  in  the  English  Embankment 
was  illuminated  by  innumerable  lights.  The  police  were  standing  at  the 
lighted  entry,  laid  with  red  baize;  and  not  merely  policemen,  but  a  police 
commander  was  at  the  entrance,  and  dozens  of  officers  of  the  police. 
Carriages  kept  driving  away,  and  fresh  ones  kept  driving  up,  with 
grooms  in  red  livery  and  grooms  in  plumed  hats.  From  the  carriages 
emerged  men  wearing  uniforms,  stars,  and  ribbons;  while  ladies  in  satin 
and  ermine  stepped  carefully  out  on  the  carriage  steps,  that  were  let  dowm 
with  a  bang,  and  then  walked  hurriedly  and  noiselessly  over  the  baize  of 
the  entry.  . 

Almost  every  time  a  new  carriage  drove  up,  a  whisper  ran  through  the 
crowd  and  hats  were  taken  off.  ‘The  Emperor?  .  .  .  No,  a  minister  .  .  . 
prince  .  .  .  ambassador  .  .  .  Don’t  you  see  the  plumes?  .  .  .’  was 
audible  in  the  crowd.  One  person,  better  dressed  than  the  rest,  seemed 
to  know  every  one,  and  mentioned  by  name  all  the  most  celebrated  per¬ 
sonages  of  the  day. 

A  third  of  the  guests  had  already  arrived  at  this  ball,  while  the 
Rostovs,  who  were  to  be  present  at  it,  were  still  engaged  in  hurried 
preparations. 

Many  had  been  the  discussions  and  the  preparations  for  that  ball  in 
the  Rostov  family;  many  the  fears  that  an  invitation  might  not  arrive, 
that  the  dresses  would  not  be  ready,  and  that  everything  would  not  be 
arranged  as  it  ought  to  be. 

The  Rostovs  were  to  be  accompanied  by  Marya  Ignatyevna  Peronsky, 
a  friend  and  relation  of  the  countess,  a  thin  and  yellow  maid-of-honour 
of  the  old  court,  Who  was  acting  as  a  guide  to  the  provincial  Rostovs  in 
the  higher  circles  of  Petersburg  society. 

At  ten  o’clock  the  Rostovs  were  to  drive  to  Tavritchesky  Garden  to 
call  for  the  maid-of-honour.  Meantime  it  was  five  minutes  to  ten,  and 
the  young  ladies  were  not  yet  dressed. 

Natasha  was  going  to  her  first  great  ball.  She  had  got  up  at  eight 
o’clock  that  morning,  and  had  spent  the  whole  day  in  feverish  agitation 
and  activity.  All  her  energies  had  since  morning  been  directed  to  the  , 
one  aim  of  getting  herself,  her  mother,  and  Sonya  as  well  dressed  as 
possible.  Sonya  and  her  mother  put  themselves  entirely  in  her  hands.  I 
The  countess  was  to  wear  a  dark  red  velvet  dress;  the  two  girls  white  ; 
tulle  dresses  over  pink  silk  slips,  and  roses  on  their  bodices.  They  were  i| 
to  wear  their  hair  a  la  grecque. 

All  the  essentials  were  ready.  Feet,  arms,  necks,  c.ud  ears  had  been  j 
washed,  scented,  and  powdered  with  peculiar  care  in  readiness  for  the  , 


WAR  AND  PEACE  423 

ball.  Openwork  silk  stockings  and  white  satin  shoes  with  ribbons  had 
been  put  on.  The  hairdressing  was  almost  aceomplisbed.  Sonya  was 
finishing  dressing,  so  was  the  countess;  but  Natasha,  who  had  been  busily 
looking  after  every  one,  was  behindhand.  She  was  still  sitting  before  the 
looking-glass  with  a  peignoir  thrown  over  her  thin  shoulders.  Sonya, 
already  dressed,  stood  in  the  middle  of  the  room,  and  was  trying  to  fasten 
in  a  last  ribbon,  hurting  her  little  finger  as  she  pressed  the  pin  with  a 
scrooping  sound  into  the  silk. 

‘Not  like  that,  Sonya,  not  like  that!’  said  Natasha,  turning  her  head, 
and  clutching  her  hair  in  both  hands,  as  the  maid  arranging  it  was  not 
quick  enough  in  letting  it  go.  ‘The  ribbon  mustn’t  go  like  that;  come 
here.’  Sonya  squatted  down.  Natasha  pinned  the  ribbon  in  her  own  way. 

‘Really,  miss,  you  mustn’t  do  so,’  said  the  maid,  holding  Natasha’s  hair. 

‘Oh,  my  goodness!  Afterwards!  There,  that’s  right,  Sonya.’ 

‘Will  you  soon  be  ready?’  they  heard  the  countess’s  voice.  ‘It  will  be 
ten  in  a  minute.’ 

‘Immediately,  immediately.  .  .  .  And  are  you  ready,  mamma?’ 

‘Only  my  cap  to  fasten  on.’ 

‘Don’t  do  it  without  me,’  shouted  Natasha;  ‘you  don’t  know  how  to!’ 

‘But  it’s  ten  o’clock  already.’ 

It  had  been  arranged  to  be  at  the  ball  at  half-past  ten,  and  Natasha 
still  had  to  dress,  and  they  had  to  drive  to  Tavritchesky  Garden. 

When  her  coiffure  was  finished,  Natasha,  in  her  mother’s  dressing- 
jacket  and  a  short  petticoat  under  which  her  dancing-shoes  could  be  seen, 
ran  up  to  Sonya,  looked  her  over,  and  then  ran  to  her  mother.  Turning 
her  head  round,  she  pinned  on  her  cap,  and  hurriedly  kissing  her  grey 
hair,  ran  back  to  the  maids  who  were  shortening  her  skirt. 

All  attention  was  now  centred  on  Natasha’s  skirt,  which  was  too  long. 
Two  maids  were  running  it  up  round  the  edge,  hurriedly  biting  off  the 
threads.  A  third  one,  with  pins  in  her  teeth  and  lips,  was  running  from 
the  countess  to  Sonya;  a  fourth  was  holding  up. the  whole  tulle  dress  in 
her  arms. 

‘Mavrushka,  quicker,  darling!’ 

‘Give  me  that  thimble,  miss.’ 

‘Will  you  be  quick?’  said  the  count  from  outside  the  door,  coming  in. 
‘Here  are  your  smelling-salts.  Madame  Peronsky  must  be  tired  of 
waiting.’ 

‘Ready,  miss,’  said  the  maid,  lifting  up  the  shortened  tulle  skirt  on  two 
fingers,  blowing  something  off  it,  and  giving  it  a  shake  to  show  her  appre¬ 
ciation  of  the  transparency  and  purity  of  what  she  had  in  her  hands. 

Natasha  began  putting  on  the  dress. 

‘In  a  minute,  in  a  minute,  don’t  come  in,  papa,’  she  shouted  to  her 
father  at  the  door,  from  under  the  tulle  of  the  dress  that  concealed  all 
her  face.  Sonya  slammed  the  door.  A  minute  later  the  count  was  admitted. 
He  was  wearing  a  blue  frock  coat,  stockings,  and  dancing-shoes,  and  was 
perfumed  and  pomaded. 


424  WARANDPEACE 

‘Ah,  papa,  how  nice  you  look,  lovely!’  said  Natasha,  standing  in  the 
middle  of  the  room,  stroking  out  the  folds  of  her  tulle. 

‘If  you  please,  miss,  if  you  please  .  .  said  a  maid,  pulling  up  the 
skirt  and  turning  the  pins  from  one  corner  of  her  mouth  to  the  other 
with  her  tongue. 

‘Say  what  you  like!’  cried  Sonya,  with  despair  in  her  voice,  as  she 
gazed  at  Natasha’s  skirt,  ‘say  what  you  like! — it’s  too  long  still!  ’ 

Natasha  walked  a  little  further  off  to  look  at  herself  in  the  pierglass. 
The  skirt  was  too  long. 

‘My  goodness,  madam,  it’s  not  a  bit  too  long,’  said  Mavrushka,  creep¬ 
ing  along  the  floor  on  her  knees  after  her  young  lady. 

‘Well,  if  it’s  long,  we’ll  tack  it  up,  in  one  minute,  we’ll  tack  it  up,’  said 
Dunyasha,  a  resolute  character.  And  taking  a  needle  out  of  the  kerchief 
on  her  bosom  she  set  to  work  again  on  the  floor. 

At  that  moment  the  countess  in  her  cap  and  velvet  gown  walked 
shyly  with  soft  steps  into  the  room. 

‘Oo-oo!  my  beauty!  ’  cried  the  count.  ‘She  looks  nicer  than  any  of  you !  ’ 
.  .  .  He  would  have  embraced  her,  but,  flushing,  she  drew  back  to  avoid 
being  crumpled. 

‘Mamma,  the  cap  should  be  more  on  one  side,’  said  Natasha.  ‘I’ll  pin 
it  fresh,’  and  she  darted  forward.  The  maids  turning  up  her  skirt,  not 
prepared  for  her  hasty  movement,  tore  off  a  piece  of  the  tulle. 

‘Oh,  mercy!  What  was  that?  Really  it’s  not  my  fault  .  .  .’ 

‘It’s  all  right,  I’ll  run  it  up,  it  won’t  show,’  said  Dunyasha. 

‘My  beauty,  my  queen!’  said  the  old  nurse  coming  in  at  the  doorway. 
‘And  Sonyushka,  too;  ah,  the  beauties!  .  .  .’ 

At  a  quarter  past  ten  they  were  at  last  seated  in  their  carriage  and 
driving  off.  But  they  still  had  to  drive  to  Tavritchesky  Garden. 

Madame  Peronsky  was  ready  and  waiting.  In  spite  of  her  age  and 
ugliness,  just  the  same  process  had  been  going  on  with  her  as  with  the 
Rostovs,  not  with  flurry,  for  with  her  it  was  a  matter  of  routine.  Her 
elderly  and  unprepossessing  person  had  been  also  washed  and  scented 
and  powdered ;  she  had  washed  as  carefully  behind  her  ears,  and  like  the 
Rostovs’  nurse,  her  old  maid  had  enthusiastically  admired  her  mistress’s 
attire,  when  she  came  into  the  drawing-room  in  her  yellow  gown  adorned 
with  her  badge  of  a  maid-of-honour.  Madame  Peronsky  praised  the 
Rostovs’  costumes,  and  they  praised  her  attire  and  her  taste.  Then, 
careful  of  their  coiffures  and  their  dresses,  at  eleven  o’clock  they  settled 
themselves  in  the  carriages  and  drove  off. 


XV 


Natasha  had  not  had  a  free  moment  all  that  day,  and  had  not  once  had 
time  to  think  of  what  lay  before  her. 

In  the  damp,  chill  air,  in  the  closeness  and  half  dark  of  the  swaying 
carriage,  she  pictured  to  herself  for  the  first  time  what  was  in  store  for 


WAR  AND  PEACE  425 

her  there,  at  the  ball,  in  the  brightly  lighted  halls — music,  flowers, 
dancing,  the  Tsar,  all  the  brilliant  young  people  of  Petersburg.  The 
prospect  before  her  was  so  splendid  that  she  could  not  even  believe  that 
it  would  come  to  pass:  so  incongruous  it  seemed  with  the  chilliness,  dark¬ 
ness,  and  closeness  of  the  carriage.  She  could  only  grasp  all  that  awaited 
her  when,  walking  over  the  red  cloth,  she  went  into  the  vestibule,  took  off 
her  cloak,  and  walked  beside  Sonya  in  front  of  her  mother  between  the 
flowers  up  the  lighted  staircase.  Only  then  she  remembered  how  she  must 
behave  at  a  ball,  and  tried  to  assume  the  majestic  manner  that  she  con¬ 
sidered  indispensable  for  a  girl  at  a  ball.  But  luckily  she  felt  that  there 
was  a  mist  before  her  eyes;  she  could  see  nothing  clearly,  her  pulse  beat 
a  hundred  times  a  minute,  and  the  blood  throbbed  at  her  heart.  She  was 
unable  to  assume  the  manner  that  would  have  made  her  absurd;  and 
moved  on,  thrilling  with  excitement,  and  trying  with  all  her  might 
simply  to  conceal  it.  And  it  was  just  in  this  mood  that  she  looked  her  best. 
In  front  and  behind  them  walked  guests  dressed  in  similar  ball-dresses 
and  conversing  in  similarly  subdued  tones.  The  looking-glasses  on  the 
staircases  reflected  ladies  in  white,  blue,  and  pink  dresses,  with  diamonds 
and  pearls  on  their  bare  arms  and  necks. 

Natasha  looked  into  the  looking-glasses  and  could  not  distinguish 
herself  from  the  rest.  All  was  mingled  into  one  brilliant  procession.  At 
the  entrance  into  the  first  room,  the  regular  hum  of  voices,  footsteps, 
greetings,  deafened  Natasha;  the  light  and  brilliance  dazzled  her  still 
more.  The  host  and  hostess  who  had  been  already  standing  at  the  door 
for  half  an  hour,  saying  exactly  the  same  words  to  every  guest  on  arrival, 
Charme  de  vous  voir,  gave  the  same  greeting  to  the  Rostovs  and  Madame 
Peronsky.  The  two  young  girls  in  their  white  dresses,  with  roses  alike  in 
their  black  hair,  made  curtsies  just  alike,  but  unconsciously  the  hostess’s 
eyes  rested  longer  on  the  slender  figure  of  Natasha.  She  looked  at  her, 
and  smiled  at  her  a  smile  that  was  something  more  than  the  smile  of 
welcome  she  had  for  all.  Looking  at  her,  the  hostess  was  reminded  perhaps 
of  her  golden  days  of  girlhood,  gone  never  to  return,  of  her  own  first  ball. 
The  host  too  followed  Natasha  with  his  eyes,  and  asked  the  count  which 
of  the  girls  was  his  daughter. 

‘Charming!’  he  said,  kissing  his  own  finger-tips. 

In  the  ballroom,  guests  stood  crowding  about  the  entry  in  expectation 
of  the  Tsar.  The  countess  took  up  her  position  in  the  front  row  of  this 
crowd.  Natasha  heard  and  felt  that  several  voices  were  asking  who  she 
was,  that  many  pairs  of  eyes  were  fixed  on  her.  She  knew  that  she  was 
making  a  good  impression  on  those  who  noticed  her,  and  this  observation 
calmed  her  somewhat. 

‘There  are  some  like  ourselves,  and  some  not  as  good,’  she  thought. 

Madame  Peronsky  was  pointing  out  to  the  countess  the  most  dis¬ 
tinguished  persons  at  the  ball. 

‘That  is  the  Dutch  ambassador,  do  you  see,  the  grey-haired  man,’ 
Madame  Peronsky  was  saying,  indicating  an  old  man  with  a  profusion  of 
silver-grey  curls,  who  was  surrounded  by  ladies  laughing  at  some  story 


426  WARANDPEACE 

he  was  telling.  ‘And  here  she  comes,  the  queen  of  Petersburg  society, 
Countess  Bezuhov,’  she  said,  pointing  to  Ellen  who  had  just  come  in. 

‘How  lovely!  She’s  quite  equal  to  Marya  Antonovna.  Look  how  atten¬ 
tive  all  the  men  are  to  her,  young  and  old  alike.  She’s  both  lovely  and 
clever.  .  .  .  They  say  Prince  So-and-So  is  wild  about  her.  And  you  see 
these  two,  though  they  are  not  good-looking,  they  are  even  more  run 
after.’ 

She  pointed  out  a  lady  who  was  crossing  the  room  accompanied  by  a 
very  ugly  daughter. 

‘That’s  the  heiress  of  a  million,’  said  Madame  Peronsky.  ‘And,  look, 
here  come  her  suitors.  .  .  .  That’s  Countess  Bezuhov’s  brother,  Anatole 
Kuragin,’  she  said,  pointing  to  a  handsome  officer  in  the  Horse  Guards, 
who  passed  by  them  looking  from  the  height  of  his  lifted  head  over  the 
ladies  to  something  beyond  them.  ‘He  is  handsome,  isn’t  he?  They  say  he 
is  to  be  married  to  that  heiress.  And  your  cousin,  Drubetskoy,  is  very 
attentive  to  her  too.  They  say  she  has  millions.  Oh,  that’s  the  French 
ambassador  himself,’  she  said  in  answer  to  the  countess’s  inquiry  as  to 
the  identity  of  Caulaincourt.  ‘Just  look,  he’s  like  some  monarch.  But  yet 
they’re  nice,  the  French  are  very  nice.  No  people  more  charming  in 
society.  Ah,  here  she  is!  Yes,  still  lovelier  than  any  one,  our  Marya 
Antonovna!  And  how  simply  dressed!  Exquisite!’ 

‘And  that  stout  fellow  in  spectacles  is  a  universal  freemason,’  said 
Madame  Peronsky,  indicating  Bezuhov.  ‘Set  him  beside  his  wife :  he’s  a 
motley  fool! ’ 

Swinging  his  stout  frame,  Pierre  slouched  through  the  crowd,  nodding 
to  right  and  to  left,  as  casually  and  good-naturedly  as  though  he  were 
walking  through  a  crowd  in  a  market.  He  made  his  way  through  the 
crowd  unmistakably  looking  for  some  one. 

Natasha  looked  with  joy  at  the  familiar  face  of  Pierre,  the  motley  fool, 
as  Madame  Peronsky  called  him,  and  knew  that  it  was  they,  and  she  in 
particular,  of  whom  Pierre  was  in  search  in  the  crowd.  Pierre  had 
promised  her  to  be  at  the  ball  and  to  find  her  partners.  But  before 
reaching  them,  Pierre  came  to  a  standstill  beside  a  very  handsome,  dark 
man  of  medium  height  in  a  white  uniform,  who  was  standing  in  a  window 
talking  to  a  tall  man  wearing  stars  and  a  ribbon. 

Natasha  at  once  recognised  the  handsome  young  man  in  the  white 
uniform;  it  was  Bolkonsky,  who  seemed  to  her  to  have  grown  much 
younger,  happier,  and  better  looking. 

‘There’s  some  one  else  we  know,  Bolkonsky,  do  you  see,  mamma?’  said 
Natasha,  pointing  out  Prince  Andrey.  ‘Do  you  remember  he  stayed  a 
night  at  home,  at  Otradnoe?’ 

‘Oh,  do  you  know  him?’  said  Madame  Peronsky.  ‘I  can’t  bear  him. 
Every  one  is  crazy  over  him.  And  his  conceit!  it’s  beyond  all  bounds!  He 
takes  after  his  worthy  papa!  And  he’s  hand  in  glove  now  with  Speransky, 
making  out  some  sort  of  plans  for  reform.  Just  look  how  he  behaves  with 
ladies!  She’s  speaking  to  him,  and  he  has  turned  his  back  on  her,’  she 


WAR  AND  PEACE  427 

said,  pointing  to  him.  ‘I  would  soon  send  him  about  his  business  if  he  were 
to  treat  me  like  those  ladies.’ 


XVI 

There  was  a  sudden  stir,  the  crowd  began  talking,  rushed  forward,  then 
moved  apart  again,  and  down  the  space  left  open  through  it,  the  Tsar 
walked  to  the  strains  of  the  band,  which  struck  up  at  once.  Behind  him 
walked  the  host  and  hostess.  The  Tsar  walked  in  rapidly,  bowing  to  right 
and  to  left,  as  though  trying  to  hurry  over  the  first  moments  of  greeting. 
The  musicians  played  the  polonaise  in  vogue  at  the  time  on  account  of 
the  words  set  to  it.  The  words  began:  ‘Alexander,  Elisaveta,  our  hearts 
ye  ravish  quite.’  The  Tsar  went  into  the  drawing-room,  the  crowd  made 
a  dash  for  the  door;  several  persons  ran  hurriedly  to  the  door  and  back 
with  excited  faces.  The  crowd  made  another  rush  back,  away  from  the 
drawing-room  door  at  which  the  Tsar  appeared  in  conversation  with  the 
hostess.  A  young  man,  looking  distraught,  pounced  down  on  the  ladies 
and  begged  them  to  move  aside.  Several,  with  faces  that  betrayed  a  total 
oblivion  of  all  the  rules  of  decorum,  squeezed  forward,  to  the  destruction 
of  their  dresses.  The  men  began  approaching  the  ladies,  and  couples 
were  formed  for  the  polonaise. 

There  was  a  general  movement  of  retreat,  and  the  Tsar,  smiling,  came 
out  at  the  drawing-room  door,  leading  out  the  lady  of  the  house,  and 
not  keeping  time  to  the  music.  He  was  followed  by  the  host  with  Marya 
Antonovna  Narishkin;  then  came  ambassadors,  ministers,  and  various 
generals,  whose  names  Madame  Peronsky  never  tired  of  reciting.  More 
than  half  the  ladies  had  partners,  and  were  taking  part,  or  preparing  to 
take  part,  in  the  polonaise. 

Natasha  felt  that  she  would  be  left  with  her  mother  and  Sonya  in  that 
minority  of  the  ladies  who  were  crowded  back  against  the  wall,  and  not 
invited  to  dance  the  polonaise.  She  stood,  her  thin  arms  hanging  at  her 
sides,  and  her  scarcely  outlined  bosom  heaving  regularly.  She  held  her 
breath,  and  gazed  before  her  with  shining,  frightened  eyes,  with  an  ex¬ 
pression  of  equal  readiness  for  the  utmost  bliss  or  the  utmost  misery. 
She  took  no  interest  in  the  Tsar,  nor  in  all  the  great  people  Madame 
Peronsky  was  pointing  out;  her  mind  was  filled  by  one  thought:  ‘Is  it 
possible  no  one  will  come  up  to  me?  Is  it  possible  that  I  shall  not  dance 
among  the  foremost?  Is  it  possible  I  shall  not  be  noticed  by  all  these 
men,  who  now  don’t  even  seem  to  see  me,  but  if  they  look  at  me,  look 
with  an  expression  as  though  they  would  say:  “Ah!  that’s  not  she,  so  it’s 
no  use  looking”?’  ‘No,  it  cannot  be!’  she  thought.  ‘They  must  know  how 
I  long  to  dance,  how  well  I  dance,  and  how  they  would  enjoy  dancing 
with  me.’ 

The  strains  of  the  polonaise,  which  had  already  lasted  some  time, 
were  beginning  to  sound  like  a  melancholy  reminiscence  in  the  ears  of 
Natasha.  She  wanted  to  cry.  Madame  Peronsky  had  left  them.  The  count 


428  WARANDPEACE 

was  at  the  other  end  of  the  ballroom,  the  countess,  Sonya,  and  she  stood 
in  that  crowd  of  strangers  as  lonely  as  in  a  forest,  of  no  interest,  of  no 
use  to  any  one.  Prince  Andrey  with  a  lady  passed  close  by  them,  obviously 
not  recognising  them.  The  handsome  Anatole  said  something  smiling  to 
the  lady  on  his  arm,  and  he  glanced  at  Natasha’s  face  as  one  looks  at 
a  wall.  Boris  passed  by  them  twice,  and  each  time  turned  away.  Berg 
and  his  wife,  who  were  not  dancing,  came  towards  them. 

This  family  meeting  here,  in  a  ballroom,  seemed  a  humiliating  thing 
to  Natasha,  as  though  there  were  nowhere  else  for  family  talk  but  here 
at  a  ball.  She  did  not  listen,  and  did  not  look  at  Vera,  who  said  something 
to  her  about  her  own  green  dress. 

At  last  the  Tsar  stood  still  beside  the  last  of  his  partners  (he  had 
danced  with  three),  the  music  ceased.  An  anxious-looking  adjutant  ran 
up  to  the  Rostovs,  begging  them  to  move  a  little  further  back,  though  : 
they  were  already  close  to  the  wall,  and  from  the  orchestra  came  the 
circumspect,  precise,  seductively,  stately  rhythm  of  the  waltz.  The  Tsar 
glanced  with  a  smile  down  the  ballroom.  A  moment  passed;  no  one  had 
yet  begun.  An  adjutant,  who  was  a  steward,  went  up  to  Countess  Bezuhov 
and  asked  her  to  dance.  Smiling,  she  raised  her  hand  and  laid  it  on  the 
adjutant’s  shoulder  without  looking  at  him.  The  adjutant-steward,  a 
master  of  his  art,  grasped  his  partner  firmly,  and  with  confident  de-  | 
liberation  and  smoothness  broke  with  her  into  the  first  gallop  round  the 
edge  of  the  circle,  then  at  the  corner  of  the  ballroom  caught  his  partner’s 
left  hand,  turned  her;  and  througl  xhe  quickening  strains  of  the  music 
nothing  could  be  heard  but  the  regular  jingle  of  the  spurs  on  the  adjutant’s 
rapid,  practised  feet,  and  at  every  third  beat  the  swish  of  his  partner’s  i 
flying  velvet  skirt  as  she  whirled  round. 

Natasha  looked  at  them,  and  was  ready  to  cry  that  it  was  not  she 
dancing  that  first  round  of  the  waltz. 

Prince  Andrey,  in  his  white  uniform  of  a  cavalry  colonel,  wearing 
stockings  and  dancing-shoes,  stood  looking  eager  and  lively,  in  the  front 
of  the  ring  not  far  from  the  Rostovs.  Baron  Firhoff  was  talking  to  him 
of  the  proposed  first  sitting  of  the  State  Council  to  be  held  next  day. 
From  his  intimacy  with  Speransky,  and  the  part  he  was  taking  in  the 
labours  of  the  legislative  commission,  Prince  Andrey  was  in  a  position  to 
give  authoritative  information  in  regard  to  that  sitting,  about  which  the 
most  diverse  rumours  were  current.  But  he  did  not  hear  what  Firhoff 
was  saying  to  him,  and  looked  from  the  Tsar  to  the  gentlemen  preparing 
to  dance,  who  had  not  yet  stepped  out  into  the  ring. 

Prince  Andrey  was  watching  these  gentlemen,  who  were  timid  in  the  I 
presence  of  the  Tsar,  and  the  ladies,  who  were  dying  to  be  asked  to  dance. 

Pierre  went  up  to  Prince  Andrey  and  took  him  by  the  arm. 

‘You  always  dance.  Here  is  my  protegee,  the  younger  Rostov  girl, 
ask  her,’  he  said. 

‘Where?’  asked  Bolkonsky.  ‘I  beg  your  pardon,’  he  said,  turning  to  the  < 
baron,  ‘we  will  finish  this  conversation  in  another  place,  but  at  a  ball 
one  must  dance.’  He  went  forward  in  the  direction  indicated  by  Pierre. 


WARANDPEACE  429 

Natasha’s  despairing,  tremulous  face  broke  upon  Prince  Andrey.  He 
recognised  her,  guessed  her  feelings,  saw  that  it  was  her  debut,  remem¬ 
bered  what  she  had  said  at  the  window,  and  with  an  expression  of 
pleasure  on  his  face  he  approached  Countess  Rostov. 

‘Permit  me  to  introduce  you  to  my  daughter,’  said  the  countess, 
reddening. 

‘I  have  the  pleasure  of  her  acquaintance  already,  if  the  countess  re¬ 
members  me,’  said  Prince  Andrey,  with  a  low  and  courteous  bow,  which 
seemed  a  direct  contradiction  to  Madame  Peronsky’s  remarks  about  his 
rudeness.  He  went  up  to  Natasha,  and  raised  his  hand  to  put  it  round 
her  waist  before  he  had  fully  uttered  the  invitation  to  dance.  He  pro¬ 
posed  a  waltz  to  her.  The  tremulous  expression  of  Natasha’s  face,  ready 
for  despair  or  for  ecstasy,  brightened  at  once  into  a  happy,  grateful, 
childlike  smile. 

‘I  have  been  a  long  while  waiting  for  you,’  that  alarmed  and  happy 
young  girl  seemed  to  say  to  him  in  the  smile  that  peeped  out  through  the 
starting  tears  as  she  raised  her  hand  to  Prince  Audrey’s  shoulder.  They 
were  the  second  couple  that  walked  forward  into  the  ring. 

Prince  Andrey  was  one  of  the  best  dancers  of  his  day.  Natasha  danced 
exquisitely.  Her  little  feet  in  their  satin  dancing-shoes  performed  their 
task  lightly  and  independently  of  her,  and  her  face  beamed  with  a  rapture 
of  happiness. 

Her  bare  neck  and  arms  were  thin,  and  not  beautiful  compared  with 
Ellen’s  shoulders.  Her  shoulders  were  thin,  her  bosom  undefined,  her  arms 
were  slender.  But  Ellen  was,  as  it  were,  covered  with  the  hard  varnish 
of  those  thousands  of  eyes  that  had  scanned  her  person,  while  Natasha 
seemed  like  a  young  girl  stripped  for  the  first  time,  who  would  have  been 
greatly  ashamed  if  she  had  not  been  assured  by  every  one  that  it  must 
be  so. 

Prince  Andrey  loved  dancing.  He  was  anxious  to  escape  as  quickly  as 
he  could  from  the  political  and  intellectual  conversations  into  which 
every  one  tried  to  draw  him,  and  anxious  too  to  break  through  that  bur¬ 
densome  barrier  of  constraint  arising  from  the  presence  of  the  Tsar;  so  he 
made  haste  to  dai.ce,  and  chose  Natasha  for  a  partner  because  Pierre 
pointed  her  out  to  him,  and  because  she  was  the  first  pretty  girl  who 
caught  his  eyes.  But  he  had  no  sooner  put  his  arm  round  that  slender, 
supple  waist,  and  felt  her  stirring  so  close  to  him,  and  smiling  so  close  to 
him,  than  the  intoxication  of  her  beauty  flew  to  his  head.  He  felt  full  of 
life  and  youth  again  as,  drawing  a  deep  breath,  he  brought  her  to  a 
standstill  and  began  to  watch  the  other  couples. 


XVII 

After  Prince  Andrey,  Boris  came  up  to  ask  Natasha  to  dance,  and  he 
was  followed  by  the  dancing  adjutant  who  had  opened  the  ball,  and 
many  other  young  men.  Natasha,  flushed  and  happy,  passed  on  her 


430  WAR  AND  PEACE 

superfluous  partners  to  Sonya,  and  never  ceased  dancing  all  the  evening, 
She  noticed  nothing  and  saw  nothing  of  what  was  absorbing  every  one 
else  at  that  ball.  She  did  not  notice  that  the  Tsar  talked  a  long  time  with 
the  French  ambassador,  that  his  manner  was  particularly  gracious  to  a 
certain  lady,  that  Prince  So-and-So  and  Mr.  So-and-So  had  said  and 
done  this  and  that,  that  Ellen’s  success  had  been  brilliant,  and  that  So- 
and-So  had  paid  her  marked  attention.  She  did  not  even  see  the  Tsar, 
and  was  only  aware  that  he  was  gone  from  noticing  that  the  ball  became 
livelier  after  his  departure. 

In  one  of  the  most  enjoyable  cotillions  before  supper,  Prince  Andrey 
danced  again  with  Natasha.  He  reminded  her  of  how  he  had  first  seen 
her  in  the  avenue  at  Otradnoe,  and  how  she  could  not  sleep  on  that  moon¬ 
light  night,  and  told  her  how  he  had  unwittingly  listened  to  her.  Natasha 
blushed  at  these  recollections,  and  tried  as  it  were  to  excuse  herself,  as 
though  there  were  something  to  be  ashamed  of  in  the  emotion  to  which 
Prince  Andrey  had  unwittingly  played  the  eavesdropper. 

Like  all  men  who  have  grown  up  in  society,  Prince  Andrey  liked 
meeting  anything  not  of  the  conventional  society  stamp.  And  such  was 
Natasha  with  her  wonder,  her  delight,  her  shyness,  and  even  her  mistakes 
in  talking  French.  His  manner  was  particularly  tender  and  circumspect 
as  he  talked  to  her.  Sitting  beside  her,  and  talking  of  the  simplest  and 
most  trifling  subjects,  Prince  Andrey  admired  the  radiant  brilliance  of 
her  eyes  and  her  smile,  that  had  no  concern  with  what  was  said  but  was 
due  simply  to  her  own  happiness.  When  Natasha  was  chosen  again,  and 
she  had  got  up  with  a  smile  and  was  dancing,  Prince  Andrey  particularly 
admired  her  shy  grace.  In  the  middle  of  the  cotillion,  Natasha  went  back 
to  her  place,  breathless  at  the  end  of  a  figure.  Another  partner  again 
chose  her.  She  was  tired  and  panting,  and  evidently  she  thought  for  an 
instant  of  refusing,  but  immediately  she  put  her  hand  on  her  partner’s 
shoulder  and  was  off  again  gaily,  smiling  to  Prince  Andrey. 

‘I  should  have  been  glad  to  rest  and  sit  by  you.  I’m  tired;  but  you  see 
how  they  keep  asking  me,  and  I’m  glad  of  it,  and  I’m  happy,  and  I  love 
every  one,  and  you  and  I  understand  all  about  it,’  and  more,  much  more 
was  said  in  that  smile.  When  her  partner  left  her  side,  Natasha  flew 
across  the  room  to  choose  two  ladies  for  the  figure. 

‘If  she  goes  first  to  her  cousin  and  then  to  another  lady,  she  will  be  my 
wife,’  Prince  Andrey — greatly  to  his  own  surprise — caught  himself  saying 
mentally,  as  he  watched  her.  She  did  go  first  to  her  cousin. 

‘What  nonsense  does  sometimes  come  into  one’s  mind!  thought 
Prince  Andrey, ‘but  one  thing’s  certain,  that  girl  is  so  charming,  so  original, 
that  she  won’t  be  dancing  here  a  month  before  she  will  be  married.  .  .  . 
She’s  a  rare  thing  here,’  he  thought,  as  Natasha  settled  herself  beside 
him,  sticking  in  the  rose  that  was  falling  out  of  her  bodice. 

At  the  end  of  the  cotillion,  the  old  count  in  his  blue  frock  coat  went  up; 
to  the  young  people  who  had  been  dancing.  He  invited  Prince  Andrey  tcj 
come  and  see  them,  and  asked  his  daughter  whether  she  were  enjoying 


WAR  AND  PEACE  431 

herself.  Natasha  did  not  at  once  answer,  she  only  smiled  a  smile  that  said 
reproachfully:  ‘How  can  you  ask  such  a  question?’ 

‘Enjoying  myself  as  I  never  have  before  in  my  life!’  she  said,  and 
Prince  Andrey  noticed  how  her  thin  arms  were  swiftly  raised  as  though 
to  embrace  her  father,  and  dropped  again  at  once.  Natasha  was  happy 
as  she  had  never  been  in  her  life.  She  was  at  that  highest  pitch  of  happi¬ 
ness,  when  one  becomes  completely  good  and  kind,  and  disbelieves  in  the 
very  possibility  of  evil,  unhappiness,  and  sorrow. 

At  that  ball  Pierre  for  the  first  time  felt  humiliated  by  the  position  his 
wife  took  in  the  highest  court  circle.  He  was  sullen  and  absent-minded. 
There  was  a  broad  furrow  right  across  his  forehead,  as  he  stood  in  a 
window,  staring  over  his  spectacles  and  seeing  no  one.  Natasha  passed 
close  by  him  on  her  way  in  to  supper.  Pierre’s  gloomy,  unhappy  face 
struck  her.  She  stopped,  facing  him.  She  longed  to  come  to  his  aid.  to 
bestow  on  him  some  of  her  own  overflowing  happiness.  ‘How  delightful  it 
is,’  she  said;  ‘isn’t  it?’ 

Pierre  smiled  an  absent-minded  smile,  obviously  not  grasping  what 
was  said  to  him.  ‘Yes,  I’m  very  glad,’  he  said. 

‘How  can  people  be  discontented  at  anything!’  thought  Natasha. 
‘Especially  any  one  as  nice  as  Bezuhov.’ 

In  Natasha’s  eyes  all  the  people  at  the  ball  were  particularly  kind, 
sweet,  good  people,  loving  one  another;  none  were  capable  of  wronging 
one  another,  and  so  all  must  be  happy. 


XVIII 

Next  day  when  Prince  Andrey  thought  of  the  ball  it  did  not  occupy  his 
mind  for  long.  ‘Yes,  it  was  a  very  successful  ball.  And  besides  .  .  .  yes, 
the  younger  Rostov  is  very  charming.  There’s  something  fresh  in  her, 
original,  unlike  Petersburg.’  That  was  all  he  thought  about  the  previous 
day’s  ball,  and  after  his  morning  tea  he  set  to  work. 

But  from  fatigue  and  want  of  sleep  he  was  not  very  well  disposed  for 
work,  and  could  get  nothing  done.  He  was  continually  criticising  his  own 
work — a  habit  common  with  him — and  was  glad  when  he  heard  a  visitor 
arrive. 

The  visitor  was  Bitsky,  a  man  who  was  a  member  of  various  com- 
aiittees  and  of  all  the  societies  in  Petersburg.  He  was  a  passionate 
adherent  of  the  new  ideas  and  of  Speransky,  and  the  busiest  purveyor  of 
news  in  Petersburg,  one  of  those  men  who  choose  their  opinions  like  their 
flothes — according  to  the  fashion— but  for  that  very  reason  seem  the 
most  vehement  partisans.  Scarcely  waiting  to  remove  his  hat,  he  ran 
fussily  up  to  Prince  Andrey,  and  at  once  began  talking.  He  had  just 
earned  particulars  of  the  sitting  of  the  State  Council  of  that  morning, 
apened  by  the  Tsar,  and  began  enthusiastically  upon  the  subject.  The 


432  WAR  AND  PEACE 

Tsar’s  speech  had  been,  he  said,  an  extraordinary  one.  It  had  been  a 
speech  such  as  are  only  delivered  by  constitutional  monarchs.  ‘The  Em¬ 
peror  directly  asserted  that  the  Council  and  the  Senate  are  the  estates  of 
the  realm;  he  said  that  government  should  be  founded,  not  on  arbitrary 
authority,  but  on  a  secure  basis.  The  Emperor  said  that  the  fiscal  system 
must  be  reconstituted  and  the  accounts  must  be  public,’  Bitsky  an¬ 
nounced,  laying  stress  on  certain  words,  and  opening  his  eyes  signifi¬ 
cantly.  ‘Yes,  to-day’s  sitting  marks  an  epoch,  the  greatest  epoch  in  our 
history,’  he  concluded. 

Prince  Andrey  heard  his  account  of  the  opening  of  the  State  Council, 
to  which  he  had  been  looking  forward  with  such  eagerness,  and  to  which 
he  had  attached  so  much  consequence,  and  was  amazed  that  now,  when 
it  had  come  to  pass,  this  event,  far  from  affecting  him,  struck  him  as  less 
than  insignificant.  With  quiet  irony  he  listened  to  Bitsky’s  enthusiastic 
description.  The  idea  in  his  mind  was  of  the  simplest.  ‘What  is  it  to  me 
and  Bitsky,’  he  thought,  ‘what  is  it  to  us,  whatever  the  Emperor  is  pleased 
to  say  in  the  Council?  Can  all  that  make  me  any  happier  or  better?’ 

And  this  simple  reflection  suddenly  destroyed  all  Prince  Andrey’s 
former  interest  in  the  reforms  that  were  being  made.  That  day  Prince 
Andrey  was  to  dine  with  Speransky,  ‘with  only  a  few  friends,’  as  the  host 
had  said  in  inviting  him.  That  dinner,  in  the  intimate  home  circle  of  the 
man  who  had  so  fascinated  him,  had  seemed  very  attractive  to  Prince 
Andrey,  especially  as  he  had  not  hitherto  seen  Speransky  in  his  home 
surroundings.  But  now  he  had  no  wish  to  go  to  it. 

At  the  hour  fixed,  however,  Prince  Andrey  was  entering  the  small 
house  in  Tavritchesky  Garden.  The  little  house,  which  was  Speransky’s 
property,  was  distinguished  by  an  extraordinary  cleanliness,  suggestive 
of  the  cleanliness  of  a  convent.  In  the  parqueted  dining-room,  Prince 
Andrey,  who  was  a  little  late,  found  all  that  circle  of  Speransky’s  intimate 
friends  already  gathered  together  at  five  o’clock.  There  were  no  ladies 
present,  except  Speransky’s  little  daughter  (with  a  long  face  like  hen 
father’s)  and  her  governess.  The  guests  were  Gervais,  Magnitsky  andi 
Stolypin.  From  the  vestibule  Prince  Andrey  had  caught  the  sound  of 
loud  voices  and  a  ringing,  staccato  laugh — a  laugh  such  as  one  hears  on 
the  stage.  Some  one — it  sounded  like  Speransky — was  giving  vent  to  a 
staccato  ‘ha  .  .  .  ha  .  .  .  ha  .  .  .’  Prince  Andrey  had  never  before 
heard  Speransky  laugh,  and  this  shrill,  ringing  laugh  from  the  great; 
statesman  made  a  strange  impression  on  him. 

Prince  Andrey  went  into  the  dining-room.  The  whole  party  were 
standing  between  the  two  windows  at  a  little  table  laid  with  hors  d.’ oeuvres.. 
Speransky  was  standing  at  the  table  with  a  mirthful  countenance,  wear¬ 
ing  a  grey  frock  coat  with  a  star,  and  the  white  waistcoat  and  high  white 
stock,  in  which  he  had  been  at  the  famous  sitting  of  the  State  Council. 
His  guests  formed  a  ring  round  him.  Turning  towards  him  Magnitsky 
was  relating  an  anecdote.  Speransky  listened,  laughing  beforehand  at 
what  Magnitsky  was  going  to  say.  Just  as  Prince  Andrey  walked  into  the 
room,  Magnitsky’s  words  were  again  drowned  in  laughter.  Stolypin  gave 


WARANDPEACE  433 

vent  to  a  bass  guffaw  as  he  munched  a  piece  of  bread  and  cheese.  Gervais 
softly  hissed  a  chuckle,  and  Speransky  laughed  his  shrill,  staccato  laugh. 

Speransky,  still  laughing,  gave  Prince  Andrey  his  soft,  white  hand. 
‘Very  glad  to  see  you,  prince,’  he  said.  ‘One  minute  .  .  .’  he  turned  to 
Magnitsky,  whose  tale  he  was  interrupting.  ‘We  have  made  a  compact 
to-day;  this  is  a  holiday  dinner,  and  not  one  word  about  business.’  And  he 
turned  again  to  the  story-teller,  and  again  he  laughed. 

With  a  sense  of  wondering  and  melancholy  disillusion,  Prince  Andrey 
heard  his  laughter  and  looked  at  Speransky  laughing.  It  was  not  Speran¬ 
sky,  but  some  other  man,  it  seemed  to  Prince  Andrey.  All  that  had 
seemed  mysterious  and  attractive  in  Speransky  suddenly  seemed  to  Prince 
Andrey  obvious  and  unnattractive. 

At  dinner  the  conversation  never  paused  for  a  moment,  and  consisted 
of  something  like  the  contents  of  a  jest-book.  Magnitsky  had  hardly 
finished  his  anecdote  when  another  gentleman  expressed  his  readiness  to 
relate  something  even  more  amusing.  The  anecdotes  for  the  most  part 
related,  if  not  to  the  service  itself,  to  persons  prominent  in  the  service. 
It  was  as  though  in  this  circle  the  utter  insignificance  of  these  prominent 
persons  was  so  completely  accepted  that  the  only  attitude  possible  to¬ 
wards  them  was  one  of  good-humoured  hilarity.  Speransky  told  them  how 
at  the  council  that  morning  a  deaf  statesman,  on  being  asked  his  opinion, 
replied  that  he  was  of  the  same  opinion.  Gervais  described  a  whole 
episode  of  the  revision,  only  remarkable  for  the  imbecility  of  all  concerned 
in  it.  Stolypin,  stammering,  took  up  the  conversation  and  began  talking 
of  the  abuses  of  the  old  order  of  things,  with  a  warmth  that  threatened  to 
give  the  conversation  a  serious  turn.  Magnitsky  began  to  make  fun  of 
Stolypin’s  earnestness.  Gervais  put  in  his  joke,  and  the  conversation 
resumed  its  former  lively  tone.  It  was  obvious  that  after  his  labours 
Speransky  liked  to  rest  and  be  amused  in  the  circle  of  his  friends;  and  all 
his  friends  understood  his  tastes,  and  were  trying  to  amuse  him  and 
themselves.  But  this  kind  of  gaiety  seemed  to  Prince  Andrey  tiresome  and 
anything  but  gay.  Speransky’s  high  voice  struck  him  unpleasantly,  and 
his  continual  laugh  in  its  high-pitched,  falsetto  note  was  for  some  reason 
an  offence  to  Prince  Andrey’s  feelings.  Prince  Andrey  did  not  laugh,  and 
was  afraid  he  would  be  felt  uncongenial  by  this  party.  But  no  one  noticed 
his  lack  of  sympathy  with  the  general  merriment.  All  of  them  appeared 
to  be  greatly  enjoying  themselves. 

Several  times  he  tried  to  enter  into  the  conversation,  but  every  time  the 
word  was  snatched,  out  of  his  mouth,  like  a  cork  out  of  water,  and  he 
could  not  bandy  jokes  with  them.  There  was  nothing  wrong  or  unseemly 
in  what  they  said;  it  was  all  witty,  and  might  have  been  amusing,  but 
something — that  very  something  that  makes  the  zest  of  gaiety — was 
wanting,  and  they  did  not  even  know  of  its  existence. 

After  dinner  Speransky’s  daughter  and  her  governess  rose  from  the 
table.  Speransky  patted  his  daughter  with  his  white  hand,  and  kissed  her. 
And  that  gesture,  too,  seemed  to  Prince  Andrey  unnatural. 


434  WAR  AND  PEACE 

The  men  sat  on  over  their  port,  after  the  English  fashion.  A  conversa¬ 
tion  sprang  up  about  Napoleon’s  doings  in  Spain,  of  which  all  were  united 
in  approving,  while  Prince  Andrey  attacked  them.  But  in  the  middle  of 
this  discussion  Speransky,  obviously  wishing  to  change  the  subject,  began 
with  a  smile  telling  an  anecdote,  which  had  no  connection  with  it.  For 
several  instants  every  one  was  silent. 

As  they  sat  at  table,  Speransky,  corking  up  a  bottle  of  wine  and  saying, 
‘Nowadays  good  wine  doesn’t  go  a-begging!’  gave  it  to  the  servant  and 
got  up.  All  rose,  and  talking  just  as  noisily,  went  into  the  drawing-room. 
Speransky  was  handed  two  envelopes  brought  by  a  special  courier.  He 
took  them  and  went  into  his  study.  As  soon  as  he  had  gone,  there  was  a 
lull  in  the  general  gaiety,  and  the  guests  began  conversing  sensibly  in 
low  tones  together. 

‘Well,  now  for  the  recitation!  ’  said  Speransky,  coming  out  of  his  study. 
‘A  marvellous  talent!’  he  said  to  Prince  Andrey.  Magnitsky  at  once 
threw  himself  into  an  attitude,  and  began  to  recite  comic  French  verses, 
a  skit  he  had  composed  on  various  well-known  persons.  Several  times  he 
was  interrupted  by  applause.  At  the  conclusion  of  the  recitation  Prince 
Andrey  went  up  to  Speransky  to  say  good-bye. 

‘Why  so  early?’  said  Speransky. 

‘I  promised  to  be  at  a  soiree.  .  . 

They  said  no  more.  Prince  Andrey  looked  at  those  mirror-like,  im¬ 
penetrable  eyes,  so  close  to  his,  and  he  felt  it  ludicrous  that  he  should  have 
expected  anything  from  Speransky,  and  from  all  his  own  work  connected 
with  him,  and  marvelled  how  he  could  have  ascribed  any  value  to  what 
Speransky  was  doing.  That  punctual,  mirthless  laugh  was  ringing  in 
Prince  Andrey’s  ears  long  after  he  had  left  Speransky’s. 

On  reaching  home  Prince  Andrey  began  looking  at  his  life  in  Peters¬ 
burg  during  the  last  four  months,  as  though  it  were  something  new.  He 
thought  of  the  efforts  he  had  made,  and  the  people  he  had  tried  to  see, 
and  the  history  of  his  project  of  army  reform,  which  had  been  accepted 
for  consideration,  and  had  been  shelved  because  another  scheme,  a  very 
poor  one,  had  already  been  worked  out  and  presented  to  the  Tsar.  He 
thought  of  the  sittings  of  the  committee,  of  which  Berg  was  a  member. 
He  thought  of  the  conscientious  and  prolonged  deliberations  that  took 
place  at  those  sittings  on  every  point  relating  to  the  formalities  of  the 
sittings  themselves,  and  the  studious  brevity  with  which  anything  re¬ 
lating  to  the  reality  of  their  duties  was  touched  on  in  passing.  He  thought 
of  his  work  on  the  legislative  reforms,  of  his  careful  translation  of  the 
Roman  and  French  codes  into  Russian,  and  he  felt  ashamed  of  himself. 
Then  he  vividly  imagined  Bogutcharovo,  his  pursuits  in  the  country,  his 
expedition  to  Ryazan;  he  thought  of  his  peasants,  of  Dron  the  village 
elder;  and  applying  the  section  on  Personal  Rights,  which  he  had 
divided  into  paragraphs,  to  them,  he  marvelled  how  he  could  have  so  long 
busied  himself  on  work  so  idle. 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


43S 


XIX 

The  next  day  Prince  Andrev  paid  calls  on  various  people  whom  he  had 
not  visited  before,  and  among  them  on  the  Rostovs,  with  whom  he  had 
renewed  his  acquaintance  at  the  ball.  Apart  from  considerations  of  polite¬ 
ness,  which  necessitated  a  call  on  the  Rostovs,  Prince  Andrey  wanted  to 
see  at  home  that  original,  eager  girl,  who  had  left  such  a  pleasant  recol¬ 
lection  with  him. 

Natasha  was  one  of  the  first  to  meet  him.  She  was  in  a  blue  everyday 
dress,  in  which  she  struck  Prince  Andrey  as  looking  prettier  than  in  her 
ball-dress.  She  and  all  the  family  received  Prince  Andrey  like  an  old 
friend,  simply  and  cordially.  All  the  family,  which  Prince  Andrey  had 
once  criticised  so  severely,  now  seemed  to  him  to  consist  of  excellent, 
simple,  kindly  people.  The  hospitality  and  good-nature  of  the  old  count, 
particularly  striking  apd  attractive  in  Petersburg,  was  such  that  Prince 
Andrey  could  not  refuse  to  stay  to  dinner.  ‘Yes,  these  are  good-natured, 
capital  people,’  thought  Bolkonsky.  ‘Of  course  tl\ey  have  no  conception, 
what  a  treasure  they  possess  in  Natasha;  but  they  are  good  people,  who 
make  the  best  possible  background  for  the  strikingly  poetical  figure  of 
that  charming  girl,  so  full  of  life!’ 

Prince  Andrey  was  conscious  in  Natasha  of  a  special  world,  utterly 
remote  from  him,  brimful  of  joys  unknown  to  him,  that  strange  world, 
which  even  in  the  avenue  at  Otradnoe,  and  on  that  moonlight  night  at 
the  window  had  tantalised  him.  Now  that  no  longer  tantalised  him,  it 
seemed  no  longer  an  alien  world;  but  he  himself  was  stepping  into  it, 
and  finding  new  pleasures  in  it. 

After  dinner  Natasha  went  to  the  clavichord,  at  Prince  Andrey’s  re¬ 
quest,  and  began  singing.  Prince  Andrey  stood  at  the  window  talking  to 
the  ladies,  and  listened  to  her.  In  the  middle  of  a  phrase,  Prince  Andrey 
ceased  speaking,  and  felt  suddenly  a  lump  in  his  throat  from  tears,  the 
possibility  of  which  he  had  not  dreamed  of  in  himself.  He  looked  at 
Natasha  singing,  and  something  new  and  blissful  stirred  in  his  soul.  He 
was  happy,  and  at  the  same  time  he  was  sad.  He  certainly  had  nothing  to 
weep  about,  but  he  was  ready  to  weep.  For  what?  For  his  past  love?  For 
the  little  princess?  For  his  lost  illusions?  .  .  .  For  his  hopes  for  the 
future?  .  .  .  Yes,  and  no.  The  chief  thing  which  made  him  ready  to 
weep  was  a  sudden,  vivid  sense  of  the  fearful  contrast  between  something 
infinitely  great  and  illimitable  existing  in  him,  and  something  limited  and 
material,  which  he  himself  was,  and  even  she  was.  This  contrast  made  his 
heart  ache,  and  rejoiced  him  while  she  was  singing. 

As  soon  as  Natasha  had  finished  singing,  she  went  up  to  him,  and  asked 
how  he  liked  her  voice.  She  asked  this,  and  was  abashed  after  saying  it, 
conscious  that  she  ought  not  to  have  asked  such  a  question.  He  smiled, 
looking  at  her,  and  said  he  liked  her  singing,  as  he  liked  everything 
she  did. 


436  WARANDPEACE 

It  was  late  in  the  evening  when  Prince  Andrey  left  the  Rostovs’.  He 
went  to  bed  from  the  habit  of  going  to  bed,  but  soon  saw  that  he  could 
not  sleep.  He  lighted  a  candle  and  sat  up  in  bed;  then  got  up,  then  lay 
down  again,  not  in  the  least  wearied  by  his  sleeplessness:  he  felt  a  new 
joy  in  his  soul,  as  though  he  had  come  out  of  a  stuffy  room  into  the  open 
daylight.  It  never  even  occurred  to  him  that  he  was  in  love  with  this  little 
Rostov  girl.  He  was  not  thinking  about  her.  He  only  pictured  her  to 
himself,  and  the  whole  of  life  rose  before  him  in  a  new  light  as  he  did  so. 
‘Why  do  I  struggle?  Why  am  I  troubled  in  this  narrow,  cramped  routine, 
when  life,  all  life,  with  all  its  joys,  lies  open  before  me?’  he  said  to  him¬ 
self.  And  for  the  first  time  for  a  very  long  while,  he  began  making 
happy  plans  for  the  future.  He  made  up  his  mind  that  he  ought  to  look 
after  his  son’s  education,  to  find  a  tutor,  and  entrust  the  child  to  him. 
Then  he  ought  to  retire  from  the  army,  and  go  abroad,  see  England, 
Switzerland,  Italy.  ‘I  must  take  advantage  of  my  liberty,  while  I  feel  so 
much  youth  and  strength  in  me,’  he  told  himself.  ‘Pierre  was  right  in 
saying  that  one  must  believe  in  the  possibility  of  happiness,  in  order  to  be 
happy,  and  now  I  do  believe  in  it.  Let  us  leave  the  dead  to  bury  the  dead; 
but  while  one  is  living,  one  must  live  and  be  happy,’  he  thought. 


One  morning  Colonel  Adolphe  Berg,  whom  Pierre  knew  just  as  he  knew 
every  one  in  Moscow  and  Petersburg,  called  upon  him.  He  was  wearing  a 
brand-new  uniform,  and  had  his  powdered  locks  standing  up  over  his 
forehead,  as  worn  by  the  Tsar  Alexander  Pavlovitch. 

‘I  have  just  been  calling  on  the  countess,  your  spouse,  and  to  my 
misfortune,  my  request  could  not  be  granted.  I  hope  I  shall  be  more 
fortunate  with  you,  count,’  he  said,  smiling. 

‘What  is  it  you  desire,  colonel?  I  am  at  your  disposal.’ 

‘I  am  by  now,  quite  settled  in  my  new  quarters,’  Berg  informed  him, 
with  perfect  conviction  that  to  hear  this  fact  could  not  but  be  agreeable; 
‘and  so  I  was  desirous  of  giving  a  little  soiree  for  my  friends  and  my 
spouse.’  (He  smiled  still  more  blandly.)  ‘I  meant  to  ask  the  countess  and 
you  to  do  me  the  honour  to  come  to  us  for  a  cup  of  tea,  and  ...  to 
supper.’ 

Only  the  Countess  Elena  Vassilyevna,  who  considered  it  beneath  her  r 
to  associate  with  nobodies  like  the  Bergs,  could  have  had  the  cruelty  to 
refuse  such  an  invitation.  Berg  explained  so  clearly  why  he  wanted  to 
gather  together  a  small  and  select  company  at  his  new  rooms;  and  why  it 
would  be  agreeable  to  him  to  do  so ;  and  why  he  would  grudge  spending  i 
money  on  cards,  or  anything  else  harmful;  but  was  ready  for  the  sake  of  ■ 
good  society  to  incur  expense,  that  Pierre  could  not  refuse,  and  promised 
to  come. 

‘Only  not  late,  count,  if  I  may  venture  to  beg.  Ten  minutes  to  eight, 

I  venture  to  beg.  We  will  make  up  a  party  for  boston.  Our  general  is 


WARANDPEACE  437 

coming;  he  is  very  kind  to  me.  We  will  have  a  little  supper,  count,  so  I 
shall  esteem  it  an  honour.’ 

Contrary  to  his  usual  habit  (he  was  almost  always  late)  Pierre  arrived 
at  the  Bergs’  not  at  ten  minutes  to  eight,  but  at  a  quarter  to  eight. 

The  Bergs  had  made  all  necessary  preparations  for  their  little  party, 
and  were  quite  ready  to  receive  their  guests. 

Berg  and  his  wife  were  sitting  in  a  new,  clean,  light  study,  furnished 
with  little  busts  and  pictures  and  new  furniture.  Berg,  with  his  new 
uniform  closely  buttoned  up,  sat  beside  his  wife,  and  was  explaining  to 
her  that  one  always  could  and  ought  to  cultivate  the  acquaintance  of 
people  above  one — for  only  then  is  there  anything  agreeable  in  acquaint¬ 
ances.  ‘You  pick  up  something,  you  can  put  in  a  word  for  something. 
Look  at  me  now,  how  I  used  to  manage  in  the  lower  grades’  (Berg  reck¬ 
oned  his  life  not  by  years  but  by  promotions).  ‘My  comrades  are  nothing 
still,  while  I’m  a  lieutenant-colonel.  I  have  the  happiness  of  being  your 
husband’  (he  got  up  and  kissed  Vera’s  hand,  but  on  the  way  turned  back 
the  corner  of  the  rug,  which  was  rucked  up).  ‘And  how  did  I  obtain  all 
this?  Chiefly  by  knowing  how  to  select  my  acquaintances.  It  goes  without 
saying,  of  course,  that  one  has  to  be  conscientious  and  punctual  in  the 
discharge  of  one’s  duties.’ 

Berg  smiled  with  a  sense  of  his  own  superiority  over  a  mere  weak 
woman,  and  paused,  reflecting  that  this  charming  wife  of  his  was,  after 
all,  a  weak  woman,  who  could  never  attain  all  that  constituted  a  man’s 
dignity, — ein  Mann  zu  sein.  Vera  smiled,  too,  at  the  same  time  with  a 
sense  of  her  superiority  over  her  conscientious,  excellent  husband,  who 
yet,  like  all  men,  according  to  Vera’s  ideas  of  them,  took  such  a  mistaken 
view  of  life.  Berg,  judging  from  his  wife,  considered  all  women  weak  and 
foolish.  Vera,  judging  from  her  husband  only,  and  generalising  from  her 
observation  of  him,  supposed  that  all  men  ascribed  common-sense  to 
none  but  themselves,  and  at  the  same  time  had  no  understanding  for 
inything,  and  were  conceited  and  egoistic. 

Berg  got  up,  and  cautiously  embracing  his  wife  so  as  not  to  crush  the  lace 
bertha,  for  which  he  had  paid  a  round  sum,  he  kissed  her  just  on  her  lips. 

‘There’s  only  one  thing:  we  mustn’t  have  children  too  soon,’  he  said,  by 
i  connection  of  ideas  of  which  he  was  himself  unconscious. 

‘Yes,’  answered  Vera,  ‘I  don’t  at  all  desire  that.  We  must  live  for 
society.’ 

‘Princess  Yusupov  was  wearing  one  just  like  that,’  said  Berg,  pointing 
A'ith  a  happy  and  good-humoured  smile  to  the  bertha. 

At  that  moment  they  were  informed  that  Count  Bezuhov  had  arrived. 
Both  the  young  couple  exchanged  glances  of  self-satisfaction,  each  men- 
ally  claiming  the  credit  of  this  visit. 

‘See  what  comes  of  knowing  how  to  make  acquaintances,’  thought 
Berg.  ‘See  what  comes  of  behaving  properly!  ’ 

‘But,  please,  when  I  am  entertaining  guests,’  said  Vera,  ‘don’t  you  in- 
errupt  me,  because  I  know  with  what  to  entertain  each  of  them,  and 
vhat  to  say  in  the  company  of  different  people.’ 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


438 

Berg,  too,  smiled. 

‘Oh,  but  sometimes  men  must  have  their  masculine  conversation,’ 
he  said. 

Pierre  was  shown  into  the  little  drawing-room,  in  which  it  was  impos¬ 
sible  to  sit  down  without  disturbing  the  symmetry,  tidiness,  and  order; 
and  consequently  it  was  quite  comprehensible,  and  not  strange,  that 
Berg  should  magnanimously  offer  to  disturb  the  symmetry  of  the  arm¬ 
chair  or  of  the  sofa  for  an  honoured  guest,  and  apparently  finding  himself 
in  miserable  indecision  in  the  matter,  should  leave  his  guest  to  solve  the 
question  of  selection.  Pierre  destroyed  the  symmetry,  moved  out  a  chair 
for  himself,  and  Berg  and  Vera  promptly  began  their  soiree,  interrupting 
each  other  in  their  efforts  to  entertain  their  guest. 

Vera,  deciding  in  her  own  mind  that  Pierre  ought  to  be  entertained 
with  conversation  about  the  French  Embassy,  promptly  embarked  upon 
that  subject.  Berg,  deciding  that  masculine  conversation  was  what  was  1 
required,  interrupted  his  wife’s  remarks  by  reference  to  the  question  of 
war  with  Austria,  and  made  an  unconscious  jump  from  that  general 
subject  to  personal  considerations  upon  the  proposal  made  him  to  take 
part  in  the  Austrian  campaign,  and  the  reasons  which  had  led  him  to 
decline  it.  Although  the  conversation  was  extremely  disconnected,  and 
Vera  resented  the  intervention  of  the  masculine  element,  both  the  young 
people  felt  with  satisfaction  that  although  only  one  guest  was  present,  the 
soiree  had  begun  very  well,  and  that  their  soiree  was  as  like  every  other 
soiree  as  two  drops  of  water, — with  the  same  conversation  and  tea  and 
lighted  candles. 

The  next  to  arrive  was  Boris,  an  old  comrade  of  Berg’s.  There  was  a 
certain  shade  of  patronage  and  condescension  in  his  manner  to  Berg  and 
Vera.  After  Boris  came  the  colonel  and  his  lady,  then  the  general  himself, 
then  the  Rostovs,  and  the  soiree  now  began  to  be  exactly,  incontestably, ; 
like  all  other  soirees.  Berg  and  Vera  could  hardly  repress  their  smiles  of  1 
glee  at  the  sight  of  all  this  movement  in  their  drawing-room,  at  the  sound 
of  the  disconnected  chatter,  and  the  rustle  of  skirts  and  of  curtsies. 
Everything  was  precisely  as  everybody  always  has  it ;  especially  so  was 
the  general,  who  admired  their  rooms,  clapped  Berg  on  the  shoulder,  and 
with  paternal  authority  insisted  on  arranging  the  table  for  boston.  The 
general  sat  by  Count  Ilya  Andreivitch,  as  the  guest  next  in  precedence 
to  himself.  The  elderly  guests  were  together,  the  younger  people  together, 
the  hostess  at  the  tea-table,  on  which  there  were  cakes  in  the  silver  cake- 
basket  exactly  like  the  cakes  at  the  Panins’  soiree.  Everything  was  pre¬ 
cisely  like  what  everybody  else  had. 


XXI 

Pierre,  as  one  of  the  most  honoured  guests,  was  obliged  to  sit  down  to 
boston  with  the  old  count,  the  general,  and  the  colonel.  As  he  sat  at  the 
boston-table  he  happened  to  be  directly  facing  Natasha,  and  he  was 


WAR  AND  PEACE  439 

struck  by  the  curious  change  that  had  come  over  her  since  the  day  of  the 
ball.  Natasha  was  silent,  and  not  only  was  she  not  so  pretty  as  she  had 
been  at  the  ball,  she  would  have  been  positively  plain  but  for  the  look 
of  gentle  indifference  to  everything  in  her  face. 

‘What  is  wrong  with  her?’  Pierre  wondered,  glancing  at  her.  She  was 
sitting  by  her  sister  at  the  tea-table;  she  gave  reluctant  answers  to  Boris 
at  her  side  and  did  not  look  at  him.  After  playing  all  of  one  suit  and 
taking  five  tricks  to  his  partner’s  satisfaction,  Pierre,  having  caught  the 
sound  of  greetings  and  the  steps  of  some  one  entering  while  he  took  his 
tricks,  glanced  at  her  again. 

‘Why,  what  has  happened  to  her?’  he  said  to  himself  in  still  greater 
wonder. 

Prince  Andrey  was  standing  before  her,  saying  something  to  her  with 
an  expression  of  guarded  tenderness  on  his  face.  She,  lifting  her  head, 
was  looking  at  him,  flushing  crimson,  and  visibly  trying  to  control  her 
breathing,  which  came  in  panting  gasps.  And  the  vivid  glow  of  some 
inner  fire  that  had  been  quenched  before  was  alight  in  her  again.  She 
was  utterly  transformed.  From  a  plain  girl  she  was  once  more  the 
beautiful  creature  she  had  been  at  the  ball. 

Prince  Andrey  went  up  to  Pierre,  and  Pierre  noticed  a  new,  youthful 
expression  in  his  friend’s  face.  Several  times  Pierre  changed  his  seat 
during  the  play,  sitting  sometimes  with  his  back  to  Natasha,  sometimes 
facing  her,  and  during  all  the  six  rubbers  he  was  observing  her  and  his 
friend. 

‘Something  very  serious  is  happening  between  them,’  thought  Pierre, 
and  a  feeling  at  once  of  gladness  and  of  bitterness  made  him  agitated  and 
forgetful  of  the  game. 

After  six  rubbers  the  general  got  up,  saying  it  was  of  no  use  playing 
like  that,  and  Pierre  was  at  liberty.  Natasha,  at  one  side  of  the  room, 
was  talking  to  Sonya  and  Boris.  Vera,  with  a  subtle  smile,  was  saying 
something  to  Prince  Andrey.  Pierre  went  up  to  his  friend,  and,  asking 
whether  they  were  talking  secrets,  sat  down  beside  them.  Vera,  noticing 
Prince  Andrey’s  attention  to  Natasha,  felt  that  at  a  soiree,  at  a  real 
,  soiree,  it  was  absolutely  necessary  there  should  be  delicate  allusions  to 
the  tender  passion,  and  seizing  an  opportunity  when  Prince  Andrey  was 
alone,  began  a  conversation  with  him  upon  the  emotions  generally,  and 
her  sister  in  particular.  She  felt  that,  with  a  guest  so  intellectual  as  she 
considered  Prince  Andrey,  she  must  put  all  her  diplomatic  tact  into  the 
Task  before  her.  When  Pierre  went  up  to  them  he  noticed  that  Vera  was 
in  full  flow  of  self-complacent  talk,  while  Prince  Andrey  seemed  em¬ 
barrassed — a  thing  that  rarely  happened  to  him. 

‘What  do  you  think?’  Vera  was  saying  with  a  subtle  smile.  ‘You, 
prince,  have  so  much  penetration  and  see  into  people’s  characters  at  once. 
What  do  you  think  about  Natalie?  Is  she  capable  of  constancy  in  her 
;attachments?  Is  she  capable,  like  other  women’  (Vera  meant  herself)  ‘of 
doving  a  man  once  for  all  and  remaining  faithful  to  him  for  ever?  That’s 
Avhat  I  regard  as  true  love!  What  do  you  think,  prince?’ 


440  W  A  R  A  N  D  P  E  A  C  E 

‘I  know  your  sister  too  little,’  answered  Prince  Andrey,  with  a  sarcastic 
smile,  under  which  he  tried  to  conceal  his  embarrassment,  ‘to  decide  a 
question  so  delicate;  and,  besides,  I  have  noticed  that  the  less  attractive 
a  woman  is,  the  more  constant  she  is  apt  to  be,’  he  added,  and  he  looked 
at  Pierre,  who  at  that  moment  joined  them. 

‘Yes,  that  is  true,  prince.  In  these  days,’  pursued  Vera  (talking  of  ‘these 
days,’  as  persons  of  limited  intellect  as  a  rule  love  to  do,  supposing  they 
have  discovered  and  estimated  the  peculiarities  of  the  times,  and  that 
human  characteristics  do  change  with  the  times),  ‘in  these  days  a  girl  has 
so  much  liberty  that  the  pleasure  of  being  paid  attention  often  stifles 
these  feelings  in  her.  And  Natalie,  it  must  be  confessed,  is  very  susceptible 
on  that  side.’ 

This  going  back  to  Natasha  again  made  Prince  Andrey  contract  his 
brows  disagreeably.  He  tried  to  get  up,  but  Vera  persisted  with  a  still 
more  subtle  smile. 

‘Nobody,  I  imagine,  has  been  so  much  run  after  as  she  has,’  Vera  went 
on;  ‘but  no  one,  until  quite  of  late,  has  ever  made  a  serious  impression  on 
her.  Of  course,  you  know,  count,’  she  turned  to  Pierre,  ‘even  our  charm¬ 
ing  cousin,  Boris,  who,  entre  nous,  was  very,  very  far  gone  in  the  region 
of  the  tender  passion  .  .  .’  She  intended  an  allusion  to  the  map  of  love 
then  in  fashion. 

Prince  Andrey  scowled,  and  was  mute. 

‘But,  of  course,  you  are  a  friend  of  Boris’s?’  Vera  said  to  him. 

‘Yes,  I  know  him.  .  .  .’ 

‘He  has  probably  told  you  of  his  childish  love  for  Natasha?’ 

‘Oh,  was  there  a  childish  love  between  them?’  asked  Prince  Andrey,  ! 
with  a  sudden,  unexpected  flush  on  his  face. 

‘Yes.  You  know  between  cousins  the  close  intimacy  often  leads  to 
love.  Cousinhood  is  a  dangerous  neighbourhood.  Isn’t  it?’ 

‘Oh,  not  a  doubt  of  it,’  said  Prince  Andrey,  and  with  sudden  and  un¬ 
natural  liveliness,  he  began  joking  with  Pierre  about  the  necessity  of  his 
being  careful  with  his  cousins  at  Moscow,  ladies  of  fifty,  and  in  the 
middle  of  these  jesting  remarks  he  got  up,  and  taking  Pierre’s  arm,  drew 
him  aside. 

‘Well,  what  is  it?’  said  Pierre,  who  had  been  watching  in  wonder  his  • 
friend’s  excitement,  and  noticed  the  glance  he  turned  upon  Natasha  as 
he  got  up. 

‘I  must,  I  must  talk  to  you,’  said  Prince  Andrey.  ‘You  know  that  pair 
of  women’s  gloves’  (he  referred  to  the  masonic  gloves  given  to  a  newly 
initiated  brother  to  be  entrusted  to  the  woman  he  loved).  ‘I  .  .  .  but 
no,  I  will  talk  to  you  later  on.  .  .  .’  And  with  a  strange  light  in  his  eyes 
and  a  restlessness  in  his  movements,  Prince  Andrey  approached  Natasha 
and  sat  down  beside  her.  Pierre  saw  that  Prince  Andrey  asked  her  some 
question,  and  she  answered  him,  flushing  hotly. 

But  at  that  moment  Berg  approached  Pierre,  and  insisted  upon  his 
taking  part  in  an  argument  between  the  general  and  the  colonel  on  affairs 
in  Spain. 


WARANDPEACE  441 

Berg  was  satisfied  and  happy.  The  smile  of  glee  never  left  his  face. 
The  soiree  was  a  great  success,  and  exactly  like  other  soirees  he  had 
seen.  Everything  was  precisely  similar:  the  ladies’  refined  conversation, 
and  the  cards,  and  after  the  cards  the  general  raising  his  voice  and  the 
samovar  and  the  tea  cakes;  but  one  thing  was  still  lacking,  which  he  had 
always  seen  at  soirees,  and  wished  to  imitate.  There  was  still  wanting  the 
Qsual  loud  conversation  between  the  gentlemen  and  discussion  about 
some  serious  intellectual  question.  The  general  had  started  that  conversa¬ 
tion,  and  Berg  drew  Pierre  into  it. 
bi-rfiX 


XXII 

tbt&'  ofic 

Next  day  Prince  Andrey  went  to  dine  at  the  Rostovs’,  as  Count  Ilya 
AndrfcfitCh  had  invited  him,  and  spent  the  whole  day  with  them. 

Everyone  in  the  house  perceived  on  whose  account  Prince  Andrey 
came,  and  he  openly  tried  to  be  all  day  long  with  Natasha. 

Not  only  in  the  soul  of  Natasha — scared,  but  happy  and  enthusiastic — 
in  the  whole  household,  too,  there  were  a  feeling  of  awe,  of  something 
of  great  gravity  being  bound  to  happen.  With  sorrowful  and  sternly  serious 
eyes  the  countess  looked  at  Prince  Andrey  as  he  talked  to  Natasha,  and 
shyly  and  self-consciously  tried  to  begin  some  insignificant  talk  with  him 
as  soon  as  he  looked  round  at  her.  Sonya  was  afraid  to  leave  Natasha,  and 
afraid  of  being  in  their  way  if  she  stayed  with  them.  Natasha  turned  pale 
in  a  panic  of  expectation  every  time  she  was  left  for  a  moment  alone  with 
him.  Prince  Andrey’s  timidity  impressed  her.  She  felt  that  he  wanted  to 
tell  her  something,  but  could  not  bring  himself  up  to  the  point. 

When  Prince  Andrey  had  gone  away  in  the  evening,  the  countess  went 
up  to  Natasha  and  whispered: 

‘Well?’ 

‘Mamma,  for  God’s  sake,  don’t  ask  me  anything  just  now.  This  one 
can’t  talk  of,’  said  Natasha. 

But  in  spite  of  this  answer,  Natasha  lay  a  long  while  in  her  mother's 
bed  that  night,  her  eyes  fixed  before  her,  excited  and  scared  by  turns. 
She  told  her  how  he  had  praised  her,  how  he  had  said  he  was  going  abroad, 
how  he  had  asked  where  they  were  going  to  spend  the  summer,  and  how 
he  had  asked  her  about  Boris. 

‘But  anything  like  this,  like  this  ...  I  have  never  felt  before!’  she 
said.  ‘Only  I’m  afraid  with  him,  I’m  always  afraid  with  him.  What  does 
that  mean?  Does  it  mean  that  it’s  the  real  thing?  Mamma,  are  you  asleep?’ 

‘No,  my  darling.  I’m  afraid  of  him  myself,’  answered  her  mother.  ‘Go 
to  bed.’ 

‘Anyhow,  I  shouldn’t  go  to  sleep.  How  stupid  sleep  is!  Mamma, 
mamma,  nothing  like  this  have  I  ever  felt  before,’  she  said,  with  wonder 
and  terror  at  the  feeling  she  recognised  in  herself.  ‘And  could  we  ever 
have  dreamed!  .  .  .’ 

It  seemed  to  Natasha  that  she  had  fallen  in  love  with  Prince  Andrey 


442  WAR  AND  PEACE 

the  first  time  she  saw  him  at  Otradnoe.  She  was  as  it  were  terrified  at 
this  strange,  unexpected  happiness  that  the  man  she  had  chosen  even 
then  (she  was  firmly  convinced  that  she  had  done  so) — that  very  man 
should  meet  them  again  now  and  be  apparently  not  indifferent  to  her.  jM 

‘And  it  seems  as  though  it  all  happened  on  purpose — his  coming  ' 
Petersburg  just  while  we  are  here.  And  our  meeting  at  that  ball.  It  wgg 
all  fate.  It's  clear  that  it  is  fate,  that  it  has  all  led  up  to  this.  Even  tljga,  : 
as  soon  as  I  saw  him,  I  felt  something  quite  different.’ 

‘What  has  he  said  to  you?  What  are  those  verses?  Read  them  jxioiH 
said  the  mother  thoughtfully,  referring  to  the  verses  Prince  Andrey  toad 
written  in  Natasha’s  album. 

‘Mamma,  does  it  matter  his  being  a  widower?’ 

‘Hush,  Natasha.  Pray  to  God.  Marriages  are  made  in  heaven,’  she  said, 
quoting  the  French  proverb.  ,:b 

‘Mamma,  darling,  how  I  love  you!  how  happy  I  am!’  cried  Nalksha. 
shedding  tears  of  excitement  and  happiness  and  hugging  her  vnaother. 

At  that  very  time  Prince  Andrey  was  telling  Pierre  of  his  love  for 
Natasha  and  of  his  fixed  determination  to  marry  her. 

That  evening  the  Countess  Elena  Vassilyevna  gave  a  reception;  the  •! 
French  ambassador  was  there,  and  a  royal  prince  who  had  become  a 
very  frequent  visitor  at  the  countess’s  of  late,  and  many  brilliant  ladies 
and  gentlemen.  Pierre  came  down  to  it,  wandered  through  the  rooms  and 
impressed  all  the  guests  by  his  look  of  concentrated  preoccupation  and 
gloom. 

Pierre  had  been  feeling  one  of  his  attacks  of  nervous  depression  coming  i 
upon  him  ever  since  the  day  of  the  ball,  and  had  been  making  desperate 
efforts  to  struggle  against  it.  Since  his  wife’s  intrigue  with  the  royal  prince, 
Pierre  had  been  to  his  surprise  appointed  a  kammerherr,  and  ever  since 
he  had  felt  a  sense  of  weariness  and  shame  in  court  society,  and  his  old 
/deas  of  the  vanity  of  all  things  human  began  to  come  back  oftener  and 
oftener.  The  feeling  he  had  lately  noticed  between  his  protegee  Natasha 
and  Prince  Andrey  had  aggravated  his  gloom  by  the  contrast  between  his 
own  position  and  his  friend’s.  He  tried  equally  to  avoid  thinking  of  his  [ 
wife  and  also  of  Natasha  and  Prince  Andrey.  Again  everything  seemed 
to  him  insignificant  in  comparison  with  eternity;  again  the  question  rose 
before  him:  ‘What  for?’  And  for  days  and  nights  together  he  forced  him¬ 
self  to  work  at  masonic  labours,  hoping  to  keep  off  the  evil  spirit.  Pierre 
had  come  out  of  the  countess’s  apartments  at  midnight,  and  was  sitting 
in  a  shabby  dressing-gown  at  the  table  in  his  own  low-pitched,  smoke- 
blackened  room  upstairs,  copying  out  long  transactions  of  the  Scottish 
freemasons,  when  some  one  came  into  his  room.  It  was  Prince  Andrey. 

‘Oh,  it’s  you,’  said  Pierre,  with  a  preoccupied  and  dissatisfied  air.  ‘I’m 
at  work,  you  see,’  he  added,  pointing  to  the  manuscript  book  with  that 
look  of  escaping  from  the  ills  of  life  with  which  unhappy  people  look  at 
their  work. 

Prince  Andrey  stood  before  Pierre  with  a  radiant,  ecstatic  face,  full 


WAR  AND  PEACE  443 

of  new  life,  and  with  the  egoism  of  happiness  smiled  at  him  without  notic¬ 
ing’  *, his  gloomy  face. 

‘\hVell,  my  desr  boy,’  he  said,  ‘I  wanted  to  tell  you  yesterday,  and  I 
hav'a<3  come  to  dq,so  to-day.  I  have  never  felt  anything  like  it.  I  am  in 
ov  1fe.’ 

1 ,  Pierre  suddenly  heaved  a  heavy  sigh,  and  dumped  down  his  heavy 
K  Arson  on  the  sofa  beside  Prince  Andrey. 
f  ‘With  Natasha  Rostov,  yes?’  he  said. 

(  ‘Yes,  yes,  who  else  could  it  be?  I  would  never  have  believed  it,  but 
the  feeling  is  too  strong  for  me.  Yesterday  I  was  in  torment,  in  agony,  but 
I  would  not  exchange  that  agony  even  for  anything  in  the  world.  I  have 
i;  never  lived  till  now,  but  I  cannot  live  without  her.  But  can  she  love 
1  me?  .  .  .  I’m  too  old  for  her.  .  .  .  Why  don’t  you  speak?  .  .  .’ 

‘I?  I?  What  did  I  tell  you?’  said  Pierre,  suddenly  getting  up  and 
!  walking  about  the  room.  ‘I  always  thought  so.  .  .  .  That  girl  is  a  treas- 
I  ure.  .  .  .  She’s  a  very  rare  sort  of  girl.  .  .  .  My  dear  fellow,  don’t,  I 

I  entreat  you,  be  too  wise,  don’t  doubt,  marry,  marry,  marry!  .  .  .  And 
;  I  am  sure  no  man  was  ever  happier  than  you  will  be.’ 

‘But  she?’ 

‘She  loves  you.’ 

‘Don’t  talk  nonsense  .  .  .’  said  Prince  Andrey,  smiling  and  looking 
i  into  Pierre’s  face. 

‘She  loves  you,  I  know  it,’  Pierre  cried  angrily. 

|1  ‘No;  do  listen,’  said  Prince  Andrey,  taking  hold  of  him  by  the  arm 
and  stopping  him.  ‘Do  you  know  the  state  I  am  in?  I  must  talk  about  it 
I;  to  some  one.’ 

‘Well,  well,  talk  away,  I’m  very  glad,’  said  Pierre,  and  his  face  did 

II  really  change,  the  line  of  care  in  his  brow  was  smoothed  away,  and  he 
|j  listened  gladly  to  Prince  Andrey.  His  friend  seemed,  and  was  indeed,  an 
I  utterly  different,  new  man.  What  had  become  of  his  ennui,  his  contempt 
[I  of  life,  his  disillusionment?  Pierre  was  the  only  person  to  whom  he  could 
|.  have  brought  himself  to  speak  quite  openly;  but  to  him  he  did  reveal  all 
|i  that  was  in  his  heart.  Readily  and  boldly  he  made  plans  reaching  far  into 
I  the  future;  said  he  could  not  sacrifice  his  own  happiness  to  the  caprices 
|  of  his  father;  declared  that  he  would  force  his  father  to  agree  to  the 
|  marriage  and  like  her,  or  dispense  with  his  consent  altogether;  then  he 
|  marvelled  at  the  feeling  which  had  taken  possession  of  him,  as  something 
|  strange,  and  apart,  independent  of  himself. 

‘I  should  never  have  believed  it,  if  any  one  }iad  told  me  I  could  love 
j  like  this,’  said  Prince  Andrey.  ‘It  is  utterly  different  from  the  feeling  I 
|  once  had.  The  whole  world  is  split  into  two  halves  for  me:  one — she,  and 
I  there  all  is  happiness,  hope,  and  light;  the  other  half — all  where  she  is 
|  not,  there  all  is  dejection  and  darkness.  .  .  .’ 

‘Darkness  and  gloom,’  repeated  Pierre;  ‘yes,  yes,  I  understand  that.’ 
I  ‘I  can’t  help  loving  the  light ;  that’s  not  my  fault ;  and  I  am  very  happy, 
j  Do  you  understand  me?  I  know  you  are  glad  for  me.’ 

I  ‘Yes,  yes,’  Pierre  assented,  looking  at  his  friend  with  eyes  full  of 


444  WAR  AND  PEACE 

tenderness  and  sadness.  The  brighter  the  picture  of  Prince  Andrey’s  fate 

before  his  mind,  the  darker  seemed  his  own. 

XXIII 

To  get  married  his  father’s  consent  was  wanted,  and  to  obtain  this  Prince; 
Andrey  set  off  to  see  his  father. 

The  father  received  his  son’s  communication  with  external  composure.! 
but  with  inward  wrath.  He  could  not  comprehend  how  any  one  could 
want  to  alter  his  life,  to  introduce  any  new  element  into  it,  when  life 
was  for  him  so  near  its  end.  ‘If  they  would  only  let  me  live  my  life  out 
as  I  want  to,  and  then  do  as  they  like,’  the  old  man  said  to  himself.  With 
his  son,  however,  he  made  use  of  that  diplomacy  to  which  he  always  had 
resort  in  case  of  gravity.  Assuming  a  calm  tone,  he  went  into  the  whole 
question  judicially. 

In  the  first  place,  the  marriage  was  not  a  brilliant  one  from  the  point  of 
view  of  birth,  fortune,  or  distinction.  Secondly,  Prince  Andrey  was  not  in 
his  first  youth,  and  was  delicate  in  health  (the  old  man  laid  special  stress 
on  this),  and  the  girl  was  very  young.  Thirdly,  there  was  his  son,  whom 
it  would  be  a  pity  to  entrust  to  a  mere  girl.  ‘Fourthly,  and  finally,’  said  the 
father,  looking  ironically  at  his  son,  ‘I  beg  you  to  defer  the  matter  for  a 
year;  go  abroad,  and  get  well;  find  a  German,  as  you  want  to  do  so,  for 
Prince  Nikolay,  and  then,  if  your  love,  your  passion,  your  obstinacy— 
what  you  choose — are  so  great,  then  get  married.  And  that’s  my  last  word 
on  the  subject;  you  know,  the  last  .  .  .’  the  old  prince  concluded,  in  a 
tone  that  showed  that  nothing  would  compel  him  to  alter  his  decision. 

Prince  Andrey  saw  clearly  that  the  old  man  hoped  that  either  his  feel¬ 
ing  or  that  of  his  betrothed  would  not  stand  the  test  of  a  year,  or  that  he, 
the  old  prince,  would  die  himself  in  the  course  of  it,  and  he  decided  to  act 
in  accordance  with  his  father’s  wish;  to  make  an  offer  and  to  defer  the 
marriage  for  a  year. 

Three  weeks  after  his  last  visit  to  the  Rostovs,  Prince  Andrey  returned 
to  Petersburg. 

The  day  after  her  conversation  with  her  mother,  Natasha  spent  the 
whole  day  expecting  Bolkonsky,  but  he  did  not  come.  The  next  day,  and 
the  third,  it  was  just  the  same.  Pierre  too  stayed  away,  and  Natasha, 
not  knowing  Prince  Andrey  had  gone  away  to  see  his  father,  did  not 
know  how  to  interpret  his  absence. 

So  passed  the  three  weeks.  Natasha  would  not  go  out  anywhere,  and 
wandered  like  a  shadow  about  the  house,  idle  and  listless,  wept  at  night 
in  secret,  and  did  not  go  in  to  her  mother  in  the  evenings.  She  was  con¬ 
tinually  flushing  and  very  irritable.  It  seemed  to  her  that  every  one  knew 
of  her  disappointment,  was  laughing  at  her,  and  pitying  her.  In  spite  of 
all  the  intensity  of  her  inward  grief,  the  wound  to  her  vanity  aggravated 
her  misery. 


WARANDPEACE  445 

She  came  in  to  the  countess  one  day,  tried  to  say  something,  and  all 
at  once  burst  into  tears.  Her  tears  were  the  tears  of  an  offended  child, 
who  does  not  know  why  it  is  being  punished.  The  countess  tried  to  comfort 
Natasha.  At  first  she  listened  to  her  mother’s  words,  but  suddenly  she 
interrupted  her: 

‘Stop,  mamma,  I  don’t  think  of  him  or  want  to  think  of  him!  Why, 
he  kept  coming,  and  he  has  left  off,  and  he  has  left  off  .  .  .’  Her  voice 
quivered,  she  almost  began  to  cry,  but  recovered  herself,  and  went  on 
calmly: 

‘And  I  don’t  want  to  be  married  at  all.  And  I’m  afraid  of  him;  I  have 
quite,  quite  got  over  it  now  .  . 

The  day  after  this  conversation,  Natasha  put  on  the  old  dress  she 
specially  associated  with  the  fun  she  had  often  had  when  wearing  it  in 
the  mornings,  and  began  from  early  morning  to  take  up  her  old  manner 
of  life,  which  she  had  given  up  ever  since  the  ball.  After  morning  tea, 
she  went  into  the  big  hall,  which  she  particularly  liked  on  account  of  the 
loud  resonance  in  it,  and  began  singing  her  sol-fa  exercises.  When  she 
had  finished  the  first  exercise  she  stood  still  in  the  middle  of  the  room 
and  repeated  a  single  musical  phrase  which  particularly  pleased  her. 
She  listened  with  delight,  as  though  it  were  new  to  her,  to  the  charm  of 
these  notes  ringing  out,  filling  the  empty  space  of  the  great  room  and  dying 
slowly  away,  and  she  felt  all  at  once  cheerful.  ‘Why  think  so  much  about 
it;  things  are  nice  even  as  it  is,’  she  said  to  herself;  and  she  began  walking 
up  and  down  the  room,  not  putting  her  feet  simply  down  on  the  resound¬ 
ing  parquet,  but  at  each  step  bending  her  foot  from  the  heel  to  the  toe 
(she  had  on  some  new  shoes  she  particularly  liked),  and  listening  to  the 
regular  tap  of  the  heel  and  creak  of  the  toe  with  the  same  pleasure  with 
which  she  had  listened  to  the  sound  of  her  own  voice.  Passing  by  the 
looking-glass,  she  glanced  into  it.  ‘Yes,  that’s  me!’  the  expression  of  her 
face  seemed  to  say  at  the  sight  of  herself.  ‘Well,  and  very  nice  too.  And  I 
need  nobody.’ 

A  footman  would  have  come  in  to  clear  away  something  in  the  room, 
but  she  would  not  let  him  come  in.  She  shut  the  door  after  him,  and 
continued  her  promenade  about  the  room.  She  had  come  back  that  morn¬ 
ing  to  her  favourite  mood  of  loving  herself  and  being  ecstatic  over  herself. 
‘What  a  charming  creature  that  Natasha  is!’  she  said  again  of  herself, 
(Speaking  as  some  third  person,  a  generic,  masculine  person. 

‘Pretty,  a  voice,  young,  and  she’s  in  nobody’s  way,  only  leave  her  in 
peace.’  But,  however  much  she  might  be  left  in  peace,  she  could  not  now 
be  at  peace,  and  she  felt  that  immediately. 

In  the  vestibule  the  hall-door  opened;  some  one  was  asking,  ‘At  home?’ 
iand  steps  were  audible.  Natasha  was  looking  at  herself  in  the  glass,  but 
she  did  not  see  herself.  She  heard  sounds  in  the  vestibule.  When  she  saw 
herself  caught  the  sound  of  his  voice  at  the  opened  door, 
herself,  her  face  was  pale.  It  was  he.  She  knew  it  for  certain,  though  she 

Natasha,  pale  and  panic-stricken,  flew  into  the  drawing-room. 


446  WARANDPEACE 

‘Mamma,  Bolkonsky  has  come,’  she  said.  ‘Mamma,  this  is  awful,  un¬ 
bearable!  ...  I  don’t  want  ...  to  be  tortured!  What  am  I  to  do?’ 

The  countess  had  not  time  to  answer  her  before  Prince  Andrey  with  a 
troubled  and  serious  face  walked  into  the  drawing-room.  As  soon  as  he 
saw  Natasha  his  face  beamed  with  delight.  He  kissed  the  countess’s  hand 
and  Natasha’s,  and  sat  down  beside  the  sofa. 

‘It’s  a  long  while  since  we  have  had  the  pleasure  .  .  .’  the  countess 
was  beginning,  but  Prince  Andrey  cut  her  short,  answering  her  implied 
question,  and  obviously  in  haste  to  say  what  he  had  to  say. 

‘I  have  not  been  to  see  you  all  this  time  because  I  have  been  to  see  my 
father;  I  had  to  talk  over  a  very  important  matter  with  him.  I  only 
returned  last  night,’  he  said,  glancing  at  Natasha.  ‘I  want  to  have  a  talk 
with  you,  countess,’  he  added  after  a  moment’s  silence. 

The  countess  dropped  her  eyes,  sighing  heavily. 

‘I  am  at  your  disposal,’  she  brought  out. 

Natasha  knew  she  ought  to  go,  but  she  was  unable  to  do  so:  something 
seemed  gripping  her  throat,  and,  regardless  of  civility,  she  stared  straight 
at  Prince  Andrey  with  wide-open  eyes. 

‘At  once?  .  .  .  This  minute?  .  .  .  No,  it  cannot  be!  ’  she  was  thinking. 

He  glanced  at  her  again,  and  that  glance  convinced  her  that  she  was 
not  mistaken.  Yes,  at  once,  this  very  minute  her  fate  was  to  be  decided. 

‘Run  away,  Natasha;  I  will  call  you,’  the  countess  whispered. 

With  frightened  and  imploring  eyes  Natasha  glanced  at  Prince  Andrey 
and  at  her  mother,  and  went  out. 

‘I  have  come,  countess,  to  ask  for  your  daughter’s  hand,’  said  Prince 
Andrey. 

The  countess’s  face  flushed  hotly,  but  she  said  nothing. 

‘Your  offer  .  .  .’  the  countess  began  at  last,  sedately.  He  sat  silent, 
looking  into  her  face.  ‘Your  offer’  .  .  .  (she  hesitated  in  confusion)  ‘is 
agreeable  to  us,  and  ...  I  accept  your  offer.  I  am  glad  of  it.  And  my 
husband  ...  I  hope  .  .  .  but  it  must  rest  with  herself  .  .  .’ 

‘I  will  speak  to  her,  when  I  have  received  your  consent.  .  .  .  Do  you 
give  it  me?’  said  Prince  Andrey. 

‘Yes,’  said  the  countess,  and  she  held  out  her  hand  to  him,  and  with 
mingled  feelings  of  aversion  and  tenderness  she  pressed  her  lips  to  his 
forehead  as  he  bent  to  kiss  her  hand.  Her  wish  was  to  love  him  as  a  son; 
but  she  felt  that  he  was  a  man  alien  to  her,  and  that  she  was  afraid  of  him. 

‘I  am  sure  my  husband  will  consent,’  said  the  countess;  ‘but  your 
father  .  .  .’ 

‘My  father,  whom  I  have  informed  of  my  plans,  has  made  it  an  ex¬ 
press  condition  that  the  marriage  should  not  take  place  for  a  year.  That, 
too,  I  meant  to  speak  of  to  you,’  said  Prince  Andrey. 

‘It  is  true  that  Natasha  is  very  young,  but — so  long  as  that?’ 

‘It  could  not  be  helped,’  said  Prince  Andrey  with  a  sigh. 

‘I  will  send  her  to  you,’  said  the  countess,  and  she  went  out  of  the 
room. 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


447 


‘Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us!’  she  kept  repeating  as  she  looked  for  her 
daughter. 

Sonya  told  her  that  Natasha  was  in  her  bedroom.  She  was  sitting  on 
her  bed,  with  a  pale  face  and  dry  eyes;  she  was  gazing  at  the  holy  picture, 
and  murmuring  something  to  herself,  as  she  rapidly  crossed  herself.  Seeing 
her  mother,  she  leaped  up  and  flew  towards  her. 

‘Well,  mamma,  .  .  .  well?’ 

‘Go,  go  to  him.  He  asks  your  hand,’  said  the  countess,  coldly  it  seemed 
to  Natasha.  .  .  .  ‘Yes  .  .  .  go  .  .  .’  the  mother  murmured  mournfully 
and  reproachfully  with  a  deep  sigh  as  her  daughter  ran  off. 

Natasha  could  not  have  said  how  she  reached  the  drawing-room.  As 
she  entered  the  door  and  caught  sight  of  him,  she  stopped  short:  ‘Is  it 
possible  that  this  stranger  has  now  become  everything  to  me?’  she  asked 
herself,  and  instantly  answered:  ‘Yes,  everything:  he  alone  is  dearer  to 
me  now  than  everything  in  the  world.’  Prince  Andrey  approached  her 
with  downcast  eyes. 

‘I  have  loved  you  from  the  first  minute  I  saw  you.  Can  I  hope?’ 

He  glanced  at  her  and  was  struck  by  the  serious,  impassioned  look  in 
her  face.  Her  face  seemed  to  say:  ‘Why  ask?  Why  doubt  of  what  you 
cannot  but  know?  Why  talk  when  no  words  can  express  what  one  feels?’ 

She  came  nearer  to  him  and  stopped.  He  took  her  hand  and  kissed  it. 

‘Do  you  love  me?’ 

‘Yes,  yes,’  said  Natasha,  almost  angrily  it  seemed.  She  drew  a  deep 
sigh,  and  another,  her  breathing  came  more  and  more  quickly,  and  she 
burst  into  sobs. 

‘What  is  it?  What’s  the  matter?’ 

‘Oh,  I  am  so  happy,’  she  answered,  smiling  through  her  tears.  She  bent 
over  closer  to  him,  thought  a  second,  as  though  wondering  whether  it  were 
possible,  and  then  kissed  him. 

Prince  Andrey  held  her  hands,  looked  into  her  eyes  and  could  find 
no  trace  of  his  former  love  for  her  in  his  heart.  Some  sudden  reaction 
seemed  to  have  taken  place  in  his  soul;  there  was  none  of  the  poetic  and 
mysterious  charm  of  desire  left  in  it ;  instead  of  that  there  was  pity  for  her 
feminine  and  childish  weakness,  terror  at  her  devotion  and  trustfulness, 
an  irksome,  yet  sweet,  sense  of  duty,  binding  him  to  her  for  ever.  The 
actual  feeling,  though  not  so  joyous  and  poetical  as  the  former  feeling, 
was  more  serious  and  deeper. 

‘Did  your  mamma  tell  you  that  it  cannot  be  for  a  year?’  said  Prince 
Andrey,  still  gazing  into  her  eyes. 

‘Can  this  be  I,  the  baby-girl  (as  every  one  used  to  call  me)  ?’  Natasha 
was  thinking.  ‘Can  I  really  be  from  this  minute  a  wife,  on  a  level  with 
this  unknown,  charming,  intellectual  man,  who  is  looked  up  to  even  by 
my  father?  Can  it  be  true?  Can  it  be  true  that  now  there  can  be  no  more 
alaying  with  life,  that  now  I  am  grown  up,  that  now  a  responsibility  is 
aid  upon  me  for  every  word  and  action?  Oh,  what  did  he  ask  me?’ 

‘No,’  she  answered,  but  she  had  not  understood  his  question. 

‘Forgive  me,’  said  Prince  Andrey,  ‘but  you  are  so  young,  and  I  have 


44§  WAR  AND  PEACE 

had  so  much  experience  of  life.  I  am  afraid  for  you.  You  don’t  know 
yourself.’ 

Natasha  listened  with  concentrated  attention,  trying  to  take  in  the 
meaning  of  his  words;  but  she  did  not  understand  them. 

‘Hard  as  that  year  will  be  to  me,  delaying  my  happiness,’  continued 
Prince  Andrey,  ‘in  that  time  you  will  be  sure  of  yourself.  I  beg  you  to 
make  me  happy  in  a  year,  but  you  are  free;  our  engagement  shall  be  kept 
a  secret,  and  if  you  should  find  out  that  you  do  not  love  me,  or  if  you 
should  come  to  love  .  .  .’  said  Prince  Andrey  with  a  forced  smile. 

‘Why  do  you  say  that?’  Natasha  interrupted.  ‘You  know  that  from 
the  very  day  when  you  first  came  to  Otradnoe,  I  have  loved  you,’  she 
said,  firmly  persuaded  that  she  was  speaking  the  truth. 

‘In  a  year  you  will  learn  to  know  yourself.  .  .  .’ 

‘A  who-ole  year!’  cried  Natasha  suddenly,  only  now  grasping  that 
their  marriage  was  to  be  deferred  for  a  year.  ‘But  why  a  year?  .  .  . 
Why  a  year?  .  .  . 

Prince  Andrey  began  to  explain  to  her  the  reasons  for  this  delay. 
Natasha  did  not  hear  him. 

‘And  can’t  it  be  helped?’  she  asked.  Prince  Andrey  made  no  reply, 
but  his  face  expressed  the  impossibility  of  altering  this  decision. 

‘That’s  awful!  Oh,  it’s  awful,  awful!’  Natasha  cried  suddenly,  and  she 
broke  into  sobs  again.  ‘I  shall  die  if  I  have  to  wait  a  year;  it’s  impossible, 
it’s  awful.’  She  glanced  at  her  lover’s  face  and  saw  the  look  of  sympa¬ 
thetic  pain  and  perplexity  on  it. 

‘No,  no,  I’ll  do  anything,’  she  said,  suddenly  checking  her  tears;  ‘I’m 
so  happy! ’ 

Her  father  and  mother  came  into  the  room  and  gave  the  betrothed 
couple  their  blessing.  From  that  day  Prince  Andrey  began  to  visit  the 
Rostovs  as  Natasha’s  affianced  lover. 


XXIV 

Thehe  was  no  formal  betrothal  and  no  announcement  was  made  of  the 
engagement  of  Bolkonsky  and  Natasha;  Prince  Andrey  insisted  upon 
that.  He  said  that  since  he  was  responsible  for  the  delay  of  their  marriage, 
he  ought  to  bear  the  whole  burden  of  it.  He  said  that  he  was  bound  for 
ever  by  his  word,  but  he  did  not  want  to  bind  Natasha  and  would  leave 
her  perfect  freedom.  If  in  another  six  months  she  were  to  feel  that  she 
did  not  love  him,  she  would  have  a  perfect  right  to  refuse  him.  It  need 
hardly  be  said  that  neither  Natasha  nor  her  parents  would  hear  of  this 
possibility;  but  Prince  Andrey  insisted  on  having  his  own  way.  Prince| 
Andrey  came  every  day  to  the  Rostovs’,  but  he  did  not  behave  with 
Natasha  as  though  he  were  engaged  to  her;  he  addressed  her  formally  and  I 
kissed  only  her  hand.  From  the  day  of  his  proposal  Prince  Audrey’s  rela¬ 
tions  with  Natasha  had  become  quite  different  from  what  had  existed 


WARANDPEACE  449 

between  them  before:  their  relations  were  simple  and  intimate.  It  seemed 
as  though  till  then  they  had  not  known  each  other.  Both  loved  to  recall 
how  they  had  regarded  one  another  when  they  were  nothing  to  each  other. 
Now  they  both  felt  utterly  different  creatures — then  affected,  now  simple 
and  sincere.  At  first  there  had  been  a  feeling  of  awkwardness  in  the 
family  in  regard  to  Prince  Andrey.  He  seemed  a  man  from  another  world, 
and  Natasha  used  for  a  long  while  to  try  and  make  her  people  understand 
Prince  Andrey,  and  declared  to  every  one  with  pride  that  he  only  seemed 
to  be  so  different,  that  he  was  really  like  every  one  else,  and  that  she 
was  not  afraid  of  him  and  no  one  need  be.  After  a  few  days,  the  rest  of 
the  family  got  accustomed  to  seeing  him,  and  went  on  without  constraint 
with  their  usual  manner  of  life,  in"  which  he  took  part.  He  knew  how  to 
talk  to  the  count  about  the  management  of  his  estates,  to  the  countess 
and  Natasha  about  dress,  and  to  Sonya  about  her  album  and  embroidery. 
Sometimes  the  Rostovs  among  themselves,  and  in  Prince  Audrey’s  pres¬ 
ence,  expressed  their  wonder  at  the  way  it  had  all  happened,  and  at  the 
events  that  obviously  betokened  that  it  was  to  be:  Prince  Andrey ’s  com¬ 
ing  to  Otradnoe,  and  their  coming  to  Petersburg,  and  the  resemblance 
between  Natasha  and  Prince  Andrey,  which  the  old  nurse  had  remarked 
on  Prince  Andrey ’s  first  visit,  and  the  meeting  in  1805  between  Andrey 
and  Nikolay,  and  many  other  incidents  betokening  that  it  was  to  be, 
were  observed  by  the  family. 

The  house  was  full  of  that  poetic  atmosphere  of  dulness  and  silence, 
which  always  accompanies  the  presence  of  an  engaged  couple.  Often  as 
they  all  sat  together  every  one  was  silent.  Sometimes  the  others  got  up 
and  went  away,  and  the  engaged  pair  were  still  as  mute  when  they  were 
left  alone.  Rarely  they  spoke  of  their  future  life  together.  Prince  Andrey 
felt  frightened  and  ashamed  to  speak  of  it.  Natasha  shared  the  feeling, 
as  she  did  all  his  feelings,  which  she  never  failed  to  divine.  Once  Natasha 
began  questioning  him  about  his  son. 

Prince  Andrey  blushed — a  thing  frequent  with  him  at  that  time,  which 
Natasha  particularly  liked  to  see — and  said  that  his  son  would  not  live 
with  them. 

‘Why  not?’  said  Natasha,  taking  fright. 

‘I  cannot  take  him  from  his  grandfather  and  then  .  . 

‘How  I  should  have  loved  him!’  said  Natasha,  at  once  divining  his 
thought;  ‘but  I  know  you  want  to  avoid  any  pretext  for  our  being 
blamed.’ 

The  old  count  sometimes  came  up  to  Prince  Andrey,  kissed  him  and 
isked  his  advice  about  some  question  relating  to  Petya’s  education  or 
Nikolay’s  position.  The  old  countess  sighed  as  she  looked  at  them.  Sonya 
»vas  afraid  every  instant  of  being  in  their  way,  and  was  always  trying  to 
and  excuses  for  leaving  them  alone,  even  when  they  had  no  wish  to  be 
ilone.  When  Prince  Andrey  talked — he  described  things  very  well — 
\Tatasha  listened  to  him  with  pride.  When  she  talked,  she  noticed  with 
oy  and  dread  that  he  watched  her  with  an  intent  and  scrutinising  look. 


45°  WARANDPEACE 

She  asked  herself  in  perplexity:  ‘What  is  it  he  seeks  in  me?  What  is  it 
he  is  probing  for  with  that  look?  What  if  I  haven’t  in  me  what  he  is 
searching  for  in  that  look?’  Sometimes  she  fell  into  the  mood  of  wild 
gaiety  characteristic  of  her,  and  then  she  particularly  loved  to  see  and 
hear  how  Prince  Andrey  laughed.  He  rarely  laughed,  but  when  he  did 
laugh  he  abandoned  himself  utterly  to  his  mirth,  and  she  always  felt 
herself  drawn  closer  to  him  by  this  laughter.  Natasha  would  have  been 
perfectly  happy  if  the  thought  of  the  separation  before  her,  coming  closer 
and  closer,  had  not  terrified  her.  He  too  turned  pale  and  cold  at  the 
mere  thought  of  it. 

On  the  day  before  he  was  to  leave  Petersburg,  Prince  Andrey  brought 
with  him  Pierre,  who  had  not  been  at  the  Rostovs’  since  the  day  of  the 
ball.  Pierre  seemed  absent-minded  and  embarrassed.  He  talked  chiefly  to 
the  countess.  Natasha  was  sitting  at  the  chess-board  with  Sonya,  and 
invited  Prince  Andrey  to  join  them.  He  went  to  them. 

‘You  have  known  Bezuhov  a  long  while,  haven’t  you?’  he  asked.  ‘Do; 
you  like  him?’ 

‘Yes;  he’s  very  nice,  but  very  absurd.’ 

And  she  began,  as  people  always  did  when  speaking  of  Pierre,  to  tell 
anecdotes  of  his  absent-mindedness,  anecdotes  which  were  made  up, 
indeed,  about  him. 

‘You  know,  I  have  confided  our  secret  to  him,’  said  Prince  Andrey.  ‘I 
have  known  him  from  childhood.  He  has  a  heart  of  gold.  I  beg  you, 
Natalie,’  he  said,  with  sudden  seriousness,  ‘I  am  going  away;  God  knows 
what  may  happen.  You  may  change  .  .  .  Oh,  I  know  I  ought  not  to 
speak  of  that.  Only  one  thing— if  anything  were  to  happen  to  you,  while 
I  am  away  .  .  .’ 

‘What  could  happen?’ 

‘If  any  trouble  were  to  come,’  pursued  Prince  Andrey.  ‘I  beg  you 
Mademoiselle  Sophie,  if  anything  were  to  happen,  to  go  to  him  and  no! 
one  else  for  advice  and  help.  He  is  a  most  absent-minded  and  eccentric 
person,  but  he  has  the  truest  heart.’ 

Neither  her  father,  nor  her  mother,  neither  Sonya  nor  Prince  Andrevi 
could  have  foreseen  the  effect  of  the  parting  on  Natasha.  She  wandered 
about  the  house  all  that  day,  flushed,  excited,  and  tearless,  busying  hersell 
about  the  most  trivial  matters  as  though  she  had  no  notion  of  what  was! 
before  her.  She  did  not  weep  even  at  the  moment  when  he  kissed  heii 
hand  for  the  last  time. 

‘Don’t  go  away!’  was  all  she  said,  in  a  voice  that  made  him  wonden 
whether  he  ought  not  really  to  remain,  and  that  he  remembered  lonp 
after.  When  he  had  gone,  she  still  did  not  weep;  but  for  several  day:, 
she  sat  in  her  room,  not  crying,  but  taking  no  interest  in  anything,  anc 
only  saying  from  time  to  time:  ‘Oh,  why  did  he  go?’  But  a  fortnight  afte 
his  departure,  she  surprised  those  around  her  equally  by  recovering  fron 
her  state  of  spiritual  sickness,  and  became  herself  again,  only  with  < 
change  in  her  moral  physiognomy,  such  as  one  sees  in  the  faces  of  chil 
dren  after  a  long  illness. 

1 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


45i 


XXV 

The  health  and  character  of  Prince  Nikolay  Andreitch  Bolkonksy  had, 
during  that  year,  after  his  son  had  left  him,  grown  considerably  feebler. 
He  became  more  irritable  than  ever,  and  it  was  Princess  Marya  who  as 
a  rule  bore  the  brunt  of  his  outbursts  of  causeless  fury.  He  seemed  studi¬ 
ously  to  seek  out  all  the  tender  spots  in  her  consciousness  so  as  to  inflict 
on  her  the  cruellest  wounds  possible.  Princess  Marya  had  two  passions 
and  consequently  two  joys:  her  nephew,  Nikolushka,  and  religion;  and 
both  were  favourite  subjects  for  the  old  prince’s  attacks  and  jeers.  What¬ 
ever  was  being  spoken  of,  he  would  bring  the  conversation  round  to  the 
superstitiousness  of  old  maids,  or  the  petting  and  spoiling  of  children. 
‘You  want  to  make  him’  (Nikolushka)  ‘just  such  another  old  maid  as 
you  are  yourself.  Prince  Andrey  wants  a  son  and  not  an  old  maid,’  he 
would  say.  Or  addressing  Mademoiselle  Bourienne  he  would  ask  her, 
before  Princess  Marya,  how  she  liked  our  village  priests  and  holy  pic¬ 
tures,  and  make  jests  about  them.  .  .  . 

He  was  constantly  wounding  Princess  Marya ’s  feelings,  but  his  daugh¬ 
ter  needed  no  effort  to  forgive  him.  Could  he  be  to  blame  in  anything 
he  did  to  her,  could  her  father,  who  as  she  knew  in  spite  of  it  all,  loved 
her,  be  unjust?  And  indeed  what  is  justice?  Princess  Marya  never  gave 
a  thought  to  that  proud  word,  ‘justice.’  All  the  complex  laws  of  humanity 
were  summed  up  for  her  in  one  clear  and  simple  law: — the  law  of  love 
and  self-sacrifice,  laid  down  by  Him  who  had  in  His  love  suffered  for 
humanity,  though  He  was  God  Himself.  What  had  she  to  do  with  the 
[justice  or  injustice  of  other  people?  All  she  had  to  do  was  to  suffer  and 
to  love;  and  that  she  did. 

In  the  winter  Prince  Andrey  had  come  to  Bleak  Hills,  had  been  gay, 
gentle,  and  affectionate,  as  Princess  Marya  had  not  seen  him  for  years. 
She  felt  that  something  had  happened  to  him,  but  he  said  nothing  to  his 
sister  of  his  love.  Before  his  departure,  Prince  Andrey  had  a  long  con¬ 
versation  with  his  father,  and  Princess  Marya  noticed  that  they  were 
.11  pleased  with  each  other  at  parting. 

Soon  after  Prince  /ndrey  had  gone,  Princess  Marya  wrote  from  Bleak 
dills  to  her  friend  in  Petersburg,  Julie  Karagin,  whom  Princess  Marya 
lad  dreamed — as  girls  always  do  dream — of  marrying  to  her  brother, 
ihe  was  at  this  time  in  mourning  for  the  death  of  a  brother,  who  had  been 
ailed  in  Turkey. 

'  ‘Sorrow,  it  seems,  is  our  common  lot,  my  sweet  and  tender  friend  Julie. 

!  ‘Your  loss  is  so  terrible  that  I  can  only  explain  it  to  myself,  as  a 
pecial  sign  of  the  grace  of  God,  who  in  His  love  for  you  would  chasten 
ou  and  your  incomparable  mother. 

j  ‘Ah,  my  dear,  religion,  and  religion  alone  can — I  don’t  say  comfort 
s — but  save  us  from  despair.  Religion  alone  can  interpret  to  us  what, 


452  WAR  AND  PEACE 

without  its  aid,  man  cannot  comprehend:  to  what  end,  for  what  cause, 
good,  elevated  beings  who  are  able  to  find  happiness  in  life,  not  injuring 
others,  but  indispensable  to  their  happiness,  are  called  away  to  God, 
while  the  wicked,  the  useless,  injuring  others  and  a  burden  to  themselves 
and  others,  are  left  living.  The  first  death  which  I  have  seen,  and  which 
I  shall  never  forget — the  death  of  my  dear  little  sister-in-law — made  on 
me  just  the  same  impression.  Just  as  you  question  destiny,  and  ask  why 
your  noble  brother  had  to  die,  so  did  I  wonder  what  reason  there  was  for 
that  angel  Liza  to  die — who  had  never  done  the  slightest  harm  to  any 
one,  never  even  had  a  thought  in  her  heart  that  was  not  kind.  And  yet — 
do  you  know,  dear  friend — five  years  have  passed  since  then,  and  even  I, 
with  my  poor  intelligence,  begin  now  to  understand  clearly  why  it  was 
needful  she  should  die,  and  in  what  way  that  death  was  but  an  expression 
of  the  boundless  grace  of  the  Creator,  all  of  whose  acts,  though  for  the 
most  part  we  comprehend  them  not,  are  but  manifestations  of  His  in¬ 
finite  love  for  His  creature.  Perhaps,  I  often  think,  she  was  of  too  angelic 
an  innocence  to  have  the  force  to  perform  all  a  mother’s  duties.  As  a 
young  wife,  she  was  irreproachable;  possibly  she  could  not  have  been 
equally  so  as  a  mother.  As  it  is,  not  only  has  she  left  us,  and  particularly 
Prince  Andrey,  the  purest  memories  and  regrets,  but  there  she  is  in  all 
likelihood  receiving  a  place  for  which  I  dare  not  hope  for  myself.  But 
not  to  speak  of  her  alone,  that  early  and  terrible  death  has  had  the  most 
blessed  influence  on  me  and  on  my  brother,  in  spite  of  all  our  grief. 
At  the  time,  at  the  moment  of  our  loss,  I  could  not  have  entertained  such 
thoughts;  at  that  time  I  should  have  dismissed  them  in  horror,  but  now 
it  seems  clear  and  incontestable.  I  write  all  this  to  you,  dear  friend, 
simply  to  convince  you  of  the  Gospel  truth,  which  has  become  a  principle 
of  life  for  me:  not  one  hair  of  our  head  falls  without  His  will.  And  the  ; 
guiding  principle  of  His  will  is  only  His  infinite  love  for  us,  and  so  what¬ 
ever  may  befall  us,  all  is  for  our  good. 

‘You  ask  whether  we  shall  spend  next  winter  in  Moscow.  In  spite  of 
all  my  desire  to  see  you,  I  do  not  expect  and  do  not  wish  to  do  so.  And  ; 
you  will  be  surprised  to  hear  that  Bonaparte  is  responsible  for  this!  I 
will  tell  you  why:  my  father’s  health  is  noticeably  weaker;  he  cannot 
endure  contradiction  and  is  easily  irritated.  This  irritability  is,  as  you 
are  aware,  most  readily  aroused  on  political  subjects.  He  cannot  endure 
the  idea  that  Bonaparte  is  treating  on  equal  terms' with  all  the  sovereigns!; 
of  Europe,  especially  our  own,  the  grandson  of  the  great  Catherine!  Asj 
you  know,  I  take  absolutely  no  interest  in  politics,  but  from  my  father  ( 
and  his  conversations  with  Mihail  Ivanovitch,  I  know  all  that  goes  on 
in  the  world,  and  have  heard  of  all  the  honours  conferred  on  Bonaparte.’: 
It  seems  that  Bleak  Hills  is  now  the  only  spot  on  the  terrestrial  globe 
where  he  is  not  recognised  as  a  great  man— still  less  as  Emperor  of 
France.  And  my  father  cannot  tolerate  this  state  of  things.  It  seems  to 
me  that  my  father  shows  a  disinclination  for  the  visit  to  Moscow,  chiefly 
owing  to  his  political  views  and  his  foreseeing  the  difficulties  likely  to 
arise  from  his  habit  of  expressing  his  opinions  freely,  with  no  regard 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


453 

for  any  one.  All  that  he  would  gain  from  medical  treatment  in  Moscow, 
he  would  lose  from  the  inevitable  discussions  upon  Bonaparte.  In  any 
case  the  matter  will  very  soon  be  settled. 

‘Our  home  life  goes  on  in  its  old  way,  except  for  the  absence  of  my 
brother  Andrey.  As  I  wrote  to  you  before,  he  has  greatly  changed  of  late. 
It  is  only  of  late,  during  this  year  that  he  seems  to  have  quite  recovered 
from  the  shock  of  his  loss.  He  has  become  again  just  as  I  knew  him  as 
a  child,  good-natured,  affectionate,  with  a  heart  such  as  I  know  in  no 
one  else.  He  feels  now,  it  seems  to  me,  that  life  is  not  over  for  him.  But, 
together  with  this  moral  change,  he  has  become  very  weak  physically. 
He  is  thinner  than  ever  and  more  nervous.  I  feel  anxious  about  him  and 
glad  that  he  is  taking  this  tour  abroad,  which  the  doctors  prescribed  long 
ago.  I  hope  that  it  will  cure  him.  You  write  to  me  that  he  is  spoken  of 
in  Petersburg  as  one  of  the  most  capable,  cultivated,  and  intellectual 
young  men.  Forgive  me  for  the  pride  of  family — I  never  doubted  it.  The 
good  he  did  here  to  every  one — from  his  peasants  to  the  local  nobility — 
is  incalculable.  When  he  went  to  Petersburg  he  was  received  as  he  de¬ 
served.  I  wonder  at  the  way  reports  fly  from  Petersburg  to  Moscow,  and 
especially  such  groundless  ones  as  the  rumour  you  wrote  to  me  about, 
of  my  brother’s  supposed  engagement  to  the  little  Rostov  girl.  I  don’t 
imagine  that  Andrey  will  ever  marry  any  one  at  all,  and  certainly  not  her. 
And  I  will  tell  you  why.  In  the  first  place,  I  know  that  though  he  rarely 
speaks  of  his  late  wife,  the  grief  of  his  loss  has  penetrated  too  deeply  into 
his  heart  for  him  ever  to  be  ready  to  give  her  a  successor,  and  our  little 
angel  a  stepmother.  Secondly,  because,  as  far  as  I  can  ascertain,  that  girl 
is  not  one  of  the  kind  of  women  who  could  attract  my  brother  Andrey. 
I  do  not  believe  that  Andrey  has  chosen  her  for  his  wife;  and  I  will 
frankly  confess,  I  should  not  wish  for  such  a  thing.  But  how  I  have  been 
running  on;  I  am  finishing  my  second  sheet.  Farewell,  my  sweet  friend; 
and  may  God  keep  you  in  His  holy  and  mighty  care.  My  dear  companion, 
Mademoiselle  Bourienne,  sends  you  kisses.  Marie.’ 

XXVI 

In  the  middle  of  the  summer  Princess  Marya,  to  her  surprise,  received  a 
letter  from  Prince  Andrey,  who  was  in  Switzerland.  In  it  he  told  her 
strange  and  surprising  news.  He  informed  his  sister  of  his  engagement  to 
the  younger  Rostov.  His  whole  letter  was  full  of  loving  enthusiasm  for 
his  betrothed,  and  tender  and  confiding  affection  for  his  sister.  He  wrote 
that  he  had  never  loved  as  he  loved  now,  and  that  it  was  only  now  that 
he  saw  all  the  value  and  meaning  of  life.  He  begged  his  sister  to  forgive 
him  for  having  said  nothing  of  his  plans  to  her  on  his  last  visit  to  Bleak 
Hills,  though  he  had  spoken  of  it  to  his  father.  He  had  said  nothing  to 
her  for  fear  Princess  Marya  would  beg  her  father  to  give  his  consent, 
and,  without  attaining  her  object,  would  irritate  her  father  and  draw  all 
the  weight  of  his  displeasure  upon  herself.  The  matter  was  not,  however, 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


4S4 

then,  he  wrote  to  her,  so  completely  settled  as  now.  ‘At  that  time  our  j 
father  insisted  on  a  delay  of  a  year,  and  now  six  months,  half  of  the 
period  specified,  is  over,  and  I  remain  firmer  than  ever  in  my  resolution. 

If  it  were  not  for  the  doctors  keeping  me  here  at  the  waters  I  should  be  i 
back  in  Russia  myself ;  but,  as  it  is,  I  must  put  off  my  return  for  another 
three  months.  You  know  me  and  my  relations  with  our  father.  I  want 
nothing  from  him.  I  have  been,  and  always  shall  be,  independent;  but  to 
act  in  opposition  to  his  will,  to  incur  his  anger  when  he  has  perhaps  not  j 
long  left  to  be  with  us,  would  destroy  half  my  happiness.  I  am  writing 
a  letter  to  him  now,  and  I  beg  you  to  choose  a  favourable  moment  to 
give  him  the  letter,  and  to  let  me  know  how  he  looks  at  the  whole  matter, 
and  if  there  is  any  hope  of  his  agreeing  to  shorten  the  year  by  three 
months.’ 

After  long  hesitations,  doubts,  and  prayers,  Princess  Marya  gave  the 
letter  to  her  father.  The  next  day  the  old  prince  said  to  her  calmly: 

‘Write  to  your  brother  to  wait  till  I’m  dead.  .  .  .  He  won’t  have  long 
to  wait.  I  shall  soon  set  him  free.’ 

The  princess  tried  to  make  some  reply,  but  her  father  would  not  let  her 
speak,  and  went  on,  getting  louder  and  louder.  ‘Let  him  marry,  let  him 
marry,  the  dear  fellow.  .  .  .  A  nice  connection !  .  .  .  Clever  people,  eh? 
Rich,  eh?  Oh  yes,  a  fine  stepmother  for  Nikolushka  she’ll  make!  You 
write  to  him  he  can  marry  her  to-morrow.  Nikolushka  shall  have  her  for 
a  stepmother,  and  I’ll  marry  little  Bourienne!  .  .  .  Ha,  ha,  ha,  and 
so  he  shall  have  a  stepmother  too!  Only  there’s  one  thing,  I  won’t  have 
any  more  women-folk  about  my  house;  he  may  marry  and  go  and  live  | 
by  himself.  Perhaps  you’ll  go  and  live  with  him  too?’  He  turned  to  Princess 
Marya:  ‘You’re  welcome  to,  and  good  luck  to  you!’ 

After  this  outburst  the  prince  did  not  once  allude  to  the  subject  again. 
But  his  repressed  anger  at  his  son’s  poor-spirited  behaviour  found  a  vent 
in  his  treatment  of  his  daughter.  He  now  added  to  his  former  subjects 
for  jeering  and  annoying  her  a  new  one — allusions  to  a  stepmother  and 
gallantries  to  Mademoiselle  Bourienne. 

‘Why  shouldn’t  I  marry  her?’  he  would  say  to  his  daughter.  ‘A  capital 
princess  she  will  make!’  And  latterly,  to  her  perplexity  and  amazement, 
Princess  Marya  began  to  notice  that  her  father  was  really  beginning  to  i 
attach  himself  more  and  more  closely  to  the  Frenchwoman.  Princess 
Marya  wrote  to  Prince  Andrey  and  told  him  how  their  father  had  taken 
the  letter,  but  comforted  her  brother  with  hopes  that  he  would  become 
reconciled  to  the  idea. 

Nikolushka  and  his  education,  her  brother  Andrey  and  religion,  were 
Princess  Marya’s  joys  and  consolations.  But  apart  from  those,  since 
every  one  must  have  personal  hopes,  Princess  Marya  cherished,  in  the 
deepest  secrecy  of  her  heart,  a  hidden  dream  and  hope  that  was  the 
source  of  the  chief  comfort  in  her  life.  This  comforting  dream  and  hope 
was  given  her  by  ‘God’s  folk’ — the  crazy  prophets  and  the  pilgrims,  who 
visited  her  without  the  prince’s  knowledge.  The  longer  Princess  Marya 
lived,  the  more  experience  and  observation  she  had  of  life  the  more 


WARANDPEACE  455 

she  wondered  at  the  shortsightedness  of  men,  who  seek  here  on  earth 
for  enjoyment,  toil,  suffer,  strive  and  do  each  other  harm  to  attain 
that  impossible,  visionary,  and  sinful  happiness.  Prince  Andrey  had 
loved  a  wife;  she  died;  that  was  not  enough  for  him,  he  wanted  to 
bind  his  happiness  to  another  woman.  Her  father  did  not  want  that,  be¬ 
cause  he  coveted  a  more  distinguished  or  a  wealthier  match  for  Andrey, 
And  they  were  all  striving,  and  suffering,  and  in  torment,  and  sullying 
their  souls,  their  eternal  souls,  to  attain  a  bliss  the  duration  of  which 
was  but  a  moment.  Not  only  do  we  know  that  for  ourselves.  Christ,  the 
Son  of  God,  came  down  upon  earth  and  told  us  that  this  life  is  but  for 
a  moment,  is  but  a  probation;  yet  we  still  cling  to  it  and  think  to  find 
happiness  in  it.  ‘How  is  it  no  one  has  realised  that?’  Princess  Marya 
wondered.  ‘No  one  but  these  despised  people  of  God  who,  with  wallets 
over  their  shoulders,  come  to  me  by  the  back  stairs,  afraid  of  the  prince 
catching  sight  of  them,  and  not  from  fear  of  ill-usage,  but  from  fear  of 
tempting  him  to  sin.  To  leave  home  and  country,  give  up  all  thoughts 
of  worldly  blessings,  and  clinging  to  nothing,  to  wander  from  place  to 
place  in  a  home-spun  smock  under  a  different  name,  doing  people  no 
harm,  but  praying  for  them,  praying  equally  for  those  who  drive  them 
away  and  those  who  succour  them:  higher  than  that  truth  and  that  life 
there  is  no  truth  and  no  life!’ 

There  was  one  pilgrim-woman,  Fedosyushka,  a  quiet,  little  woman 
of  about  fifty,  marked  by  smallpox,  who  had  been  wandering  for  over 
thirty  years  barefooted  and  wearing  chains.  Princess  Marya  was  par¬ 
ticularly  fond  of  her.  One  day  when  sitting  in  a  dark  room,  by  the  light 
only  of  the  lamp  before  the  holy  picture,  Fedosyushka  told  her  about 
her  life.  Princess  Marya  felt  all  at  once  so  strongly  that  Fedosyushka 
was  the  one  person  who  had  found  the  right  way  of  life,  that  she  re¬ 
solved  to  go  on  a  pilgrimage  herself.  When  Fedosyushka  had  gone  to  bed 
Princess  Marya  pondered  a  long  while  over  it,  and  at  last  made  up  her 
mind  that — however  strange  it  might  be — she  must  go  on  a  pilgrimage. 
She  confided  her  intention  to  no  one  but  a  monk,  Father  Akinfy,  and 
this  priest  approved  of  her  project.  On  the  pretence  of  getting  presents 
for  pilgrim  women,  Princess  Marya  had  prepared  for  herself  the  complete 
outfit  of  a  pilgrim — a  smock,  plaited  shoes,  a  full -skirted  coat,  and  a  black 
kerchief.  Often  she  went  to  her  secret  wardrobe,  where  she  kept  them, 
and  stood  in  uncertainty  whether  the  time  to  carry  out  her  plan  had 
come  or  not. 

Often  as  she  listened  to  the  pilgrims’  tales,  their  simple  phrases — 
that  had  become  mechanical  to  them,  but  were  to  her  ears  full  of  the 
deepest  significance — worked  upon  her  till  she  was  several  times  ready 
to  throw  up  everything  and  run  away  from  home.  In  imagination  she  al¬ 
ready  saw  herself  with  Fedosyushka  in  a  coarse  smock,  trudging  along 
the  dusty  road  with  her  wallet  and  her  staff,  going  on  her  pilgrimage, 
free  from  envy,  free  from  earthly  love,  free  from  all  desires,  from  one 
saint  to  another;  and  at  last  thither  where  there  is. neither  sorrow  nor 
sighing,  but  everlasting  joy  and  blessedness. 


456  war  and  peace 

‘I  shall  come  to  one  place.  I  shall  pray  there,  and  before  I  have  time 
to  grow  used  to  it,  to  love  it,  I  shall  go  on  further.  And  I  shall  go  on  till 
my  legs  give  way  under  me  and  I  lie  down  and  die  somewhere,  and  reach 
at  last  that  quiet,  eternal  haven,  where  is  neither  sorrow  nor  sighing!  .  .  .’ 
thought  Princess  Marya. 

But  then  at  the  sight  of  her  father,  and  still  more  of  little  Nikolushka, 
she  wavered  in  her  resolution,  wept  in  secret,  and  felt  that  she  was  a 
sinner,  that  she  loved  her  father  and  her  nephew  more  than  God. 


PART  VII 


I 

The  Biblical  tradition  tells  us  that  the  absence  of  work — idleness — was 
a  condition  of  the  first  man’s  blessedness  before  the  Fall.  The  love  of 
idleness  has  remained  the  same  ‘in  fallen  man;  but  the  curse  still  lies 
heavy  upon  man,  and  not  only  because  in  the  sweat  of  our  brow  we  must 
eat  bread,  but  because  from  our  moral  qualities  we  are  unable  to  be 
idle  and  at  peace.  A  secret  voice  tells  us  that  we  must  be  to  blame  for 
being  idle.  If  a  man  could  find  a  state  in  which  while  being  idle  he  could 
feel  himself  to  be  of  use  and  to  be  doing  his  duty,  he  would  have  attained 
to  one  side  of  primitive  blessedness.  And  such  a  state  of  obligatory  and 
irreproachable  idleness  is  enjoyed  by  a  whole  class — the  military  class. 
It  is  in  that  obligatory  and  irreproachable  idleness  that  the  chief  attrac¬ 
tion  of  military  service  has  always  consisted,  and  will  always  consist. 

Nikolay  Rostov  was  enjoying  this  blessed  privilege  to  the  full,  as  after 
the  year  1807  he  remained  in  the  Pavlograd  regiment,  in  command  of 
the  squadron  that  had  been  Denisov’s. 

Rostov  had  become  a  bluff,  good-natured  fellow,  who  would  have  been 
thought  rather  bad  form  by  his  old  acquaintances  in  Moscow,  though 
he  was  loved  and  respected  by  his  comrades,  his  subordinates,  and  his 
superior  officers,  and  was  well  content  with  his  life.  Of  late — in  the  year 
1809 — he  had  found  more  and  more  frequently  in  letters  from  home 
complaints  on  the  part  of  his  mother  that  their  pecuniary  position  was 
going  from  bad  to  worse,  and  that  it  was  high  time  for  him  to  come  home, 

'  to  gladden  and  comfort  the  hearts  of  his  old  parents. 

As  he  read  those  letters,  Nikolay  felt  a  pang  of  dread  at  their  wanting 
>  to  drag  him  out  of  the  surroundings  in  which,  by  fencing  himself  off  from 
all  the  complexities  of  existence,  he  was  living  so  quietly  and  peacefully. 
He  felt  that  sooner  or  later  he  would  have  to  plunge  again  into  that 
whirlpool  of  life,  with  many  difficulties  and  business  to  attend  to,  with 
the  steward’s  accounts,  with  quarrels  and  intrigues,  and  ties,  with 
society,  with  Sonya’s  love  and  his  promise  to  her.  All  that  was  terribly 
difficult  and  complicated;  and  he  answered  his  mother’s  letters  with  cold 
letters  in  French  on  the  classic  model,  beginning  ‘Ma  chere  maman 
and  ending:  ‘Votre  obeissant  fils’  saying  nothing  of  any  intention  of 
coming  home.  In  1810  he  received  letters  from  home  in  which  he  was 
told  of  Natasha’s  engagement  to  Bolkonsky,  and  of  the  marriage  being 
deferred  for  a  year,  because  the  old  prince  would  not  consent  to  it.  This 
letter  chagrined  and  mortified  Nikolay.  In  the  first  place,  he  was  sorry 
to  be  losing  from  home  Natasha,  whom  he  cared  more  for  than  all  the 


45  S 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


rest  of  the  family.  Secondly,  from  his  hussar  point  of  view,  he  regretted 
not  having  been  at  home  at  the  time,  as  he  would  have  shown  this  Bol¬ 
konsky  that  it  was  by  no  means  such  an  honour  to  be  connected  with 
him,  and  that  if  he  cared  for  Natasha  he  could  get  on  just  as  well  without 
his  crazy  old  father’s  consent.  For  a  moment  he  hesitated  whether  to 
ask  for  leave,  so  as  to  see  Natasha  engaged,  but  then  the  manoeuvres 
were  just  coming  on,  and  thoughts  of  Sonya,  of  complications,  recurred 
to  him,  and  again  he  put  it  off.  But  in  the  spring  of  the  same  year  he  got 
a  letter  from  his  mother,  written  without  his  father’s  knowledge,  and 
that  letter  decided  him.  She  wrote  that  if  Nikolay  did  not  come  and  look 
after  things,  their  whole  estate  would  have  to  be  sold  by  auction,  and 
they  would  all  be  beggars.  The  count  was  so  weak,  put  such  entire  con¬ 
fidence  in  Mitenka,  and  was  so  good-natured,  and  every  one  took  advan¬ 
tage  of  him,  so  that  things  w'ere  going  from  bad  to  worse.  ‘I  beseech 
you,  for  God’s  sake,  to  come  at  once,  if  you  don’t  want  to  make  me 
and  all  your  family  miserable,’  wrote  the  countess. 

That  letter  produced  an  effect  on  Nikolay.  He  had  that  common  sense 
of  mediocrity  which  showed  him  what  was  his  duty. 

His  duty  now  was,  if  not  to  retire  from  the  army,  at  least  to  go  home 
on  leave.  Why  he  had  to  go,  he  could  not  have  said;  but,  after  his  after- 
dinner  nap,  he  ordered  his  grey  mare  to  be  saddled,  a  terribly  vicious 
beast  that  he  had  not  ridden  for  a  long  while. 

He  returned  home  with  his  horse  in  a  lather,  and  told  Lavrushka — 
he  had  kept  on  Denisov’s  old  valet — and  the  comrades  who  dropped  in 
that  evening,  that  he  had  applied  for  leave  and  was  going  home.  It  was 
strange  and  difficult  for  him  to  believe  that  he  was  going  away  without 
hearing  from  the  staff  whether  he  had  been  promoted  to  be  a  captain 
or  had  received  the  St.  Anne  for  the  last  manoeuvres  (a  matter  of  the 
greatest  interest  to  him).  It  was  strange  to  him  to  think  of  going  away 
like  this  without  having  sold  Count  Goluhovsky  his  three  roan  horses, 
over  which  the  Polish  count  was  haggling  with  him.  Rostov  had  taken  a 
bet  that  he  would  get  two  thousand  for  them.  It  seemed  inconceivable 
that  without  him  the  ball  could  take  place  which  the  hussars  were  to 


give  in  honour  of  their  favourite  Polish  belle,  Madame  Pshazdetsky,  to 
outdo  the  Uhlans,  who  had  given  a  ball  to  their  favourite  belle,  Madame 
Borzhozovsky.  Yet  he  knew  he  must  leave  this  world,  where  all  was  well 
and  all  was  clear,  to  go  where  all  was  nonsensical  and  complicated.  A 
week  later  his  leave  came.  His  comrades — not  only  in  the  regiment,  but 
throughout  the  whole  brigade — gave  Rostov  a  dinner  that  cost  a  sub¬ 
scription  of  fifteen  roubles  a  head.  Two  bands  of  musicians  played,  two 
choruses  sang;  Rostov  danced  the  trepak  with  Major  Bazov;  the  drunken 
officers  tossed  him  in  the  air,  hugged  him,  dropped  him;  the  soldiers  of 
the  third  squadron  tossed  him  once  more  and  shouted  hurrah!  Then  they 
put  Rostov  in  a  sledge  and  escorted  him  as  far  as  the  first  posting- 
station  on  his  way. 

For  the  first  half  of  the  journey,  from  Krementchug  to  Kiev,  all  Ros- 


WARANDPEACE  459 

tov’s  thoughts — as  is  apt  to  be  the  case  with  travellers — turned  to  what 
he  had  left  behind — to  his  squadron.  But  after  being  jolted  over  the  first 
half  of  the  journey,  he  had  begun  to  forget  his  three  roans  and  his 
quartermaster,  Dozhoyveyky,  and  was  beginning  to  wonder  uneasily 
what  he  should  find  on  reaching  Otradnoe.  The  nearer  he  got,  the  more 
intense,  far  more  intense,  were  his  thoughts  of  home  (as  though  moral 
feeling  were  subject  to  the  law  of  acceleration  in  inverse  ratio  with  the 
square  of  the  distance).  At  the  station  nearest  to  Otradnoe  he  gave  the 
sledge-driver  a  tip  of  three  roubles,  and  ran  breathless  up  the  steps  of 
his  home,  like  a  boy. 

After  the  excitement  of  the  first  meeting,  and  the  strange  feeling  of 
disappointment  after  his  expectations — the  feeling  that  ‘it’s  just  the 
same;  why  was  I  in  such  a  hurry?’ — Nikolay  began  to  settle  down  in  his 
old  world  of  home.  His  father  and  mother  were  just  the  same,  only  a  little 
older.  All  that  was  new  in  them  was  a  certain  uneasiness  and  at  times 
a  difference  of  opinion,  which  he  had  never  seen  between  them  before, 
and  soon  learned  to  be  due  to  the  difficulties  of  their  position. 

Sonya  was  now  nearly  twenty.  She  would  grow  no  prettier  now;  there 
was  no  promise  in  her  of  more  to  come;  but  what  she  had  was  enough. 
She  was  brimming  over  with  love  and  happiness  as  soon  as  Nikolay  came 
home,  and  this  girl’s  faithful,  steadfast  love  for  him  gladdened  his  heart. 
Petya  and  Natasha  surprised  Nikolay  more  than  all  the  rest.  Petya  was 
a  big,  handsome  lad  of  thirteen,  whose  voice  was  already  cracking;  he 
was  full  of  gaiety  and  clever  pranks.  Nikolay  did  not  get  over  his 
wonder  at  Natasha  for  a  long  while,  and  laughed  as  he  looked  at  her. 

‘You’re  utterly  different,’  he  told  her. 

‘How?  Uglier?’ 

‘No,  quite  the  contrary;  but  what  dignity!  A  real  princess!’  he  whis¬ 
pered  to  her. 

‘Yes,  yes,  yes,’  cried  Natasha  gleefully. 

Natasha  told  him  all  the  story  of  Prince  Andrey’s  lovemaking,  of  his 
visit  to  Otradnoe,  and  showed  him  his  last  letter. 

‘Well,  are  you  glad?’  asked  Natasha.  ‘I’m  so  at  peace  and  happy  now.’ 

‘Very  glad,’  answered  Nikolay.  ‘He’s  a  splendid  fellow.  Are  you  very 
much  in  love,  then?’ 

‘How  shall  I  say?’  answered  Natasha.  ‘I  was  in  love  with  Boris,  with 
our  teacher,  with  Denisov;  but  this  is  utterly  different.  I  feel  calm, 
settled.  I  know  there  is  no  one  better  than  he  in  the  world,  and  so  I  am 
calm  now  and  content.  It’s  utterly  different  from  anything  before.  .  .  .’ 

Nikolay  expressed  his  dissatisfaction  at  the  marriage  being  put  off  for 
a  year.  But  Natasha  fell  on  him  with  exasperation,  proving  to  him  that 
no  other  course  was  possible,  that  it  would  be  a  horrid  thing  to  enter  a 
family  against  the  father’s  will,  and  that  she  would  not  consent  to  it 
herself. 

‘You  don’t  understand  at  all,  at  all,’  she  kept  saying; 

Nikolay  paused  a  moment,  and  then  said  he  agreed  with  her. 


46o  WARANDPEACE 

Her  brother  often  wondered  as  he  looked  at  her.  It  seemed  quite  in- ' 
credible  that  she  was  a  girl  in  love  and  parted  from  her  betrothed  lover,  j 
She  was  even-tempered,  serene,  and  quite  as  light-hearted  as  ever.  This 
made  Nikolay  wonder,  and  look  on  the  engagement  to  Bolkonsy  rather 
sceptically.  He  could  not  believe  that  her  fate  was  by  now  sealed,  es¬ 
pecially  as  he  had  never  seen  her  with  Prince  Andrey.  It  still  seemed  to 
him  that  there  was  something  not  real  in  this  proposed  marriage. 

‘Why  this  delay?  Why  were  they  not  formally  betrothed?’  he  thought. 

Once  in  talking  to  his  mother  about  his  sister,  he  found  to  his  sur- 1 
prise,  and  partly  to  his  satisfaction,  that  at  the  bottom  of  her  heart  his  ' 
mother  sometimes  regarded  the  marriage  as  sceptically  as  he  did.  j 

‘Here,  you  see,  he  writes,’  she  said,  showing  her  son  a  letter  from' 
Prince  Andrey  with  that  latent  feeling  of  grudge  which  mothers  always 
have  in  regard  to  their  daughter’s  happiness  in  marriage,  ‘he  writes  that 
he  won’t  be  coming  before  December.  What  can  it  be  that  keeps  him? 
Illness,  no  doubt!  His  health  is  very  weak.  Don’t  tell  Natasha.  Don’t 
make  a  mistake,  because  she  seems  in  good  spirits;  it’s  the  last  she  has! 
of  her  girlhood,  and  I  know  how  she  is  when  she  gets  his  letters.  Still,; 
God  grant,  all  may  be  well  yet,’  she  always  concluded:  ‘he’s  a  splendid 
fellow.’ 


In  the  early  part  of  his  time  at  home  Nikolay  was  serious  and  even  dull. 
He  was  worried  by  the  necessity  of  meddling  in  the  stupid  business  mat-; 
ters  which  his  mother  had  sent  for  him  to  look  after.  To  be  rid  of  this 
burden  as  soon  as  possible,  on  the  third  day  after  his  return,  he  marched, 
angrily  off,  making  no  reply  to  inquiries  where  he  was  going,  with  scowl- 1 
ing  brows  entered  Mitenka’s  lodge,  and  demanded  from  him  an  account 
in  full.  What  he  meant  by  an  account  in  full,  Nikolay  knew  even  less 
than  the  panic-stricken  and  bewildered  Mitenka.  The  conversation  and 
Mitenka’s  accounts  did  not  last  long.  The  village  elder,  the  deputy,  and 
the  village  clerk,  waiting  in  the  entry  of  the  lodge,  heard  with  awe  and  ,, 
delight  at  first  the  booming  and  snapping  of  the  young  count’s  voice  in  f 
a  constantly  ascending  scale,  then  terrible  words  of  abuse,  flung  one j,. 
after  another.  ja 

‘Robber!  Ungrateful  brute!  .  .  .  I’ll  thrash  the  dog!  .  .  .  not  papa  |f 
to  deal  with  .  .  .  plundering  us  .  .  .’  and  so  on. 

Then,  with  no  less  awe  and  delight,  these  persons  saw  the  young  count,  ^ 
with  a  red  face  and  bloodshot  eyes,  dragging  Mitenka  out  by  the 
collar,  kicking  him  with  great  dexterity  at  every  appropriate  moment  ^ 
between  his  words,  and  shouting:  ^ 

‘Away  with  you!  Never  let  me  set  eyes  on  you,  blackguard!’ 

Mitenka  flew  head  first  down  six  steps  and  ran  to  the  shrubbery. 
This  shrubbery  was  well  known  as  a  haven  of  refuge  for  delinquents  at 
Oradnoe.  Mitenka  had,  on  coming  home  drunk  from  the  town,  himself 


WARANDPEACE  461 

hidden  in  the  shrubbery,  and  many  of  the  residents  of  Otradnoe  had 
been  indebted  to  the  saving  power  of  the  shrubbery  when  anxious  to 
conceal  themselves  from  Mitenka. 

Mitenka’s  wife  and  sister-in-law,  with  frightened  faces,  peeped  into 
the  passage  from  the  door  of  their  room,  where  was  a  bright  samovar 
boiling,  and  the  bailiff’s  high  bedstead  stood  under  a  quilted  patchwork 
coverlet. 

The  young  count  walked  by,  treading  resolutely  and  breathing  hard, 
taking  no  notice  of  them,  and  went  into  the  house. 

The  countess  heard  at  once  through  her  maids  of  what  had  been  hap¬ 
pening  in  the  lodge,  and  on  one  side  was  comforted  by  the  reflection  that 
now  their  position  would  be  sure  to  improve,  though  on  the  other  hand 
she  was  uneasy  as  to  the  effect  of  the  scene  on  her  son.  She  went  several 
times  on  tiptoe  to  his  door,  and  listened  as  he  lighted  one  pipe  after 
another. 

The  next  day  the  old  count  drew  his  son  on  one  side,  and,  with  a  timid 
smile,  said  to  him,  ‘But  you  know,  my  dear  boy,  you  had  no  reason  to 
be  so  angry.  Mitenka  has  told  me  all  about  it.’ 

‘I  knew,’  thought  Nikolay,  ‘that  I  should  never  make  head  or  tail 
of  anything  in  this  crazy  world.’ 

‘You  were  angry  at  his  not  having  put  down  these  seven  hundred  and 
eight  roubles.  But  you  see  they  were  carried  forward  by  double  entry, 
and  you  didn’t  look  at  the  next  page.’ 

‘Papa,  he’s  a  blackguard  and  a  thief,  I  am  certain.  And  what  I  have 
done,  I  have  done.  But  if  you  don’t  wish  it,  I  will  say  nothing  to  him.’ 

‘No,  my  dear  boy!’  (The  old  count  was  confused.  He  was  conscious 
that  he  had  mismanaged  his  wife’s  estate  and  had  wronged  his  children, 
but  he  had  no  notion  how  to  rectify  the  position.)  ‘No,  I  beg  you  to  go 
into  things.  I  am  old.  I  .  .  .’ 

‘No,  papa,  forgive  me  if  I  have  done  what  you  dislike.  I  know  less 
about  it  than  you  do.’ 

‘Damn  them  all,  these  peasants,  and  money  matters  and  double  en¬ 
tries,’  he  thought.  ‘I  used  once  to  understand  scoring  at  cards,  but  book¬ 
keeping  by  double  entry  is  quite  beyond  me,’  he  said  to  himself,  and 
from  that  time  he  did  not  meddle  further  with  the  management  of  the 
family  affairs.  But  one  day  the  countess  called  her  son  into  her  room, 
told  him  that  she  had  a  promissory  note  from  Anna  Mihalovna  for  two 
thousand  roubles,  and  asked  Nikolay  what  he  thought  it  best  to  do 
about  it. 

‘Well,’  answered  Nikolay,  ‘you  say  that  it  rests  with  me.  I  don’t  like 
Anna  Mihalovna,  and  I  don’t  like  Boris,  but  they  were  our  friends,  and 
they  were  poor.  So  that’s  what  I  would  do!  ’  and  he  tore  up  the  note,  and 
by  so  doing  made  the  countess  sob  with  tears  of  joy.  After  this,  young 
Rostov  took  no  further  part  in  business  of  any  sort,  but  devoted  himself 
with  passionate  interest  to  everything  to  do  with  the  chase,  which  was 
kept  up  on  a  great  scale  on  the  old  count’s  estate. 


462 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


\ 


III 

Wintry  weather  was  already  setting  in,  the  morning  frosts  hardened  the 
earth  drenched  by  the  autumn  rains.  Already  the  grass  was  full  of  tufts, 
and  stood  out  bright  green  against  the  patches  of  brown  winter  cornland 
trodden  by  the  cattle,  and  the  pale  yellow  stubble  of  the  summer  corn¬ 
fields,  and  the  reddish  strips  of  buckwheat.  The  uplands  and  copses, 
which  at  the  end  of  August  had  still  been  green  islands  among  the  black 
fields  ploughed  ready  for  winter  corn,  and  the  stubble  had  become 
golden  and  lurid  red  islands  in  a  sea  of  bright  green  autumn  crops.  The 
grey  hare  had  already  half-changed  its  coat,  the  foxes’  cubs  were  begin¬ 
ning  to  leave  their  parents,  and  the  young  wolves  were  bigger  than  dogs. 
It  was  the  best  time  of  the  year  for  the  chase.  The  dogs  of  an  ardent 
young  sportsman  like  Rostov  were  only  just  coming  into  fit  state  for 
hunting,  so  that  at  a  common  council  of  the  huntsmen  it  was  decided  to 
give  the  dogs  three  days’  rest,  and  on  the  16th  of  September  to  go  off 
on  a  hunting  expedition,  beginning  with  Dubravy,  where  there  was  a 
litter  of  wolves  that  had  never  been  hunted. 

Such  was  the  position  of  affairs  on  the  14th  of  September. 

All  that  day  the  dogs  were  kept  at  home.  It  was  keen  and  frosty 
weather,  but  towards  evening  the  sky  clouded  over  and  it  began  to  thaw. 
On  the  morning  of  the  15th  of  September  when  young  Rostov  in  his 
dressing-gown  looked  out  of  window  he  saw  a  morning  which  was  all 
the  heart  could  desire  for  hunting.  It  looked  as  though  the  sky  were 
melting,  and  without  the  slightest  wind,  sinking  down  upon  the  earth. 
The  only  movement  in  the  air  was  the  soft  downward  motion  of  micro¬ 
scopic  drops  of  moisture  or  mist.  The  bare  twigs  in  the  garden  were 
hung  with  transparent  drops  which  dripped  on  to  the  freshly  fallen 
leaves.  The  earth  in  the  kitchen-garden  had  a  gleaming,  wet,  black  look 
like  the  centre  of  a  poppy,  and  at  a  short  distance  away  it  melted  off  into 
the  damp,  dim  veil  of  fog. 

Nikolay  went  out  on  to  the  wet  and  muddy  steps.  There  was  a  smell 
of  decaying  leaves  and  dogs.  The  broad-backed,  black  and  tan  bitch 
Milka,  with  her  big,  prominent,  black  eyes,  caught  sight  of  her  master, 
got  up,  stretched  out  her  hindlegs,  lay  down  like  a  hare,  then  suddenly 
jumped  up  and  licked  him  right  on  his  nose  and  moustache.  Another  har¬ 
rier,  catching  sight  of  his  master  from  the  bright  coloured  path,  arched 
its  back,  darted  headlong  to  the  steps,  and,  lifting  its  tail,  rubbed  itself 
against  Nikolay’s  legs. 

‘O,  hoy!  ’  He  heard  at  that  moment  the  inimitable  hunting  halloo  which 
unites  the  deepest  bass  and  the  shrillest  tenor  notes.  And  round  the 
corner  came  the  huntsman  and  whipper-in,  Danilo,  a  grey,  wrinkled  man, 
with  his  hair  cropped  round  in  the  Ukrainian  fashion.  He  held  a  bent 
whip  in  his  hand,  and  his  face  had  that  expression  of  independence  and 
scorn  for  everything  in  the  world,  which  is  only  to  be  seen  in  huntsmen. 


WARANDPEACE  463 

He  took  off  his  Circassian  cap  to  his  master  and  looked  scornfully  at  him. 
That  scorn  was  not  offensive  to  his  master.  Nikolay  knew  that  this 
Danilo,  disdainful  of  all,  and  superior  to  everything,  was  still  his  man 
and  his  huntsman. 

‘Danilo,’  said  Nikolay,  at  the  sight  of  this  hunting  weather,  those 
dogs,  and  the  huntsman,  feeling  shyly  that  he  was  being  carried  away 
by  that  irresistible  sporting  passion  in  which  a  man  forgets  all  his 
previous  intentions,  like  a  man  in  love  at  the  sight  of  his  mistress. 

‘What  is  your  bidding,  your  excellency?’  asked  a  bass  voice,  fit  for 
a  head  deacon,  and  hoarse  from  hallooing,  and  a  pair  of  flashing  black 
eyes  glanced  up  from  under  their  brows  at  the  silent  young  master. 
‘Surely  you  can’t  resist  it?’  those  two  eyes  seemed  to  be  asking. 

‘It’s  a  good  day,  eh?  Just  right  for  riding  and  hunting,  eh?’  said 
Nikolay,  scratching  Milka  behind  the  ears. 

Danilo  winked  and  made  no  reply. 

‘I  sent  Uvarka  out  to  listen  at  daybreak,’  his  bass  boomed  out  after 
a  moment’s  silence.  ‘He  brought  word  she’s  moved  into  the  Otradnoe 
enclosure;  there  was  howling  there.’  (‘She’s  moved’  meant  that  the 
mother  wolf,  of  whom  both  knew,  had  moved  with  her  cubs  into  the 
Otradnoe  copse,  which  was  a  small  hunting  preserve  about  two  versts 
away. ) 

‘Shouldn’t  we  go,  eh?’  said  Nikolay.  ‘Come  to  me  with  Uvarka.’ 

‘As  you  desire.’ 

‘Then  put  off  feeding  them.’ 

‘Yes,  sir!’ 

Five  minutes  later  Danilo  and  Uvarka  were  standing  in  Nikolay’s 
big  study.  Although  Danilo  was  not  tall,  to  see  him  in  a  room  gave  one 
an  impression  such  as  one  has  on  seeing  a  horse  or  bear  standing  on  the 
floor  among  the  furniture  and  surroundings  of  human  life.  Danilo  felt 
this  himself,  and  as  usual  he  kept  close  to  the  door  and  tried  to  speak 
more  softly,  and  not  to  move  for  fear  of  causing  some  breakage  in  the 
master’s  apartments.  He  did  his  utmost  to  get  everything  said  quickly 
so  as  to  get  as  soon  as  might  be  out  into  the  open  again,  from  under  a 
ceiling  out  under  the  sky. 

After  making  inquiries  and  extracting  from  Danilo  an  admission  that 
the  dogs  were  fit  (Danilo  himself  was  longing  to  go),  Nikolay  told  them 
to  have  the  horses  saddled.  But  just  as  Danilo  was  about  to  go,  Natasha, 
wrapped  in  a  big  shawl  of  her  old  nurse’s,  ran  into  the  room,  not  yet 
dressed,  and  her  hair  in  disorder.  Petya  ran  in  with  her. 

‘Are  you  going?’  said  Natasha.  ‘I  knew  you  would!  Sonya  said  you 
weren’t  going.  I  knew  that  on  such  a  day  you  couldn’t  help  going!’ 

‘Yes,  we’re  going,’  Nikolay  answered  reluctantly.  As  he  meant  to 
attempt  serious  hunting  he  did  not  want  to  take  Natasha  and  Petya. 
‘We  are  going,  but  only  wolf-hunting;  it  will  be  dull  for  you.’ 

‘You  know  that  it’s  the  greatest  of  my  pleasures,’  said  Natasha.  ‘It’s 
too  bad — he’s  going  himself,  has  ordered  the  horses  out  and  not  a  word 
to  us.’ 


464  WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘No  hindrance  bars  a  Russian’s  path!’  declaimed  Petya;  ‘let’s  go!’’ 

‘But  you  mustn’t,  you  know;  mamma  said  you  were  not  to,’  said 
Nikolay  to  Natasha. 

‘No,  I'm  going,  I  must  go,’  said  Natasha  stoutly.  ‘Danilo,  bid  them 
saddle  my  horse,  and  tell  Mihailo  to  come  with  my  leash,’  she  said  to 
the  huntsman. 

Simply  to  be  in  a  room  seemed  irksome  and  unfitting  to  Danilo,  but 
to  have  anything  to  do  with  a  young  lady  he  felt  to  be  utterly  impos¬ 
sible.  He  cast  down  his  eyes  and  made  haste  to  get  away,  making  as 
though  it  were  no  affair  of  his,  and  trying  to  avoid  accidentally  doing 
some  hurt  to  the  young  lady. 


IV 

The  old  count,  whose  hunting  establishment  had  always  been  kept  up  on 
a  large  scale,  had  now  handed  it  all  over  to  his  son’s  care,  but  on  that 
day,  the  15th  of  September,  being  in  excellent  spirits  he  prepared  to  join 
the  expedition.  Within  an  hour  the  whole  party  was  before  the  porch. 
When  Natasha  and  Petya  said  something  to  Nikolay  he  walked  by  them 
with  a  stern  and  serious  air,  betokening  that  he  had  no  time  to  waste  on 
trifles.  He  looked  over  everything  to  do  with  the  hunt,  sent  a  pack  of 
hounds  and  huntsmen  on  ahead  to  cut  off  the  wolf  from  behind,  got  on 
his  chestnut  Don  horse,  and  whistling  to  the  dogs  of  his  leash,  he  set  off 
across  the  threshing-floor  to  the  field  leading  to  the  Otradnoe  preserve. 
The  old  count’s  horse,  a  sorrel  gelding,  with  a  white  mane  and  tail,  called 
Viflyanka,  was  led  by  the  count’s  groom;  he  was  himself  to  drive  straight 
in  a  light  gig  to  the  spot  fixed  for  him  to  stand. 

Fifty-four  hounds  were  led  out  under  the  charge  of  six  whippers-in 
and  grooms.  Of  huntsmen,  properly  speaking,  there  were  taking  part 
in  the  hunt  eight  men  besides  the  members  of  the  family,  and  more  than 
forty  greyhounds  ran  behind  them,  so  that  with  the  hounds  in  leashes 
there  were  about  a  hundred  and  thirty  dogs  and  twenty  persons  on  horse¬ 
back. 

Every  dog  knew  its  master  and  its  call.  Every  man  in  the  hunt  knew 
his  task,  his  place,  and  the  part  assigned  him.  As  soon  as  they  had  passed 
beyond  the  fence,  they  all  moved  without  noise  or  talk,  lengthening 
out  along  the  road  and  the  field  to  the  Otradnoe  forest. 

The  horses  stept  over  the  field  as  over  a  soft  carpet,  splashing  now 
and  then  into  pools  as  they  crossed  the  road.  The  foggy  sky  still  seemed 
falling  imperceptibly  and  regularly  down  on  the  earth;  the  air  was 
still  and  warm,  and  there  was  no  sound  but  now  and  then  the  whistle 
of  a  huntsman,  the  snort  of  a  horse,  the  clack  of  a  whip,  or  the  whine  of 
a  dog  who  had  dropped  out  of  his  place.  When  they  had  gone  a  verst, 
five  more  horsemen  accompanied  by  dogs  appeared  out  of  the  mist  to 
meet  the  Rostovs.  The  foremost  of  them  was  a  fresh,  handsome  old  man 
with  large,  grey  moustaches. 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


465 


“Good-day,  uncle/  said  Nikolay  as  the  old  man  rode  up  to  him. 

‘All’s  well  and  march!  ...  I  was  sure  of  it/  began  the  man  addressed 
as  uncle.  He  was  not  really  the  Rostovs’  uncle,  but  a  distant  relative, 
who  had  a  small  property  in  their  neighbourhood. 

‘I  was  sure  you  couldn’t  resist  it,  and  a  good  thing  you  have  come  out. 
All’s  well  and  quick  march.’  (This  was  the  uncle’s  favourite  saying.) 
‘You  had  better  attack  the  preserve  at  once,  for  my  Girtchik  brought  me 
word  that  the  Ilagins  are  out  with  their  hounds  at  Korniky ;  they’ll  snatch 
the  litter  right  under  your  noses.’ 

‘That’s  where  I’m  going.  Shall  we  join  the  packs?’  asked  Nikolay. 

The  hounds  were  joined  into  one  pack,  and  the  uncle  and  Nikolay  rode 
on  side  by  side. 

Natasha,  muffled  up  in  a  shawl  which  did  not  hide  her  eager  face  and 
shining  eyes,  galloped  up  to  them,  accompanied  by  Petya,  who  kept 
beside  her,  and  Mihailo,  the  huntsman  and  groom,  who  had  been  told 
to  look  after  her.  Petya  was  laughing  and  switching  and  pulling  his  horse. 
Natasha  sat  her  raven  Arabtchick  with  grace  and  confidence  and  con¬ 
trolled  him  with  an  easy  and  steady  hand. 

The  uncle  looked  with  disapproval  at  Petya  and  Natasha.  He  did  not 
like  a  mixture  of  frivolity  with  the  serious  business  of  the  hunt. 

‘Good-day,  uncle;  we’re  coming  to  the  hunt  too!’  shouted  Petya. 

‘Good-day,  good-day,  and  mind  you  don’t  ride  down  the  dogs/  said 
the  uncle  sternly. 

‘Nikolenka,  what  a  delightful  dog  Trunila  is!  he  knew  me/  said 
Natasha  of  her  favourite  dog. 

‘In  the  first  place,  Trunila’s  not  a  dog,  but  a  wolf-hound/  thought 
Nikolay.  He  glanced  at  his  sister  trying  to  make  her  feel  the  distance 
that  lay  between  them  at  that  moment.  Natasha  understood  it. 

‘Don’t  imagine  we  shall  get  in  anybody’s  way,  uncle/  said  Natasha. 
‘We’ll  stay  in  our  right  place  and  not  stir  from  it.’ 

‘And  you’ll  do  well,  little  countess/  said  the  uncle.  ‘Only  don’t  fall 
off  your  horse,’  he  added,  ‘or  you’d  never  get  on  again — all’s  well,  quick 
march !  ’ 

The  Otradnoe  preserve  came  into  sight,  an  oasis  of  greenness,  two 
hundred  and  fifty  yards  away.  Rostov,  settling  finally  with  the  uncle 
from  what  point  to  set  the  dogs  on,  pointed  out  to  Natasha  the  place 
where  she  was  to  stand,  a  place  where  there  was  no  chance  of  anything 
running  out,  and  went  round  to  close  in  from  behind  above  the  ravine. 

‘Now,  nephew,  you’re  on  the  track  of  an  old  wolf/  said  the  uncle; 
‘mind  he  doesn’t  give  you  the  slip.’ 

‘That’s  as  it  happens/  answered  Rostov.  ‘Karay,  hey!’  he  shouted, 
replying  to  the  uncle’s  warning  by  this  call  to  his  dog.  Karay  was  an  old, 
misshapen,  muddy-coloured  hound,  famous  for  attacking  an  old  wolf 
unaided.  All  took  their  places. 

The  old  count,  who  knew  his  son’s  ardour  in  the  hunt,  hurried  to 
avoid  being  late,  and  the  whippers-in  had  hardly  reached  the  place  when 
Count  Ilya  Andreitch,  with  a  cheerful  face,  and  flushed  and  quivering 


466  WARANDPEACE 

cheeks,  drove  up  with  his  pair  of  raven  horses,  over  the  green  field  to 
the  place  left  for  him.  Straightening  his  fur  coat  and  putting  on  his 
hunting  appurtenances,  he  mounted  his  sleek,  well-fed,  quiet,  good- 
humoured  Viflyanka,  who  was  turning  grey  like  himself.  The  horses  with 
the  gig  were  sent  back.  Count  Ilya  Andreitch,  though  he  was  at  heart 
no  sportsman,  knew  well  all  the  rules  of  sport.  He  rode  into  the  edge  of 
the  thicket  of  bushes,  behind  which  he  was  standing,  picked  up  the  reins, 
settled  himself  at  his  ease  in  the  saddle,  and,  feeling  that  he  was  ready, 
looked  about  him  smiling. 

Near  him  stood  his  valet,  Semyon  Tchekmar,  a  veteran  horseman, 
though  now  heavy  in  the  saddle.  Tchekmar  held  on  a  leash  three  wolf¬ 
hounds  of  a  special  breed,  spirited  hounds,  though  they  too  had  grown 
fat  like  their  master  and  his  horse.  Two  other  keen  old  dogs  were  lying 
beside  them  not  in  a  leash.  A  hundred  paces  further  in  the  edge  of  the 
copse  stood  another  groom  of  the  count’s,  Mitka,  a  reckless  rider  and 
passionate  sportsman.  The  count  had  followed  the  old  custom  of  drinking 
before  hunting  a  silver  goblet  of  spiced  brandy;  he  had  had  a  slight 
lunch  and  after  that  half  a  bottle  of  his  favourite  bordeaux. 

Count  Ilya  Andreitch  was  rather  flushed  from  the  wine  and  the  drive; 
his  eyes,  covered  by  moisture,  were  particularly  bright,  and  sitting  in 
the  saddle  wrapped  up  in  his  fur  coat,  he  looked  like  a  baby  taken  out 
for  a  drive. 

After  seeing  after  his  duties,  Tchekmar,  with  his  thin  face  and 
sunken  cheeks,  looked  towards  his  master,  with  whom  he  had  lived  on 
the  best  of  terms  for  thirty  years.  Perceiving  that  he  was  in  a  genial 
humour,  he  anticipated  a  pleasant  chat.  A  third  person  rode  circum¬ 
spectly — he  had  no  doubt  been  cautioned — out  of  the  wood,  and  stood 
still  behind  the  count.  This  personage  was  a  grey-bearded  old  man, 
wearing  a  woman’s  gown  and  a  high,  peaked  cap.  It  was  the  buffoon, 
Nastasya  Ivanovna. 

‘Well,  Nastasya  Ivanovna,’  whispered  the  count,  winking  at  him,  ‘you 
only  scare  off  the  game,  and  Danilo  will  give  it  you.’ 

‘I  wasn’t  born  yesterday,’  said  Nastasya  Ivanovna. 

‘Sh !  ’  hissed  the  count,  and  he  turned  to  Semyon.  ‘Have  you  seen 
Natalya  Ilyinitchna?’  he  asked  Semyon.  ‘Where  is  she?’ 

‘Her  honour’s  with  Pyotr  Ilyitch,  behind  the  high  grass  at  Zharvry,’ 
answered  Semyon,  smiling.  ‘Though  she  is  a  lady,  she  has  a  great  love 
for  the  chase.’ 

‘And  you  wonder  at  her  riding,  Semyon,  .  .  .  eh?’  said  the  count,  ‘for 
a  man  even  it  wouldn’t  be  amiss!’ 

‘Who  wouldn’t  wonder!  So  daring,  so  smart!’ 

‘And  where’s  Nikolasha?  Above  the  Lyadovsky  upland,  eh?’  the  count 
asked,  still  in  a  whisper. 

‘Yes,  sir.  His  honour  knows  where  he  had  best  stand.  Pie  knows  the  ins 
and  outs  of  hunting,  so  that  Danilo  and  I  are  sometimes  quite  astonished 
at  him,’  said  Semyon,  who  knew  how  to  please  his  master. 


WAR  AND  PEACE  467 

‘He’s  a  good,  clever  sportsman,  eh?  And  what  do  you  say  to  his  rid¬ 
ing,  eh?’ 

‘A  perfect  picture  he  is!  How  he  drove  the  fox  out  of  the  Zavarzinsky 
thicket  the  other  day.  He  galloped  down  from  the  ravine,  it  was  a  sight — 
the  horse  worth  a  thousand  roubles,  and  the  rider  beyond  all  price.  Yes, 
you  would  have  to  look  a  long  while  to  find  his  match!  ’ 

‘To  look  a  long  while  .  .  .’ repeated  the  count,  obviously  regretting  that 
Semyon’s  praises  had  come  to  so  speedy  a  termination.  ‘A  long  while,’  he 
repeated,  turning  back  the  skirt  of  his  coat  and  looking  for  his  snuff-box. 

‘The  other  day  they  were  coming  out  from  Mass  in  all  their  glory, 
Mihail  Sidoritch  .  .  .’  Semyon  stopped  short,  hearing  distinctly  in  the 
still  air  the  rush  of  the  hounds,  with  no  more  than  two  or  three  dogs 
giving  tongue.  With  his  head  on  one-side,  he  listened,  shaking  a  warning 
finger  at  his  master.  ‘They’re  on  the  scent  of  the  litter  .  .  .’  he  whis¬ 
pered;  ‘they  have  gone  straight  toward  Lyadovsky  upland.’ 

The  count,  with  a  smile  still  lingering  on  his  face,  looked  straight 
before  him  along  the  path,  and  did  not  take  a  pinch  from  the  snuff-box 
he  held  in  his  hand.  The  hounds’  cry  was  followed  by  the  bass  note 
of  the  hunting  cry  for  a  wolf  sounded  on  Danilo’s  horn.  The  pack  joined 
the  first  three  dogs,  and  the  voices  of  the  hounds  could  be  heard  in  full 
cry  with  the  peculiar  note  which  serves  to  betoken  that  they  are  after 
a  wolf.  The  whippers-in  were  not  now  hallooing,  but  urging  on  the 
hounds  with  cries  of  ‘Loo!  loo!  loo!’  and  above  all  the  voices  rose  the 
voice  of  Danilo,  passing  from  a  deep  note  to  piercing  shrillness.  Danilo’s 
voice  seemed  to  fill  the  whole  forest,  to  pierce  beyond  it,  and  echo  far 
away  in  the  open  country. 

After  listening  for  a  few  seconds  in  silence,  the  count  and  his  groom 
felt  certain  that  the  hounds  had  divided  into  two  packs:  one,  the  larger, 
was  going  off  into  the  distance,  in  particularly  hot  cry;  the  other  part  of 
the  pack  was  moving  along  the  forest  past  the  count,  and  it  was  with 
this  pack  that  Danilo’s  voice  was  heard  urging  the  dogs  on.  The  sounds 
from  both  packs  melted  into  unison  and  broke  apart  again,  but  both  were 
getting  further  away.  Semyon  sighed  and  stooped  down  to  straighten 
the  leash,  in  which  a  young  dog  had  caught  his  leg.  The  count  too  sighed, 
and  noticing  the  snuff-box  in  his  hand,  he  opened  it  and  took  a  pinch. 

‘Back!’  cried  Semyon  to  the  dog,  which  had  poked  dut  beyond  the 
bushes.  The  count  started,  and  dropped  the  snuff-box.  Nastasya  Ivan¬ 
ovna  got  off  his  horse  and  began  picking  it  up. 

The  count  and  Semyon  watched  him.  All  of  a  sudden,  as  so  often 
happens,  the  sound  of  the  hunt  was  in  an  instant  close  at  hand,  as 
though  the  baying  dogs  and  Danilo’s  cries  were  just  upon  them. 

The  count  looked  round,  and  on  the  right  he  saw  Mitka,  who  was 
staring  at  the  count  with  eyes  starting  out  of  his  head.  Lifting  his  cap, 
he  pointed  in  front  to  the  other  side. 

‘Look  out!’  he  shouted  in  a  voice  that  showed  the  words  had  long 
been  fretting  him  to  be  uttered.  And  letting  go  the  dogs,  he  galloped 
towards  the  count. 


468  WAR  AND  PEACE 

The  count  and  Semyon  galloped  out  of  the  bushes,  and  on  their  left 
they  saw  a  wolf.  With  a  soft,  rolling  gait  it  moved  at  a  slow  amble 
further  to  their  left  into  the  very  thicket  in  which  they  had  been  stand¬ 
ing.  The  angry  dogs  whined,  and  pulling  themselves  free  from  the  leash, 
flew  by  the  horses’  hoofs  after  the  wolf. 

The  wolf  paused  in  his  flight;  awkwardly,  like  a  man  with  a  quinsy, 
he  turned  his  heavy-browed  head  towards  the  dogs,  and  still  with  the 
same  soft,  rolling  gait  gave  one  bound  and  a  second,  and,  waving  its 
tail,  disappeared  into  the  bushes.  At  the  same  instant,  with  a  cry  like  a 
wail,  there  sprang  desperately  out  of  the  thicket  opposite  one  hound, 
then  a  second  and  a  third,  and  all  the  pack  flew  across  the  open  ground 
towards  the  very  spot  where  the  wolf  had  vanished.  The  bushes  were 
parted  behind  the  dogs,  and  Danilo’s  brown  horse,  dark  with  sweat, 
emerged  from  them.  On  its  long  back  Danilo  sat  perched  up  and  swaying 
forward.  He  bad  no  cap  on  his  grey  hair,  that  fluttered  in  disorder  above 
his  red,  perspiring  face. 

‘Loo!  loo!  loo!  .  .  .’  he  was  shouting.  When  he  caught  sight  of  the 
count,  there  was  a  flash  like  lightning  in  his  eyes. 

‘B - !’  he  shouted,  using  a  brutally  coarse  term  of  abuse,  and 

menacing  the  count  with  his  lifted  whip.  ‘Let  the  wolf  slip!  .  .  .  sports¬ 
men  indeed!’  And  as  though  scorning  to  waste  more  words  on  the  con¬ 
fused  and  frightened  count,  he  lashed  the  moist  and  heavy  sides  of  his 
brown  gelding  with  all  the  fury  that  had  been  ready  for  the  count,  and 
flow  off  after  the  dogs.  The  count  stood  like  a  man  who  has  been 
thrashed,  looking  about  him  and  trying  to  smile  and  call  for  Semyon  to 
sympathise  with  his  plight.  But  Semyon  was  not  there;  he  had  galloped 
round  to  cut  the  wolf  off  from  the  forest.  The  greyhounds,  too,  were 
running  to  and  fro  on  both  sides.  But  the  wolf  got  off  into  the  bushes, 
and  not  one  of  the  party  succeeded  in  coming  across  him. 


V 

Nikolay  Rostov  was  standing  meanwhile  at  his  post,  waiting  tor  the 
wolf.  He  was  aware  of  what  must  be  taking  place  within  the  copse  from 
the  rush  of  the  pack  coming  closer  and  going  further  away,  from  the 
cries  of  the  dogs,  whose  notes  were  familiar  to  him,  from  the  nearness, 
and  then  greater  remoteness,  and  sudden  raising  of  the  voices  of  the 
huntsmen.  He  knew  that  there  were  both  young  and  also  old  wolves  in 
the  enclosure.  He  knew  the  hounds  had  divided  into  two  packs,  that  in 
one  place  they  were  close  on  the  wolf,  and  that  something  had  gone 
wrong.  Every  second  he  expected  the  wolf  on  his  side.  He  made  a  thou¬ 
sand  different  suppositions  of  how  and  at  what  spot  the  wolf  would  run 
out,  and  how  he  would  set  upon  it.  Hope  was  succeeded  by  despair. 
Several  times  he  prayed  to  God  that  the  wolf  would  rush  out  upon  him. 
He  prayed  with  that  feeling  of  passion  and  compunction  with  which 
men  pray  in  moments  of  intense  emotion  due  to  trivial  causes.  ‘Why, 


WARANDPEACE  469 

what  is  it  to  Thee,’  he  said  to  God,  ‘to  do  this  for  me?  I  know  Thou  art 
great  and  that  it’s  a  sin  to  pray  to  Thee  about  this,  but  for  God’s  sake 
do  make  the  old  wolf  come  out  upon  me,  and  make  Karay  fix  his  teeth 
in  his  throat  and  finish  him  before  the  eyes  of  “uncle,”  who  is  looking 
this  way.’  A  thousand  times  over  in  that  half-hour,  with  intent,  strained, 
and  uneasy  eyes  Rostov  scanned  the  thickets  at  the  edge  of  the  copse, 
with  two  scraggy  oaks  standing  up  above  the  undergrowth  of  aspen,  and 
the  ravine  with  its  overhanging  bank,  and  ‘uncle’s’  cap  peeping  out  from 
behind  a  bush  on  the  right.  ‘No,  that  happiness  is  not  to  be,’  thought 
Rostov,  ‘yet  what  would  it  cost  Him!  It’s  not  to  be!  I’m  always  un¬ 
lucky,  at  cards,  in  war,  and  everything.’  Austerlitz  and  Dolohov  flashed 
in  distinct  but  rapid  succession  through  his  imagination.  ‘Only  once  in 
my  life  to  kill  an  old  wolf ;  I  ask  for  nothing  beyond!  ’  he  thought,  strain¬ 
ing  eyes  and  ears,  looking  from  left  to  right,  and  back  again,  and  listen¬ 
ing  to  the  slightest  fluctuations  in  the  sounds  of  the  dogs.  He  looked 
again  to  the  right,  and  saw  something  running  across  the  open  ground 
towards  him.  ‘No,  it  can’t  be!’  thought  Rostov,  taking  a  deep  breath, 
as  a  man  does  at  the  coming  of  what  he  has  long  been  hoping  for.  The 
greatest  piece  of  luck  had  come  to  him,  and  so  simply,  without  noise,  or 
flourish,  or  display  to  signalise  it.  Rostov  could  not  believe  his  eyes,  and 
this  uncertainty  lasted  more  than  a  second.  The  wolf  was  running  for¬ 
ward;  he  leaped  clumsily  over  a  rut  that  lay  across  his  path. 

It  was  an  old  wolf  with  a  grey  back  and  full,  reddish  belly.  He  was 
running  without  haste,  plainly  feeling  secure  of  being  unseen.  Rostov 
held  his  breath  and  looked  round  at  the  dogs.  They  were  lying  and 
standing  about,  not  seeing  the  wolf  and  quite  unaware  of  him..  Old 
Karay  had  his  head  turned  round,  and  was  angrily  searching  for  a  flea, 
snapping  his  yellow  teeth  on  his  haunches.  ‘Loo!  loo!  loo!  ’  Rostov  whis¬ 
pered,  pouting  out  his  lips.  The  dogs  leaped  up,  jingling  the  iron  rings 
of  the  leashes,  and  pricked  up  their  ears.  Karay  scratched  his  hind-leg 
and  got  up,  pricking  up  his  ears  and  wagging  his  tail,  on  which  there 
were  hanging  matted  locks  of  his  coat. 

‘Loose  them?  or  not  loose  them?’  Nikolay  said  to  himself  as  the  wolf 
moved  away  from  the  copse  towards  him.  All  at  once  the  whole  physiog¬ 
nomy  of  the  wolf  was  transformed.  He  started,  seeing — probably  for 
the  first  time — human  eyes  fixed  upon  him;  and,  turning  his  head  a 
little  towards  Rostov,  stood  still,  in  doubt  whether  to  go  back  or  for¬ 
ward.  ‘Ay!  Never  mind,  forward!  .  .  .’  the  wolf  seemed  to  be  saying 
to  himself,  and  he  pushed  on  ahead,  without  looking  round,  softly  and 
not  rapidly,  with  an  easy  but  resolute  movement.  ‘Loo!  loo!  .  .  .’  Niko¬ 
lay  cried  in  a  voice  not  his  own,  and  of  its  own  accord  his  gallant 
horse  galloped  at  break-neck  pace  downhill,  and  leaped  over  the  water¬ 
course  to  cut  off  the  wolf’s  retreat;  the  hounds  dashed  on  even  more 
swiftly,  overtaking  it. 

Nikolay  did  not  hear  his  own  cry;  he  had  no  consciousness  of  gallop¬ 
ing;  he  saw  neither  the  dogs  nor  the  ground  over  which  he  galloped. 
He  saw  nothing  but  the  wolf,  which,  quickening  its  pace,  was  bounding 


4/o  WARANDPEACE 

in  the  same  direction  across  the  glade.  Foremost  of  the  hounds  was  the 
black  and  tan,  broad-backed  bitch,  Milka,  and  she  was  getting  close 
upon  him.  But  the  wolf  turned  a  sidelong  glance  upon  her,  and  instead 
of  flying  at  him,  as  she  always  had  done,  Milka  suddenly  stopped  short, 
her  fore-legs  held  stiffly  before  her  and  her  tail  in  the  air. 

‘Loo!  loo!  loo!’  shouted  Nikolay. 

The  red  hound,  Lyubima,  darted  forward  from  behind  Milka,  dashed 
headlong  at  the  wolf,  and  got  hold  of  him  by  the  hind-leg,  but  in  the 
same  second  bounded  away  on  the  other  side  in  terror.  The  wolf 
crouched,  gnashed  its  teeth,  rose  again,  and  bounded  forward,  followed 
at  a  couple  of  yards’  distance  by  all  the  dogs:  they  did  not  try  to  get 
closer. 

‘He’ll  get  away!  No,  it’s  impossible!’  thought  Nikolay,  still  shouting 
in  a  husky  voice. 

‘Karay!  Loo!  loo!  .  .  .’  he  kept  shouting,  looking  for  the  old  hound, 
who  was  his  one  hope  now. 

Karay,  straining  his  old  muscles  to  the  utmost,  and  watching  the 
wolf  intently,  was  bounding  clumsily  away  from  the  beast,  to  cut 
across  his  path  in  front  of  him.  But  it  was  plain  from  the  swiftness 
of  the  wolf’s  course  and  the  slowness  of  the  hounds  that  Karay  was 
out  in  his  reckoning.  Nikolay  saw  the  copse  not  far  now  ahead  of 
him.  If  once  the  wolf  reached  it,  he  would  escape  to  a  certainty.  But 
in  front  dogs  and  men  came  into  sight,  dashing  almost  straight  towards  i 
the  wolf.  There  was  still  hope.  A  long,  young  hound,  not  one  of  the 
Rostovs’ — Nikolay  did  not  recognise  him — flew  from  in  front  straight 
at  the  wolf,  and  almost  knocked  him  over.  The  wolf  got  up  again  with 
a  surprising  rapidity  and  flew  at  the  young  hound;  his  teeth  clacked, 
and  the  hound,  covered  with  blood  from  a  gash  in  his  side,  thrust  its 
head  in  the  earth,  squealing  shrilly. 

‘Karay!  old  man!’  Nikolay  wailed. 

The  old  dog,  with  the  tufts  of  matted  hair,  quivering  on  his  haunches, 
had  succeeded,  thanks  to  the  delay,  in  cutting  across  the  wolf’s  line  of 
advance,  and  was  now  five  paces  in  front  of  him.  The  wolf  stole  a  glance 
at  Karay,  as  though  aware  of  his  danger,  and  tucking  his  tail  further 
between  his  legs,  he  quickened  his  pace.  But  then — Nikolay  could  only 
see  that  something  was  happening  with  Karay — the  hound  had  dashed  i 
instantly  at  the  wolf  and  had  rolled  in  a  struggling  heap  with  him  into 
the  watercourse  before  them. 

The  moment  when  Nikolay  saw  the  dogs  struggling  with  the  wolf  in 
the  watercourse,  saw  the  wolf’s  grey  coat  under  them,  his  outstretched 
hind-leg,  his  head  gasping  in  terror,  and  his  ears  turned  back  (Karay 
had  him  by  the  throat) — the  moment  when  Nikolay  saw  all  this  was 
the  happiest  moment  of  his  life.  He  had  already  grasped  the  pommel  of 
his  saddle  to  dismount  and  stab  the  wolf,  when  suddenly  the  beast’s 
head  was  thrust  up  above  the  mass  of  dogs,  then  his  fore-legs  were 
on  the  bank  of  the  watercourse.  The  wolf  clacked  his  teeth  (Karay  had  not 
hold  of  his  throat  now),  leaped  with  his  hind-legs  out  of  the  hollow, 


WAR  AND  PEACE  471 

and  with  his  tail  between  his  legs,  pushed  forward,  getting  away  from 
the  dogs  again.  Karay,  his  hair  starting  up,  had  difficulty  in  getting 
out  of  the  watercourse;  he  seemed  to  be  bruised  or  wounded.  ‘My  God, 
why  is  this!  ’  Nikolay  shouted  in  despair.  The  uncle’s  huntsman  galloped 
across  the  line  of  the  wolf’s  advance  from  the  other  side,  and  again 
his  hounds  stopped  the  wolf,  again  he  was  hemmed  in. 

Nikolay,  his  groom,  the  uncle,  and  his  huntsman  pranced  about  the 
beast  with  shouts  and  cries  of  ‘loo,’  every  minute  on  the  point  of  dis¬ 
mounting  when  the  wolf  crouched  back,  and  dashing  forward  again 
every  time  the  wolf  shook  himself  free  and  moved  towards  the  copse, 
where  his  safety  lay. 

At  the  beginning  of  this  onset  Danilo,  hearing  the  hunters’  cries, 
had  darted  out  of  the  copse.  He  saw  that  Karay  had  hold  of  the 
wolf  and  checked  his  horse,  supposing  the  deed  was  done.  But  seeing 
that  the  hunters  did  not  dismount  from  their  horses,  and  that  the 
wolf  was  shaking  himself  free,  and  again  making  his  escape,  Danilo 
galloped  his  own  horse,  not  towards  the  wolf,  but  in  a  straight  line 
towards  the  copse,  to  cut  him  off,  as  Karay  had  done.  Thanks  to  this 
manoeuvre,  he  bore  straight  down  on  the  wolf  when  the  uncle’s  dogs 
had  a  second  time  fallen  behind  him. 

Danilo  galloped  up  in  silence,  holding  a  drawn  dagger  in  his  left  hand, 
and  thrashing  the  heaving  sides  of  his  chestnut  horse  with  his  riding 
whip,  as  though  it  were  a  flail. 

Nikolay  neither  saw  nor  heard  Danilo  till  his  panting  chestnut  darted 
close  by  him,  and  he  heard  the  sound  of  a  falling  body  and  saw  Danilo 
lying  in  the  midst  of  the  dogs  on  the  wolf’s  back,  trying  to  get  him  by 
the  ears.  It  was  obvious  to  the  dogs,  to  the  hunters,  and  to  the  wolf 
that  all  was  over  now.  The  beast,  its  ears  drawn  back  in  terror,  tried  to 
get  up,  but  the  dogs  clung  to  him.  Danilo,  as  he  got  up,  stumbled,  and 
as  though  sinking  down  to  rest,  rolled  with  all  his  weight  on  the  wolf, 
and  snatched  him  by  the  ears.  Nikolay  would  have  stabbed  him,  but 
Danilo  whispered:  ‘Don’t;  we  will  string  him  up!’  and  shifting  his 
position  he  put  his  foot  on  the  wolf’s  neck.  They  put  a  stick  in  the  wolf’s 
jaws,  fastened  it,  as  it  were  bridling  him  with  a  leash,  and  tied  his  legs. 
Danilo  swung  the  wolf  twice  from  side  to  side.  With  happy,  exhausted 
faces  they  tied  the  great  wolf  alive  on  a  horse,  that  started  and  snorted 
in  alarm  at  it;  and  with  all  the  dogs  trooping  after  and  whining  at  the 
wolf,  they  brought  it  to  the  place  where  all  were  to  meet.  The  wolf 
hounds  had  captured  two  cubs,  and  the  greyhounds  three.  The  party 
met  together  to  show  their  booty  and  tell  their  stories,  and  every  one 
went  to  look  at  the  big  wolf,  which  with  its  heavy-browed  head  hanging 
downward  and  the  stick  in  its  teeth,  gazed  with  its  great,  glassy  eyes 
at  the  crowd  of  dogs  and  men  around  it.  When  they  touched  him,  his 
fastened  legs  quivered  and  he  looked  wildly  and  yet  simply  at  all  of 
them.  Count  Ilya  Andreitch  too  went  up  and  touched  the  wolf. 

‘Oh,  what  a  great  beast!’  he  said.  ‘He’s  an  old  one,  eh?’  he  asked 
Danilo,  who  was  standing  near  him. 


472  WARANDPEACE 

‘That  he  is,  your  excellency,’  answered  Danilo,  hurriedly  taking  off 
his  cap. 

The  count  remembered  the  wolf  he  had  let  slip  and  Danilo’s  outburst. 
‘You  have  a  hot  temper  though,  my  man,’  said  the  count. 

Danilo  said  nothing,  but  he  shyly  smiled  a  smile  of  childlike  sweet¬ 
ness  and  amiability. 


VI 

The  old  count  went  home.  Natasha  and  Petya  promised  to  follow  im¬ 
mediately.  The  hunting  party  went  on  further  as  it  was  still  early.  In 
the  middle  of  the  day  they  set  the  hounds  into  a  ravine  covered  with 
thickly  growing  young  copse.  Nikolay,  standing  on  the  stubble  land 
above,  could  see  all  his  party. 

Facing  Nikolay  on  the  opposite  side  was  a  field  of  green  corn,  and 
there  stood  his  huntsman,  alone  in  a  hollow  behind  a  nut  bush.  As  soon 
as  they  loosed  the  hounds,  Nikolay  heard  a  hound  he  knew — Voltorn — ■ 
give  tongue  at  intervals;  other  hounds  joined  him,  pausing  now  and 
then,  and  taking  up  the  cry  again.  A  moment  later  he  heard  from  the 
ravine  the  cry  that  they  were  on  the  scent  of  a  fox,  and  all  the  pack 
joining  together  made  for  the  opening  towards  the  green  corn  away 
from  Nikolay. 

He  saw  the  whippers-in  in  their  red  caps  galloping  along  the  edge  of 
the  overgrown  ravine;  he  could  see  the  dogs  even,  and  was  every  instant 
expecting  the  fox  to  come  into  sight  on  the  further  side  among  the 
green  corn. 

The  huntsman  standing  in  the  hollow  started  off  and  let  his  dogs  go, 
and  Nikolay  saw  the  red,  uncouth-looking  fox  hurrying  along  close  to 
the  ground,  with  its  bushy  tail,  through  the  green  corn.  The  dogs  bore 
down  on  it.  And  now  they  were  getting  close,  and  now  the  fox  was  be¬ 
ginning  to  wind  in  circles  between  them,  making  the  circles  more  and 
more  rapidly,  and  sweeping  its  bushy  brush  around  it,  when  all  of  a 
sudden  a  strange  white  dog  flew  down  upon  it,  and  was  followed  by  a 
black  one,  and  everything  was  confusion,  and  the  dogs  formed  a  star¬ 
shaped  figure  round  it,  scarcely  moving,  with  their  heads  together,  and 
their  tails  out.  Two  huntsmen  galloped  down  to  the  dogs;  one  in  a  red 
cap,  the  other,  a  stranger,  in  a  green  coat. 

‘What’s  the  meaning  of  it?’  wondered  Nikolay.  ‘Where  did  that  hunts¬ 
man  spring  from?  That’s  not  uncle’s  man.’ 

The  huntsmen  got  the  fox,  and  remained  a  long  while  standing  on 
foot  there,  without  hanging  the  fox  on  the  saddle. 

He  could  see  the  horses  with  their  snaffles  jutting  up  standing  close 
by  the  huntsmen,  and  the  dogs  lying  down.  The  huntsmen  were  waving 
their  arms  and  doing  something  with  the  fox.  A  horn  was  sounded — 
the  signal  agreed  upon  in  case  of  a  dispute. 

‘That’s  Ilagin’s  huntsman  getting  up  a  row  of  some  sort  with  our 
Ivan,’  said  Nikolay’s  groom. 


WARANDPEACE  473 

Nikolay  sent  the  groom  to  call  his  sister  and  Petya  to  come  to  him, 
and  rode  at  a  walking  pace  towards  the  spot  where  the  whippers-in  were 
getting  the  hounds  together.  Several  of  the  party  galloped  to  the  scene 
of  the  squabble. 

Nikolay  dismounted,  and,  with  Natasha  and  Petya,  who  had  ridden 
up,  he  stood  by  the  hounds  waiting  to  hear  how  the  difficulty  was  settled. 
The  huntsman  who  had  been  quarrelling  came  riding  out  of  the  bushes 
with  the  fox  on  the  crupper,  and  rode  towards  his  young  master.  He 
took  off  his  cap  a  long  way  off,  and  tried  as  he  came  up  to  speak  respect¬ 
fully.  But  he  was  pale  and  gasping  for  breath,  and  his  face  was  wrathful. 
One  of  his  eyes  was  blackened,  but  he  was  probably  not  aware  of  it. 

‘What  was  the  matter  over  there?’  asked  Nikolay. 

‘Why,  he  was  going  to  kill  the  fox  right  under  our  hounds’  noses! 
And  my  bitch  it  was — the  mouse-coloured  one — that  had  got  hold  of 
it.  You  can  go  and  have  me  up  for  it!  Snatching  hold  of  the  fox!  I  gave 
him  one  with  the  fox.  Here  it  is  on  my  saddle.  Is  it  a  taste  of  this  you 
want?’  said  the  huntsman,  pointing  to  his  hunting-knife  and  apparently 
imagining  that  he  was  still  talking  to  his  enemy. 

Nikolay  did  not  waste  words  on  the  man,  but  asking  his  sister  and 
Petya  to  wait  for  him,  rode  over  to  where  the  hounds  and  the  men  of 
the  enemy,  Ilagin,  were  gathered  together. 

The  victorious  huntsman  rode  off  to  join  his  fellows,  and  there,  the 
centre  of  a  sympathetic  and  inquisitive  crowd,  he  recounted  his  exploit. 

The  point  was  that  Ilagin,  with  whom  the  Rostovs  had  some  quarrel 
and  were  engaged  in  a  lawsuit,  was  hunting  over  places  that  by  old 
custom  belonged  to  the  Rostovs,  and  now,  as  though  of  design,  had  sent 
his  men  to  the  ravine  where  the  Rostovs  were,  and  had  allowed  his 
man  to  snatch  a  fox  under  a  stranger’s  dogs. 

Nikolay  had  never  seen  Ilagin,  but  he  had  heard  of  the  quarrelsome¬ 
ness  and  obstinacy  of  their  neighbour;  and  rushing,  as  he  always  did, 
to  an  extreme  in  his  judgments  and  feelings,  he  cordially  detested  him, 
and  looked  upon  him  as  his  bitterest  foe.  Excited  and  angry,  he  rode  up 
to  him  now,  grasping  his  whip  in  his  hand,  fully  prepared  to  take  the 
most  energetic  and  desperate  measures  in  dealing  with  the  enemy. 

He  had  scarcely  ridden  beyond  the  ridge  of  the  copse  when  he  saw  a 
stout  gentleman  in  a  beaver  cap  riding  towards  him  on  a  handsome  raven 
horse,  accompanied  by  two  grooms. 

Instead  of  an  enemy  Nikolay  found  in  Ilagin  a  courteous  gentleman 
of  imposing  appearance,  who  was  particularly  anxious  to  make  the 
young  count’s  acquaintance.  Ilagin  took  off  his  beaver  cap  as  he  ap¬ 
proached  Rostov,  and  said  that  he  greatly  regretted  what  had  occurred, 
that  he  would  have  the  man  punished,  that  he  begged  the  count  to  let 
them  be  better  acquainted,  and  offered  him  the  use  of  his  preserves  for 
hunting. 

Natasha  had  ridden  up  not  far  behind  her  brother,  in  some  excitement, 
fearing  he  might  do  something  awful.  Seeing  that  the  opponents  were 
exchanging  affable  greetings,  she  rode  up  to  them.  Ilagin  lifted  his  beaver 


474  WARANDPEACE 

cap  higher  than  ever  to  Natasha,  and,  smiling  agreeably,  said  that  the 
countess  was  indeed  a  Diana  both  in  her  passion  for  the  chase  and  her 
beauty,  of  which  he  had  heard  so  much. 

Ilagin,  to  efface  the  impression  of  his  huntsman’s  crime,  insisted  on 
Rostov  coming  to  his  upland  a  verst  away,  which  he  preserved  for  his 
own  shooting,  and  described  as  teeming  with  hares.  Nikolay  agreed, 
and  the  whole  party,  its  numbers  now  doubled,  moved  on.  They  had  to 
ride  through  the  fields  to  get  there.  The  huntsmen  moved  in  a  line,  and 
the  gentry  rode  together.  The  uncle,  Rostov,  and  Ilagin  glanced  stealthily 
at  each  other’s  dogs,  trying  not  to  be  observed  by  the  others,  and  looking 
uneasily  for  rivals  likely  to  excel  their  own  dogs. 

Rostov  was  particularly  struck  by  the  beauty  of  a  small  thoroughbred, 
slender,  black  and  tan  bitch  of  Ilagin’s,  with  muscles  like  steel,  a  delicate 
nose,  and  prominent  black  eyes.  He  had  heard  of  the  sporting  qualities 
of  Ilagin’s  dogs,  and  in  that  handsome  bitch  he  saw  a  rival  of  his  Milka. 

In  the  middle  of  a  sedate  conversation  about  the  crops  of  the  year, 
started  by  Ilagin,  Nikolay  pointed  out  the  black  and  tan  bitch. 

‘You  have  a  fine  bitch  there!’  he  said,  in  a  careless  tone.  ‘Is  she 
clever?’ 

‘That  one?  Yes,  she’s  a  good  beast — she  can  catch  a  hare,’  Ilagin  said 
indifferently  of  his  black  and  tan  Yerza,  a  bitch  for  whom  he  had  a 
year  before  given  a  neighbour  three  families  of  house-serfs.  ‘So  they  don’t 
brag  of  their  thrashing,  count,’  he  went  on,  taking  up  their  previous 
conversation.  And  feeling  it  only  polite  to  repay  the  young  count’s  com¬ 
pliment,  Ilagin  scanned  his  dogs,  and  pitched  on  Milka,  whose  broad 
back  caught  his  eye. 

‘That’s  a  good  black  and  tan  you  have  there — a  fine  one!  ’  he  said. 

‘Yes,  she’s  all  right,  she  can  run,’  answered  Nikolay.  ‘Oh,  if  only  a 
good  big  hare  would  run  into  the  field,  I  would  show  you  what  she’s: 
like!’  he  thought,  and  turning  to  his  groom,  he  said  he  would  give  a 
rouble  to  any  one  who  would  unearth  a  hare. 

‘I  can’t  understand,’  Ilagin  went  on,  ‘how  it  is  other  sportsmen  are  so 
envious  over  game  and  dogs.  I  will  tell  you  for  myself,  count.  I  enjoy 
hunting,  as  you  know;  the  chase  in  such  company  .  .  .  what  could  be 
more  delightful’  (he  doffed  his  beaver  cap  again  to  Natasha) ;  ‘but  this 
reckoning  up  of  the  skins  one  has  carried  off — I  don’t  care  about  that.’ 

‘Oh  no!’ 

‘Nor  could  I  be  chagrined  at  my  dog’s  being  outdone  by  another  man’s 
— all  I  care  about  is  the  chase  itself,  eh,  count?  And  so  I  consider  .  .  .’ 

‘Oh,  .  .  .  ho  .  .  .  ho,’  sounded  at  that  moment  in  a  prolonged  call 
from  one  of  the  grooms.  He  was  standing  on  a  knoll  in  the  stubble  with  his 
whip  held  up,  and  he  called  once  more, ‘O  .  .  .  ho  .  .  .  aho!’  (This  call,, 
and  the  lifted  whip,  meant  that  he  saw  a  hare  squatting  before  him.) 

‘Ah,  he  has  started  a  hare,  I  fancy,’  said  Ilagin  carelessly.  ‘Well,  let  us 
course  it,  count!’ 

‘Yes,  we  must  .  .  .  but  what  do  you  say,  together?’ answered  Nikolay,, 
looking  intently  at  Yerza  and  the  uncle’s  red  Rugay,  the  two  rivals. 


WARANDPEACE  475 

igainst  whom  he  had  never  before  had  a  chance  of  putting  his  dogs.  ‘What 
if  they  outdo  my  Milka  from  the  first?’  he  thought,  riding  by  the  uncle 
and  Ilagin  towards  the  hare. 

‘Is  it  full-grown?’  asked  Ilagin,  going  up  to  the  groom  who  had  started 
it,  and  looking  about  him  with  some  excitement,  as  he  whistled  to  his 
Yerza.  .  .  .  ‘And  you,  Mihail  Nikanoritch?’  he  said  to  the  uncle. 

The  uncle  rode  on,  looking  sullen. 

‘What’s  the  use  of  my  competing  with  you?  Why,  your  dogs — you 
have  paid  a  village  for  each  of  them;  they’re  worth  thousands.  You  try 
yours  against  each  other,  and  I’ll  look  on!’ 

‘Rugay!  Hey,  hey,’  he  shouted.  ‘Rugayushka!  ’  he  added,  involuntarily 
expressing  his  tenderness,  and  the  hope  he  put  in  the  red  dog  by  this 
affectionate  diminutive.  Natasha  saw  and  felt  the  emotion  concealed  by 
the  two  elderly  men  and  by  her  brother,  and  was  herself  excited  by  it. 
The  groom  on  the  knoll  was  standing  with  his  whip  lifted;  the  gentlemen 
rode  up  to  him  at  a  walking  pace;  the  pack  were  on  the  rim  of  the  horizon, 
moving  away  from  the  hare;  the  rest  of  the  hunting  party  too  were  riding 
away.  Everything  was  done  slowly  and  deliberately. 

‘Which  way  is  its  head?’  asked  Nikolay,  after  riding  a  hundred  paces 
towards  the  groom.  But  before  the  groom  had  time  to  answer,  the  hare, 
who  had  been  sniffing  in  the  ground  the  frost  coming  next  morning,  leapt 
up  from  its  squatting  posture.  The  pack  of  hounds  on  leashes  flew  baying 
downhill  after  the  hare;  the  harriers,  who  were  not  on  leash,  rushed  from 
all  sides  towards  the  hounds  or  after  the  hare.  The  whippers-in,  who  had 
'been  moving  so  deliberately,  galloped  over  the  country  getting  the  dogs 
together,  with  shouts  of  ‘stop!’  while  the  huntsmen  directed  their  course 
with  shouts  of  ‘o  .  .  .  o  .  .  .  ahoy!’  Nikolay,  Natasha,  and  the  uncle 
ind  Ilagin,  who  had  been  hitherto  so  composed,  flew  ahead,  reckless  of 
low  or  where  they  went,  seeing  nothing  but  the  dogs  and  the  hare,  arid 
afraid  of  nothing  but  losing  sight  for  an  instant  of  the  course.  The  hare 
urned  out  to  be  a  fleet  and  strong  one.  When  he  jumped  up  he  did  not 
it  once  race  off,  but  cocked  up  his  ears,  listening  to  the  shouts  and  tramp 
>f  hoofs,  that  came  from  all  sides  at  once.  He  took  a  dozen  bounds  not 
/ery  swiftly,  letting  the  dogs  gain  on  him,  but  at  last  choosing  his  direc- 
ion,  and  grasping  his  danger,  he  put  his  ears  back,  and  dashed  off  at 
ull  speed.  He  had  been  crouching  in  the  stubble,  but  the  green  field  was 
n  front  of  him,  and  there  it  was  marshy  ground.  The  two  dogs  of  the 
room  who  had  started  him  were  the  nearest  and  the  first  to  be  on  the 
cent  after  him.  But  they  had  not  got  near  him,  when  Ilagin’s  black  and 
an  Yerza  flew  ahead  of  them,  got  within  a  yard,  pounced  on  him  with 
earful  swiftness,  aiming  at  the  hare's  tail,  and  rolled  over,  thinking  she 
ad  hold  of  him.  The  hare  arched  his  back,  and  bounded  off  more  nimbly 
1  han  ever.  The  broad-backed,  black  and  tan  Milka  flew  ahead  of  Yerza, 
nd  began  rapidly  gaining  on  the  hare. 

‘Milashka!  little  mother!’  Nikolay  shouted  triumphantly.  Milka 
?emed  on  the  point  of  pouncing  on  the  hare,  but  she  overtook  him  and 
ew  beyond.  The  hare  doubled  back.  Again  the  graceful  Yerza  dashed  at 


4.76  WAR  AND  PEACE 

him,  and  kept  dose  to  the  hare’s  tail,  as  though  measuring  the  distance, 
so  as  not  to  miss  getting  hold  of  the  hare,  by  the  haunch  this  time. 

‘Yerzinka,  little  sister!’  wailed  Ilagin,  in  a  voice  unlike  his  own.  Yerza 
did  not  heed  his  appeals.  At  the  very  moment  when  she  seemed  about  to 
seize  the  hare,  he  doubled  and  darted  away  to  the  ditch  between  the 
stubble  and  the  green  field.  Again  Yerza  and  Milka,  running  side  by  side, 
like  a  pair  of  horses,  flew  after  the  hare;  the  hare  was  better  off  in  the 
ditch,  the  dogs  could  not  gain  on  him  so  quickly. 

‘Rugay!  Rugayushka!  Forward — quick  march,’  another  voice  shouted 
this  time.  And  Rugay,  the  uncle’s  red,  broad-shouldered  dog,  stretching 
out  and  curving  his  back,  caught  up  the  two  foremost  dogs,  pushed  ahead 
of  them,  flung  himself  with  complete  self-abandonment  right  on  the  hare, 
turned  him  out  of  the  ditch  into  the  green  field,  flung  himself  still  more 
viciously  on  him  once  more,  sinking  up  to  his  knees  in  the  swampy 
ground,  and  all  that  could  be  seen  was  the  dog  rolling  over  with  the  hare, 
covering  his  back  with  mud.  The  dogs  formed  a  star-shaped  figure  round 
him.  A  moment  later  all  the  party  pulled  their  horses  up  round  the  crowd¬ 
ing  dogs.  The  uncle  alone  dismounted  in  a  rapture  of  delight,  and  cutting 
off  the  feet,  shaking  the  hare  for  the  blood  to  drip  off,  he  looked  about 
him,  his  eyes  restless  with  excitement,  and  his  hands  and  legs  moving 
nervously.  He  went  on  talking,  regardless  of  what  or  to  whom  he  spoke. 
‘That’s  something  like,  quick  march  .  .  .  there’s  a  dog  for  you  ...  he 
outstripped  them  all  .  .  .  if  they  cost  a  thousand  or  they  cost  a  rouble 
.  .  .  forward,  quick  march,  and  no  mistake!’  he  kept  saying,  panting 
and  looking  wrathfully  about  him,  as  though  he  were  abusing  some  one., 
as  though  they  had  all  been  his  enemies,  had  insulted  him,  and  he  had 
only  now  at  last  succeeded  in  paying  them  out.  ‘So  much  for  your  thousand; 
rouble  dogs — forward,  quick  march!  Rugay,  here’s  the  foot,’  he  said, 
dropping  the  dog  the  hare’s  muddy  foot,  which  he  had  just  cut  off ;  ‘you’ve; 
deserved  it — forward,  quick  march !  ’ 

‘She  wore  herself  out— ran  it  down  three  times  all  alone,’  Nikolay  was  i 
saying,  listening  to  no  one,  and  heedless  whether  he  were  heard  or  not. 

‘To  be  sure,  cutting  in  sideways  like  that!’  Ilagin’s  groom  was  saying 

‘Why,  when  it  had  been  missed  like  that,  and  once  down,  any  yard-dog 
could  catch  it  of  course,’  said  Ilagin,  at  the  same  moment,  red  and  breath¬ 
less  from  the  gallop  and  the  excitement.  At  the  same  time  Natasha,  with¬ 
out  taking  breath,  gave  vent  to  her  delight  and  excitement  in  a  shriek  • 
so  shrill  that  it  set  every  one’s  ears  tingling.  In  that  shriek  she  expressed  ij 
just  what  the  others  were  expressing  by  talking  all  at  once.  And  heil 
shriek  was  so  strange  that  she  must  have  been  ashamed  of  that  wild! 
scream,  and  the  others  must  have  been  surprised  at  it  at  any  other  time 
The  uncle  himself  twisted  up  the  hare,  flung  him  neatly  and  smartly  t 
across  his  horse’s  back,  seeming  to  reproach  them  all  by  this  gesture,  anc 
with  an  air  of  not  caring  to  speak  to  any  one,  he  mounted  his  bay  anc 
rode  away.  All  but  he,  dispirited  and  disappointed,  rode  on,  and  it  was 
some  time  before  they  could  recover  their  previous  affectation  of  in 
difference.  For  a  long  time  after  they  stared  at  the  red  dog,  Rugay,  wh<jfj 


WARANDPEACE  47V 

with  his  round  back  spattered  with  mud,  and  clinking  the  rings  of  his- 
leash,  walked  with  the  serene  air  of  a  conqueror  behind  the  uncle’s  horse. 

‘I'm  like  all  the  rest  till  it’s  a  question  of  coursing  a  hare;  but  then 
you  had  better  look  out!’  was  what  Nikolay  fancied  the  dog’s  air  ex¬ 
pressed. 

When  the  uncle  rode  up  to  Nikolay  a  good  deal  later,  and  addressed 
a  remark  to  him,  he  felt  flattered  at  the  uncle’s  deigning  to  speak  to  him 
after  what  had  happened. 


VII 

When  Ilagin  took  leave  of  them  in  the.  evening,  Nikolay  found  himself 
;o  great  a  distance  from  home  that  he  accepted  the  uncle’s  invitation  to 
stop  hunting  and  to  stay  the  night  at  the  uncle’s  little  place,  Mihailovka. 

‘And  if  you  all  come  to  me — forward,  quick  march!’  said  the  uncle, 
it  would  be  even  better;  you  see,  the  weather’s  damp,  you  could  rest, 
ind  the  little  countess  could  be  driven  back  in  a  trap.’  The  invitation 
Vas  accepted;  a  huntsman  was  sent  to  Otradnoe  for  a  trap,  and  Nikolay, 
Natasha,  and  Petya  rode  to  the  uncle’s  house. 

Five  men  servants — little  and  big — ran  out  on  to  the  front  steps  to 
fleet  their  master.  Dozens  of  women,  old  and  big  and  little,  popped  out 
it  the  back  entrance  to  have  a  look  at  the  huntsmen  as  they  arrived, 
rhe  presence  of  Natasha — a  woman,  a  lady,  on  horseback — excited  the 
uriosity  of  the  uncle’s  house-serfs  to  such  a  pitch  that  many  of  them 
vent  up  to  her,  stared  her  in  the  face,  and,  unrestrained  by  her  presence, 
uade  remarks  about  her,  as  though  she  were  some  prodigy  on  show,  not 
human  being,  and  not  capable  of  hearing  and  understanding  what  was 
aid  about  her. 

‘Arinka,  look-ee,  she  sits  sideways!  Sits  on  so,  while  her  skirt  flies 
bout.  .  .  .  And  look  at  the  little  horn!’ 

1  ‘Sakes  alive!  and  the  knife  too.  .  . 

‘A  regular  Tatar  woman!  ’ 

‘How  do  you  manage  not  to  tumble  off?’  said  the  forwardest  of  them, 
ddressing  Natasha  boldly. 

1  The  uncle  got  off  his  horse  at  the  steps  of  his  little  wooden  house, 
hich  was  shut  in  by  an  overgrown  garden.  Looking  from  one  to  another 
f  his  household,  he  shouted  peremptorily  to  those  who  were  not  wanted 
)  retire,  and  for  the  others  to  do  all  that  was  needed  for  the  reception 
f  his  guests. 

They  all  ran  off  in  different  directions.  The  uncle  helped  Natasha 
)  dismount,  and  gave  her  his  arm  up  the  shaky,  plank  steps. 

Inside,  the  house,  with  boarded,  unplastered  walls,  was  not  very 
ean ;  there  was  nothing  to  show  that  the  chief  aim  of  the  persons  living 
|i  it  was  the  removal  of  every  spot,  yet  there  were  not  signs  of  neglect, 
here  was  a  smell  of  fresh  apples  in  the  entry,  and  the  walls  were  hung 
ith  foxskins  and  wolfskins. 


47S  WARAND  PEACE 

The  uncle  led  his  guests  through  the  vestibule  into  a  little  hall  with 
a  folding-table  and  red  chairs,  then  into  a  drawing-room  with  a  round 
birchwood  table  and  a  sofa,  and  then  into  his  study,  with  a  ragged  sofa 
a  threadbare  carpet,  and  portraits  of  Suvorov,  of  his  father  and  mother 
and  of  himself  in  military  uniform.  The  study  smelt  strongly  of  tobaccc 
and  dogs.  In  the  study  the  uncle  asked  his  guests  to  sit  down  and  make 
themselves  at  home,  and  he  left  them.  Rugay  came  in,  his  back  still 
covered  with  mud,  and  lay  on  the  sofa,  cleaning  himself  with  his  tongue 
and  his  teeth.  There  was  a  corridor  leading  from  the  study,  and  in  it  the) 
could  see  a  screen  with  ragged  curtains.  Behind  the  screen  they  heard 
feminine  laughter  and  whispering.  Natasha,  Nikolay,  and  Petya  took  of! 
their  wraps  and  sat  down  on  the  sofa.  Petya  leaned  on  his  arm  and  fell 
asleep  at  once;  Natasha  and  Nikolay  sat  without  speaking.  Their  faces 
were  burning;  they  were  very  hungry  and  very  cheerful.  They  lookec 
at  one  another — now  that  the  hunt  was  over  and  they  were  indoors 
Nikolay  did  not  feel  called  upon  to  show  his  masculine  superiority  ovei 
his  sister.  Natasha  winked  at  her  brother;  and  they  could  neither  of  then 
restrain  themselves  long,  and  broke  into  a  ringing  laugh  before  they  hac 
time  to  invent  a  pretext  for  their  mirth. 

After  a  brief  interval,  the  uncle  came  in  wearing  a  Cossack  coat,  bluf 
breeches,  and  little  top-boots.  And  this  very  costume,  at  which  Natasha 
had  looked  with  surprise  and  amusement  when  the  uncle  wore  it  ai 
Otradnoe,  seemed  to  her  now  the  right  costume  here,  and  in  no  wa> 
inferior  to  frock  coats  or  ordinary  jackets.  The  uncle,  too,  was  in  good 
spirits;  far  from  feeling  mortified  at  the  laughter  of  the  brother  anc 
sister  (he  was  incapable  of  imagining  that  they  could  be  laughing  at  his 
mode  of  life),  he  joined  in  their  causeless  mirth  himself. 

‘Well,  this  young  countess  here — forward,  quick  march! — I  have  nevei 
seen  her  like!’  he  said,  giving  a  long  pipe  to  Rostov,  while  with  a  praco 
tised  motion  of  three  fingers  he  filled  another — a  short  broken  one — foi 
himself. 

‘She’s  been  in  the  saddle  all  day — something  for  a  man  to  boast  of— 
and  she’s  just  as  fresh  as  if  nothing  had  happened!’ 

Soon  the  door  was  opened  obviously,  from  the  sound,  by  a  barefoofi 
servant-girl,  and  a  stout,  red-cheeked,  handsome  woman  of  about  forty 
with  a  double  chin  and  full  red  lips,  walked  in,  with  a  big  tray  in  hei 
hands.  With  hospitable  dignity  and  cordiality  in  her  eyes  and  in  ever) 
gesture,  she  looked  round  at  the  guests,  and  with  a  genial  smile  bowed  tc 
them  respectfully. 

In  spite  of  her  exceptional  stoutness,  which  made  her  hold  her  hear . 
flung  back,  while  her  bosom  and  all  her  portly  person  was  thrust  forward 
this  woman  (the  uncle’s  housekeeper)  stepped  with  extreme  lightness 
She  went  to  the  table,  put  the  tray  down,  and  deftly  with  her  plump 
white  hands  set  the  bottles  and  dishes  on  the  table.  When  she  had  finishec 
this  task  she  went  away,  standing  for  a  moment  in  the  doorway  with  i ; 
smile  on  her  face.  ‘Here  I  am — I  am  she!  Now  do  you  understand  th< 
uncle?’  her  appearance  had  said  to  Rostov.  Who  could  fail  to  understand! 


WARANDPEACE  479 

Not  Nikolay  only,  but  even  Natasha  understood  the  uncle  now  and  the 
significance  of  his  knitted  brows,  and  the  happy,  complacent  smile,  which 
puckered  his  lips  as  Anisya  Fyodorovna  came  in.  On  the  tray  there  were 
liqueurs,  herb-brandy,  mushrooms,  biscuits  of  rye  flour  made  with  butter¬ 
milk,  honey  in  the  comb,  foaming  mead  made  from  honey,  apples,  nuts 
raw  and  nuts  baked,  and  nuts  preserved  in  honey.  Then  Anisya  Fyo¬ 
dorovna  brought  in  preserves  made  with  honey  and  with  sugar,  and  ham 
and  a  chicken  that  had  just  been  roasted. 

All  these  delicacies  were  of  Anisya  Fyodorovna's  preparing,  cooking 
or  preserving.  All  seemed  to  smell  and  taste,  as  it  were,  of  Anisya  Fyo¬ 
dorovna.  All  seemed  to  recall  her  buxomness,  cleanliness,  whiteness,  and 
cordial  smile. 

‘A  little  of  this,  please,  little  countess,’  she  kept  saying,  as  she  handed 
Natasha  first  one  thing,  then  another'.  Natasha  ate  of  everything,  and  it 
seemed  to  her  that  such  buttermilk  biscuits,  such  delicious  preserves,  such 
nuts  in  honey,  such  a  chicken,  she  had  never  seen  nor  tasted  anywhere. 
Anisya  Fyodorovna  withdrew.  Rostov  and  the  uncle,  as  they  sipped 
cherry  brandy  after  supper,  talked  of  hunts  past  and  to  come,  of  Rugay 
and  Ilagin’s  dogs.  Natasha  sat  upright  on  the  sofa,  listening  with  sparkling 
eyes.  She  tried  several  times  to  waken  Petya,  and  make  him  eat  some¬ 
thing,  but  he  made  incoherent  replies,  evidently  in  his  sleep.  Natasha 
felt  so  gay,  so  well  content  in  these  new  surroundings,  that  her  only  fear 
was  that  the  trap  would  come  too  soon  for  her.  After  a  silence  had  chanced 
to  fall  upon  them,  as  almost  always  happens  when  any  one  receives 
friends  for  the  first  time  in  his  own  house,  the  uncle  said,  in  response 
to  the  thought  in  his  guests’  minds: 

‘Yes,  so  you  see  how  I  am  finishing  my  days.  .  .  .  One  dies — forward, 
quick  march! — nothing  is  left.  So  why  sin!’ 

The  uncle’s  face  was  full  of  significance  and  even  beauty  as  he  said 
this.  Rostov  could  not  help  recalling  as  he  spoke  all  the  good  things 
he  had  heard  said  by  his  father  and  the  neighbours  about  him.  Through 
the  whole  district  the  uncle  had  the  reputation  of  being  a  most  generous 
and  disinterested  eccentric.  He  was  asked  to  arbitrate  in  family  quarrels; 
he  was  chosen  executor ;  secrets  were  entrusted  to  him ;  he  was  elected  a 
justice,  and  asked  to  fill  other  similar  posts;  but  he  had  always  persisted 
in  refusing  all  public  appointments,  spending  the  autumn  and  spring  in 
the  fields  on  his  bay  horse,  the  winter  sitting  at  home,  and  the  summer 
lying  in  his  overgrown  garden. 

‘Why  don’t  you  enter  the  service,  uncle?’ 

‘I  have  been  in  the  service,  but  I  flung  it  up.  I’m  not  fit  for  it.  I  can’t 
make  anything  of  it.  That’s  your  affair.  I  haven’t  the  wit  for  it.  The 
chase,  now,  is  a  very  different  matter;  there  it’s  all  forward  and  quick 
march!  Open  the  door  there!  ’  he  shouted.  ‘Why  have  you  shut  it?’  A  door 
at  the  end  of  the  corridor  (which  word  the  uncle  always  pronounced 
collidor,  like  a  peasant)  led  to  the  huntsmen’s  room,  as  the  sitting-room 
for  the  huntsmen  was  called.  There  was  a  rapid  patter  of  bare  feet,  and 
an  unseen  hand  opened  the  door  into  the  huntsmen’s  room.  They  could 


4S0  WARANDPEACE 

then  hear  distinctly  from  the  corridor  the  sounds  of  the  balalaika,  un¬ 
mistakably  played  by  a  master  hand.  Natasha  had  been  for  some  time 
listening,  and  now  she  went  out  into  the  corridor  to  hear  the  music  more 
clearly. 

‘That’s  Mitka,  my  coachman  ...  I  bought  him  a  good  balalaika;  I’m 
fond  of  it,’  said  the  uncle.  It  was  his  custom  to  get  Mitka  to  play  the 
balalaika  in  the  men’s  room  when  he  came  home  from  the  chase.  He  was 
fond  of  hearing  that  instrument. 

‘How  well  he  plays!  It’s  really  very  nice,’  said  Nikolay,  with  a  certain 
unconscious  superciliousness  in  his  tone,  as  though  he  were  ashamed 
to  admit  he  liked  this  music. 

‘Very  nice?’  Natasha  said  reproachfully,  feeling  the  tone  in  which  her 
brother  had  spoken.  ‘It’s  not  nice,  but  splendid,  really!’  Just  as  the 
uncle’s  mushrooms  and  honey  and  liqueurs  had  seemed  to  her  the  most 
delicious  in  the  world,  this  playing  struck  her  at  that  moment  as  the  very 
acme  of  musical  expression. 

‘More,  more,  please,’  said  Natasha  in  the  doorway,  as  soon  as  the 
balalaika  ceased.  Mitka  tuned  up  and  began  again  gallantly  twanging 
away  at  ‘My  Lady,’  with  shakes  and  flourishes.  The  uncle  sat  listening 
with  his  head  on  one  side,  and  a  slight  smile.  The  air  of  ‘My  Lady’  was 
repeated  a  hundred  times  over.  Several  times  the  balalaika  was  tuned  up 
and  the  same  notes  were  thrummed  again,  but  the  audience  did  not  weary 
of  it,  and  still  longed  to  hear  it  again  and  again.  Anisya  Fyodorovna  came 
in  and  stood  with  her  portly  person  leaning  against  the  doorpost. 

‘You  are  pleased  to  listen!’  she  said  to  Natasha,  with  a  smile  extraor¬ 
dinarily  like  the  uncle’s  smile.  ‘He  does  play  nicely,’  she  said. 

‘That  part  he  never  plays  right,’  the  uncle  said  suddenly  with  a  vigor¬ 
ous  gesture.  ‘It  ought  to  be  taken  more  at  a  run — forward,  quick 
march!  .  .  .  to  be  played  lightly.’ 

‘Why,  can  you  do  it?’  asked  Natasha. 

The  uncle  smiled,  and  did  not  answer. 

‘Just  yoih  look,  Anisyushka,  whether  the  strings  are  all  right  on  the 
guitar,  eh?  It’s  a  long  while  since  I  have  handled  it.  I  had  quite  given 
it  up!  ’ 

Anisya  Fyodorovna  went  very  readily  with  her  light  step  to  do  her 
master’s  bidding,  and  brought  him  his  guitar.  Without  looking  at  any 
one  the  uncle  blew  the  dust  off  it,  tapped  on  the  case  with  his  bony 
fingers,  tuned  it,  and  settled  himself  in  a  low  chair.  Arching  his  left 
elbow  with  a  rather  theatrical  gesture,  he  held  the  guitar  above  the 
finger-board,  and  winking  at  Anisya  Fyodorovna,  he  played,  not  the  first 
notes  of  ‘My  Lady,’  but  a  single  pure  musical  chord,  and  then  smoothly, 
quietly,  but  confidently  began  playing  in  very  slow  time  the  well-known 
song,  ‘As  along  the  high  road.’  The  air  of  the  song  thrilled  in  Nikolay’s 
and  Natasha’s  hearts  in  time,  in  tune  with  it,  with  the  same  sober  gaiety — 
the  same  gaiety  as  was  manifest  in  the  whole  personality  of  Anisya 
Fyodorovna.  Anisya  Fyodorovna  flushed,  and  hiding  her  face  in  her 
kerchief,  went  laughing  out  of  the  room.  The  uncle  still  went  on  playing 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


481 

the  song  carefully,  correctly,  and  vigorously,  gazing  with  a  transformed, 
inspired  face  at  the  spot  where  Anisya  Fyodorovna  had  stood.  Laughter 
came  gradually  into  his  face  on  one  side  under  his  grey  moustache,  and 
it  grew  stronger  as  the  song  went  on,  as  the  time  quickened,  and  breaks 
came  after  a  flourish. 

‘Splendid,  splendid,  uncle!  Again,  again!’  cried  Natasha,  as  soon  as 
he  had  finished.  She  jumped  up  from  her  place  and  kissed  and  hugged 
the  uncle.  ‘Nikolenka,  Nikolenka!  ’  she  said,  looking  round  at  her  brother 
as  though  to  ask,  ‘What  do  you  say  to  it?’ 

Nikolay,  too,  was  much  pleased  by  the  uncle’s  playing.  He  played  the 
song  a  second  time.  The  smiling  face  of  Anisya  Fyodorovna  appeared 
again  in  the  doorway  and  other  faces  behind  her.  .  .  .  ‘For  the  water 
from  the  well,  a  maiden  calls  to  him  to  stay!  ’  played  the  uncle.  He  made 
another  dexterous  flourish  and  broke  off,  twitching  his  shoulders. 

‘Oh,  oh,  uncle  darling!’  wailed  Natasha,  in  a  voice  as  imploring  as 
though  her  life  depended  on  it.  The  uncle  got  up,  and  there  seemed  to 
be  two  men  in  him  at  that  moment — one  smiled  seriously  at  the  antics 
of  the  merry  player,  while  the  merry  player  naively  and  carefully  executed 
the  steps  preliminary  to  the  dance. 

‘Come,  little  niece!’  cried  the  uncle,  waving  to  Natasha  the  hand  that 
had  struck  the  last  chord. 

Natasha  flung  off  the  shawl  that  had  been  wrapped  round  her,  ran 
forward  facing  the  uncle,  and  setting  her  arms  akimbo,  made  the  move¬ 
ments  of  her  shoulder  and  waist. 

Where,  how,  when  had  this  young  countess,  educated  by  a  French 
emigree,  sucked  in  with  the  Russian  air  she  breathed  the  spirit  of  that 
dance?  Where  had  she  picked  up  these  movements  which  the  pas  de  chale 
would,  one  might  have  thought,  long  ago  have  eradicated?  But  the  spirit, 
the  motions  were  those  inimitable,  unteachable,  Russian  gestures  the 
uncle  had  hoped  for  from  her.  As  soon  as  she  stood  up,  and  smiled  that 
triumphant,  proud  smile  of  sly  gaiety,  the  dread  that  had  come  on  Nikolay 
and  all  the  spectators  at  the  first  moment,  the  dread  that  she  would  not 
dance  it  well,  was  at  an  end  and  they  were  already  admiring  her. 

She  danced  the  dance  well,  so  well  indeed,  so  perfectly,  that  Anisya 
Fyodorovna,  who  handed  her  at  once  the  kerchief  she  needed  in  the 
dance,  had  tears  in  her  eyes,  though  she  laughed  as  she  watched  that 
slender,  graceful  little  countess,  reared  in  silk  and  velvet,  belonging  to 
another  world  than  hers,  who  was  yet  able  to  understand  all  that  was  in 
Anisya  and  her  father  and  her  mother  and  her  aunt  and  every  Russian 
soul. 

‘Well  done,  little  countess— forward,  quick  march!’  cried  the  uncle, 
laughing  gleefully  as  he  finished  the  dance.  ‘Ah,  that’s  a  niece  to  be 
proud  of!  She  only  wants  a  fine  fellow  picked  out  now  for  her  husband, — 
and  then,  forward,  quick  march!’ 

‘One  has  been  picked  out  already,’  said  Nikolay,  smiling. 

‘Oh!  ’  said  the  uncle  in  surprise,  looking  inquiringly  at  Natasha.  Natasha 
nodded  her  head  with  a  happy  smile. 


4§2  WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘And  such  an  one!  ’  she  said.  But  as  soon  as  she  said  it  a  different,  new 
series  of  ideas  and  feelings  rose  up  within  her.  ‘What  was  the  meaning  of 
Nikolay’s  smile  when  he  said:  “One  has  been  picked  out  already”?  Was 
he  glad  of  it,  or  not  glad?  He  seemed  to  think  my  Bolkonsy  would  not 
approve,  would  not  understand  our  gaiety  now.  No,  he  would  quite  under¬ 
stand  it.  Where  is  he  now?’  Natasha  wondered,  and  her  face  became 
serious  at  once.  But  that  lasted  only  one  second.  ‘I  mustn’t  think,  I 
mustn’t  dare  to  think  about  that,’  she  said  to  herself;  and  smiling,  she 
sat  down  again  near  the  uncle,  begging  him  to  play  them  something  more. 

The  uncle  played  another  song  and  waltz.  Then,  after  a  pause,  he 
cleared  his  throat  and  began  to  sing  his  favourite  hunting  song: — 

‘When  there  fall  at  evening  glow 
The  first  flakes  of  winter  snow.’  .  .  . 

The  uncle  sang,  as  peasants  sing,  in  full  and  naive  conviction  that  in  a 
song  the  whole  value  rests  in  the  words,  that  the  tune  comes  of  itself,  and 
that  a  tune  apart  is  nothing,  that  the  tune  is  only  for  the  sake  of  the 
verse.  And  this  gave  the  uncle’s  unself-conscious  singing  a  peculiar  charm, 
like  the  song  of  birds.  Natasha  was  in  ecstasies  over  the  uncle’s  singing. 
She  made  up  her  mind  not  to  learn  the  harp  any  longer,  but  to  play  only 
on  the  guitar.  She  asked  the  uncle  for  the  guitar  and  at  once  struck  the 
chords  of  the  song. 

At  ten  o’clock  there  arrived  the  wagonette,  a  trap,  and  three  men  on 
horseback,  who  had  been  sent  to  look  for  Natasha  and  Petya.  The  count 
and  countess  did  not  know  where  they  were  and  were  very  anxious,  so 
said  one  of  the  men. 

Petya  was  carried  out  and  laid  in  the  wagonette  as  though  he  had  been 
a  corpse.  Natasha  and  Nikolay  got  into  the  trap.  The  uncle  wrapped 
Natasha  up,  and  said  good-bye  to  her  with  quite  a  new  tenderness.  He 
accompanied  them  on  foot  as  far  as  the  ridge  which  they  had  to  ride 
round,  fording  the  stream,  and  bade  his  huntsmen  ride  in  front  with 
lanterns. 

‘Farewell,  dear  little  niece!’  they  heard  called  in  the  darkness  by  his 
voice,  not  the  one  Natasha  had  been  familiar  with  before,  but  the  voice 
that  had  sung  ‘When  fall  at  evening  glow.’ 

There  were  red  lights  in  the  village  they  drove  through  and  a  cheerful 
smell  of  smoke. 

‘What  a  darling  that  uncle  is!’  said  Natasha  as  they  drove  out  into 
the  highroad. 

‘Yes,’  said  Nikolay.  ‘You’re  not  cold?? 

‘No,  I’m  very  comfortable;  very.  I  am  so  happy,’  said  Natasha,  posi¬ 
tively  perplexed  at  her  own  well-being.  They  were  silent  for  a  long  while. 

The  night  was  dark  and  damp.  They  could  not  see  the  horses,  but  could 
only  hear  them  splashing  through  the  unseen  mud. 

What  wras  passing  in  that  childlike,  responsive  soul,  that  so  eagerly 
taught  and  made  its  own  all  the  varied  impressions  of  life?  How  were 
they  all  stored  away  in  her  heart?  But  she  was  very  happy.  They  were 


WARANDPEACE  43j 

getting  near  home  when  she  suddenly  hummed  the  air  of  ‘When  fall  at 
evening  glow,’  which  she  had  been  trying  to  get  all  the  way,  and  had 
only  just  succeeded  in  catching. 

‘Have  you  caught  it?’  said  Nikolay. 

‘What  are  you  thinking  of  just  now,  Nikolay?’  asked  Natasha.  They, 
were  fond  of  asking  each  other  that  question. 

‘I?’  said  Nikolay,  trying  to  recall.  ‘Well,  you  see,  at  first  I  was  thinking 
that  Rugay,  the  red  dog,  is  like  the  uncle,  and  that  if  he  were  a  man  he 
would  keep  uncle  always  in  the  house  with  him,  if  not  for  racing,  for 
music  he’d  keep  him  anyway.  How  jolly  uncle  is!  Isn’t  he?  Well,  and  you?’ 

‘I?  Wait  a  minute;  wait  a  minute!  Oh,  I  was  thinking  at  first  that  here 
we  are  driving  and  supposing  that  we  are  going  home,  but  God  knows 
where  we  are  going  in  this  darkness,  apd  all  of  a  sudden  we  shall  arrive 
and  see  we  are  not  at  Otradnoe  but  in  fairyland.  And  then  I  thought, 
too  ...  no;  nothing  more.’ 

‘I  know,  of  course,  you  thought  of  him /  said  Nikolay,  smiling,  as 
Natasha  could  tell  by  his  voice. 

‘No,’  Natasha  answered,  though  she  really  had  been  thinking  at  the 
same  time  of  Prince  Andrey  and  how  he  would  like  the  uncle.  ‘And  I 
keep  repeating,  too,  all  the  way  I  keep  repeating:  how  nicely  Anisyushka 
walked;  how  nicely  .  .  .’  said  Natasha.  And  Nikolay  heard  her  musical, 
causeless,  happy  laugh. 

‘And  do  you  know?’  she  said  suddenly.  ‘I  know  I  shall  never  be  as 
happy,  as  peaceful  as  I  am  now  .  .  .’ 

‘WThat  nonsense,  idiocy,  rubbish!’  said  Nikolay,  and  he  thought: 
‘What  a  darling  this  Natasha  of  mine  is!  I  have  never  had,  and  never 
shall  have,  another  friend  like  her.  Why  should  she  be  married?  I  could 
drive  like  this  with  her  for  ever!’ 

‘What  a  darling  this  Nikolay  of  mine  is!’  Natasha  was  thinking. 

‘All!  Still  a  light  in  the  drawing-room,’  she  said,  pointing  to  the  windows 
of  their  house  gleaming  attractively  in  the  wet,  velvety  darkness  of  the 
night. 

VIII 

Count  Ilya  Andreitch  had  given  up  being  a  marshal  of  nobility,  be¬ 
cause  that  position  involved  too  heavy  an  expenditure.  But  his  difficulties 
were  not  removed  by  that.  Often  Natasha  and  Nikolay  knew  of  uneasy, 
private  consultations  between  their  parents,  and  heard  talk  of  selling 
the  sumptuous  ancestral  house  of  the  Rostovs  and  the  estate  near  Mos¬ 
cow.  When  the  count  was  no  longer  marshal  it  was  not  necessary  to  en¬ 
tertain  on  such  a  large  scale,  and  they  led  a  quieter  life  at  Otradnoe 
than  in  former  years.  But  the  immense  house  and  the  lodges  were  still 
full  of  people;  more  than  twenty  persons  still  sat  down  to  table  with 
them.  These  were  all  their  own  people,  time-honoured  inmates  of  their 
household,  almost  members  of  the  family,  or  persons  who  must,  it  seemed, 


4S4  WARANDPEACE 

inevitably  live  in  the  count’s  house.  Such  were  Dimmler,  the  music- 
master,  and  his  wife;  Vogel  the  dancing-master,  with  his  family;  an 
old  Madame  Byelov,  and  many  others  besides;  Petya's  tutors,  the  girls’ 
old  governess,  and  persons  who  simply  found  it  better  or  more  profitable 
to  live  at  the  count’s  than  in  a  house  of  their  own.  They  did  not  entertain 
so  many  guests  as  before,  but  they  still  lived  in  that  manner,  apart  from 
which  the  count  and  countess  could  not  have  conceived  of  life  at  all. 
There  was  still  the  same  hunting  establishment,  increased  indeed  by 
Nikolay.  There  were  still  the  same  fifty  horses  and  fifteen  grooms  in 
the  stables;  the  same  costly  presents  on  name-days,  and  ceremonial 
dinners  to  the  whole  neighbourhood.  There  were  still  the  count’s  games 
of  whist  and  boston,  at  which,  letting  every  one  see  his  cards,  he  allowed 
himself  to  be  plundered  every  day  of  hundreds  by  his  neighbours,  who 
looked  upon  the  privilege  of  making  up  a  rubber  with  Count  Ilya 
Andreitch  as  a  profitable  investment. 

The  count  went  into  his  affairs  as  though  walking  into  a  huge  net, 
trying  not  to  believe  that  he  was  entangled,  and  at  every  step  getting 
more  and  more  entangled,  and  feeling  too  feeble  either  to  tear  the  nets 
that  held  him  fast,  or  with  care  and  patience  to  set  about  disentangling 
them.  The  countess  with  her  loving  heart  felt  that  her  children  were  being 
ruined,  that  the  count  was  not  to  blame,  that  he  could  not  help  being 
what  he  was,  that  he  was  distressed  himself  (though  he  tried  to  conceal 
it)  at  the  consciousness  of  his  own  and  his  children’s  ruin,  and  was 
seeking  means  to  improve  their  position.  To  her  feminine  mind  only 
one  way  of  doing  so  occurred — that  was,  to  marry  Nikolay  to  a  wealthy 
heiress.  She  felt  that  this  was  their  last  hope,  and  that  if  Nikolay  were 
to  refuse  the  match  she  had  found  for  him  she  must  bid  farewell  for 
ever  to  all  chance  of  improving  their  position.  This  match  was  Julie 
Karagin,  the  daughter  of  excellent  and  virtuous  parents,  known  to  the 
Rostovs  from  childhood,  and  now  left  a  wealthy  heiress  by  the  death  of  her 
last  surviving  brother. 

The  countess  wrote  directly  to  Madame  Karagin  in  Moscow,  suggesting 
to  her  the  marriage  of  her  daughter  to  her  own  son,  and  received  a  favour¬ 
able  reply  from  her.  Madame  Karagin  replied  that  she  was  quite  ready 
for  her  part  to  consent  to  the  match,  but  everything  must  depend  on  her 
daughter’s  inclinations.  Madame  Karagin  invited  Nikolay  to  come  to 
Moscow.  Several  times  the  countess,  with  tears  in  her  eyes,  had  told  her 
son  that  now  that  both  her  daughters  were  settled,  her  only  wish  was  to 
see  him  married.  She  said  that  she  could  rest  quietly  in  her  grave  if  this 
were  settled.  Then  she  would  say  that  she  had  an  excellent  girl  in  her 
eye,  and  would  try  and  get  from  him  his  views  on  matrimony. 

On  other  occasions  she  praised  Julie  and  advised  Nikolay  to  go  to 
Moscow  for  the  holidays  to  amuse  himself  a  little.  Nikolay  guessed  what 
his  mother’s  hints  were  aiming  at,  and  on  one  such  occasion  he  forced 
her  to  complete  frankness.  She  told  him  plainly  that  all  hope  of  improving 
their  position  rested  now  on  his  marrying  Julie  Karagin. 


WARANDPEACE  485 

‘What,  if  I  loved  a  girl  with  no  fortune  would  you  really  desire  me, 
mamma,  to  sacrifice  my  feeling  and  my  honour  for  the  sake  of  money?’ 
he  asked  his  mother,  with  no  notion  of  the  cruelty  of  his  question,  but 
simply  wishing  to  show  his  noble  sentiments. 

‘No;  you  misunderstand  me,’  said  his  mother,  not  knowing  how  to 
retrieve  her  mistake.  ‘You  misunderstand  me,  Nikolenka.  It  is  your  hap¬ 
piness  I  wish  for,’  she  added,  and  she  felt  she  was  speaking  falsely,  that 
she  was  blundering.  She  burst  into  tears. 

‘Mamma,  don't  cry,  and  only  tell  me  that  you  wish  it,  and  you  know 
that  I  would  give  my  whole  life,  everything  for  your  peace  of  mind,’  said 
Nikolay;  ‘I  will  sacrifice  everything  for  you,  even  my  feelings.’ 

But  the  countess  did  not  want  the  question  put  like  that;  she  did  not 
want  to  receive  sacrifices  from  her  son,  she  would  have  liked  to  sacrifice 
herself  to  him. 

‘No;  you  don't  understand  me,  don’t  let  us  talk  of  it,’  she  said,  wiping 
away  her  tears. 

‘Yes,  perhaps  I  really  do  love  a  poor  girl,’  Nikolay  said  to  himself; 
‘what,  am  I  to  sacrifice  my  feeling  and  my  honour  for  fortune?  I  wonder 
how  mamma  could  say  such  a  thing.  Because  Sonya  is  poor  I  must  not 
love  her,'  he  thought;  ‘I  must  not  respond  to  her  faithful,  devoted  love. 
And  it  is  certain  I  should  be  happier  with  her  than  with  any  doll  of  a 
Julie.  To  sacrifice  my  feelings  for  the  welfare  of  my  family  I  can  always 
do,’  he  said  to  himself,  ‘but  I  can’t  control  my  feelings.  If  I  love  Sonya, 
that  feeling  is  more  than  anything  and  above  anything  for  me.’ 

Nikolay  did  not  go  to  Moscow,  the  countess  did  not  renew  her  con¬ 
versations  with  him  about  matrimony,  and  with  grief,  and  sometimes 
with  exasperation,  saw  symptoms  of  a  growing  attachment  between  her 
son  and  the  portionless  Sonya.  She  blamed  herself  for  it,  yet  could  not 
refrain  from  scolding  and  upbraiding  Sonya,  often  reproving  her  without 
cause  and  addressing  her  as  ‘my  good  girl.’  What  irritated  the  kind- 
hearted  countess  more  than  anything  was  that  this  poor,  dark-eyed  niece 
was  so  meek,  so  good,  so  devoutly  grateful  to  her  benefactors,  and  so 
truly,  so  constantly,  and  so  unselfishly  in  love  with  Nikolay  that  it  was 
impossible  to  find  any  fault  with  her. 

Nikolay  went  on  spending  his  term  of  leave  with  his  parents.  From 
Prince  Andrey  a  fourth  letter  had  been  received  from  Rome.  In  it  he 
wrote  that  he  would  long  ago  have  been  on  his  way  back  to  Russia,  but 
that  in  the  warm  climate  his  wound  had  suddenly  re-opened,  which  would 
compel  him  to  defer  his  return  till  the  beginning  of  the  new  year.  Natasha 
was  as  much  in  love  with  her  betrothed,  as  untroubled  in  her  love,  and 
as  ready  to  throw  herself  into  all  the  pleasures  of  life  as  ever.  But  to¬ 
wards  the  end  of  the  fourth  month  of  their  separation  she  began  to  suffer 
from  fits  of  depression,  against  which  she  was  unable  to  contend.  She  felt 
sorry  for  herself,  sorry  that  all  this  time  should  be  wasted  and  be  of  no 
use  to  any  one,  while  she  felt  such  capacity  for  loving  and  being  loved. 

Life  was  not  gay  in  the  Rostovs’  household. 


486 


W  A  R  AND  PEACE 


IX 

Christmas  came,  and  except  for  the  High  Mass,  the  solemn  and  weari¬ 
some  congratulations  to  neighbours  and  house-serfs,  and  the  new  gowns 
donned  by  every  one,  nothing  special  happened  to  mark  the  holidays, 
though  the  still  weather  with  twenty  degrees  of  frost,  the  dazzling  sun¬ 
shine  by  day  and  the  bright,  starlit  sky  at  night  seemed  to  call  for  some 
special  celebration  of  the  season. 

On  the  third  day  of  Christmas  week,  after  dinner,  all  the  members  of 
the  household  had  separated  and  gone  to  their  respective  rooms.  It  was 
the  dullest  time  of  the  day.  Nikolay,  who  had  been  calling  on  neighbours 
in  the  morning,  was  asleep  in  the  divan-room.  The  old  count  was  resting 
in  his  own  room.  In  the  drawing-room  Sonya  was  sitting  at  a  round 
table  copying  a  design  for  embroidery.  The  countess  was  playing  patience. 
Nastasya  Ivanovna,  the  buffoon,  with  a  dejected  countenance,  was  sitting 
in  the  window  with  two  old  ladies.  Natasha  came  into  the  room,  went  up 
to  Sonya,  looked  at  what  she  was  doing,  then  went  up  to  her  mother  and 
stood  there  mutely. 

‘Why  are  you  wandering  about  like  an  unquiet  spirit?’  said  her  mother. 
‘What  do  you  want?’ 

‘I  want  him  ...  I  want  him  at  once,  this  minute,’  said  Natasha,  with 
a  gleam  in  her  eyes  and  no  smile  on  her  lips.  The  countess  raised  her  head 
and  looked  intently  at  her  daughter. 

‘Don’t  look  at  me,  mamma;  don’t  look  at  me  like  that;  I  shall  cry  in 
a  minute.’ 

‘Sit  down;  come  and  sit  by  me,’  said  the  countess. 

‘Mamma,  I  want  him.  Why  should  I  be  wasting  time  like  this, 
mamma?’  .  .  .  Her  voice  broke,  tears  gushed  into  her  eyes,  and  to  hide 
them,  she  turned  quickly  and  went  out  of  the  room.  She  went  into  the 
divan-room,  stood  there,  thought  a  moment  and  went  to  the  maids’  room. 
There  an  old  maid-servant  was  scolding  a  young  girl  who  had  run  in 
breathless  from  the  cold  outside. 

“Give  over  playing,’  said  the  old  woman;  ‘there  is  a  time  for  every¬ 
thing.’ 

‘Let  her  off,  Kondratyevna,’  said  Natasha.  ‘Run  along,  Mavrusha, 
run  along.’ 

And  after  releasing  Mavrusha,  Natasha  crossed  the  big  hall  and  went 
to  the  vestibule.  An  old  footman  and  two  young  ones  were  playing  cards. 
They  broke  off  and  rose  at  the  entrance  of  their  young  mistress.  ‘What  am 
I  to  do  with  them?’  Natasha  wondered. 

‘Yes,  Nikita,  go  out,  please  .  .  .  Where  am  I  to  send  him?  .  .  .  Yes, 
go  to  the  yard  and  bring  me  a  cock,  please;  and  you,  Misha,  bring  me 
some  oats.’ 

‘Just  a  few  oats,  if  you  please?’  said  Misha,  with  cheerful  readiness. 

‘Run  along;  make  haste,’  the  old  man  urged  him. 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


487 


‘Fyodor,  you  get  me  some  chalk.’ 

As  she  passed  the  buffet  she  ordered  the  samovar,  though  it  was  not 
the  right  time  for  it. 

The  buffet-waiter,  Foka,  was  the  most  ill-tempered  person  in  the  house. 
Natasha  liked  to  try  her  power  over  him.  He  did  not  believe  in  her  order, 
and  went  to  inquire  if  it  were  really  wanted. 

‘Ah,  you’re  a  nice  young  lady!’  said  Foka,  pretending  to  frown  at 
Natasha. 

No  one  in  the  house  sent  people  on  errands  and  gave  the  servants  so 
much  work  as  Natasha.  She  could  not  see  people  without  wanting  to 
send  them  for  something.  She  seemed  to  be  trying  to  see  whether  one  of 
them  would  not  be  cross  or  sulky  with  her;  but  no  one’s  orders  were  so 
readily  obeyed  by  the  servants  as  Natasha’s.  ‘What  am  I  to  do?  Where 
am  I  to  go?’  Natasha  wondered,  strolling.slowly  along  the  corridor. 

‘Nastasya  Ivanovna,  what  will  my  children  be?’  she  asked  the  buffoon, 
who  came  towards  her  in  his  woman’s  jacket. 

‘Fleas,  and  dragon-flies,  and  grasshoppers,’  answered  the  buffoon. 

‘My  God!  my  God!  always  the  same.  Oh,  where  am  I  to  go?  What  am 
I  to  do  with  myself?’  And  she  ran  rapidly  upstairs,  tapping  with  her  shoes, 
to  see  Vogel  and  his  wife,  who  had  rooms  on  the  top  floor.  The  two  gov¬ 
ernesses  were  sitting  with  the  Vogels  and  on  the  table  were  plates  of 
raisins,  walnuts,  and  almonds.  The  governesses  were  discussing  the  ques¬ 
tion  which  was  the  cheaper  town  to  live  in,  Moscow  or  Odessa.  Natasha 
sat  down,  listened  to  their  talk  with  a  serious  and  dreamy  face,  and  got  up. 
‘The  island  Madagascar,’  she  said.  ‘Mada-ga-scar,’  she  repeated,  articu¬ 
lating  each  syllable  distinctly;  and  making  no  reply  to  Madame  Schoss’s 
inquiry  into  her  meaning,  she  went  out  of  the  room. 

Petya,  her  brother,  was  upstairs  too.  He  was  engaged  with  his  tutor 
making  fireworks  to  let  off  that  night. 

‘Petya!  Petya!’  she  shouted  to  him,  ‘carry  me  downstairs.’  Petya  ran 
to  her  and  offered  her  his  back,  and  he  pranced  along  with  her.  ‘No, 
enough.  The  island  Madagascar,’  she  repeated,  and  jumping  off  his  back 
she  went  downstairs. 

Having  as  it  were  reviewed  her  kingdom,  tried  her  power,  and  made 
sure  that  all  were  submissive,  but  yet  that  she  was  dull,  Natasha  went  into 
the  big  hall,  took  up  the  guitar,  and  sat  down  with  it  in  a  dark  corner  be¬ 
hind  a  bookcase.  She  began  fingering  the  strings  in  the  bass,  picking  out 
a  phrase  she  recalled  from  an  opera  she  had  heard  in  Petersburg  with 
Prince  Andrey.  For  other  listeners  the  sounds  that  came  from  her  guitar 
would  have  had  no  sort  of  meaning,  but  these  sounds  called  up  in  her 
imagination  a  whole  series  of  reminiscences.  She  sat  behind  the  bookcase 
with  her  eyes  fixed  on  a  streak  of  light  that  fell  from  the  crack  in  the 
pantry  door,  and  listened  to  herself  and  recalled  the  past.  She  was  in  the 
mood  for  brooding  over  memories. 

Sonya  crossed  the  hall,  and  went  into  the  pantry  with  a  glass  in  her 
hand.  Natasha  glanced  at  her  through  the  crack  in  the  pantry  door,  and 
it  seemed  to  her  that  she  remembered  the  light  falling  through  the  crack 


488  WAR  AND  PEACE 

in  the  pantry  door,  and  Sonya  passing  with  the  glass  in  just  the  same  way. 
‘Yes,  and  it  was  exactly  the  same  in  every  detail,’  thought  Natasha. 

‘Sonya,  what  is  this?’  called  Natasha,  twanging  the  thick  cord  with 
her  fingers. 

‘Oh,  are  you  there?’  said  Sonya  starting,  and  she  came  up  and  listened. 
‘I  don’t  know.  A  storm?’  she  said  timidly,  afraid  of  being  wrong. 

‘Why,  she  started  in  just  the  same  way,  and  came  up  and  smiled  the 
same  timid  smile  when  it  all  happened  before,’  thought  Natasha;  ‘and 
just  in  the  same  way,  too.  ...  I  thought  there  was  something  wanting 
in  her.’ 

‘No,  it’s  the  chorus  from  the  “Water  Carrier,”  listen.’  And  Natasha 
hummed  the  air  of  the  chorus,  so  that  Sonya  might  catch  it.  ‘Where  were 
you  going?’  asked  Natasha. 

‘To  change  the  water  in  my  glass.  I  am  just  finishing  colouring  the 
design.’ 

‘You  always  find  something  to  do,  but  I  can’t,  you  know,’  said  Natasha. 
‘And  where’s  Nikolenka?’ 

‘I  think  he’s  asleep.’ 

‘Sonya,  do  go  and  wake  him,’  said  Natasha.  ‘Tell  him  I  want  him  to 
sing  with  me.’ 

She  sat  a  little  longer,  pondering  on  what  was  the  meaning  of  its  all 
having  happened  before,  and  not  solving  that  question,  and  not  in  the 
least  chagrined  at  being  unable  to  do  so,  she  passed  again  in  her  imagina¬ 
tion  to  the  time  when  she  was  with  him,  and  he  gazed  at  her  with  eyes 
of  love. 

‘Oh,  if  he  would  come  quickly!  I’m  so  afraid  it  will  never  come!  And 
worst  of  all,  I’m  getting  older,  that’s  the  thing.  There  won’t  be  in  me  what 
there  is  in  me  now.  Perhaps  he  is  coming  to-day,  will  be  here  immediately. 
Perhaps  he  has  come,  and  is  sitting  there  in  the  drawing-room.  Perhaps  he 
did  come  yesterday,  and  I  have  forgotten.’  She  got  up,  put  down  her  ■ 
guitar,  and  went  into  the  parlour.  All  their  domestic  circle,  tutors,  gov-  ■ 
ernesses,  and  guests  were  sitting  at  the  tea-table.  The  servants  were  stand¬ 
ing  round  the  table.  But  Prince  Andrey  was  not  there,  and  the  same  old 
life  was  still  going  on. 

‘Here  she  is,’  said  the  count,  seeing  Natasha  coming  in.  ‘Come,  sit  by 
me.’  But  Natasha  stayed  by  her  mother,  looking  about  her  as  though 
seeking  for  something. 

‘Mamma!’  she  said.  ‘Give  me  him,  give  me  him,  mamma,  quickly, 
quickly,’  and  again  she  could  hardly  suppress  her  sobs.  She  sat  down  to 
the  table  and  listened  to  the  talk  of  the  elders  and  Nikolay,  who  had  come 
in  to  tea.  ‘My  God,  my  God,  the  same  people,  the  same  talk,  papa  holding 
his  cup,  and  blowing  it  just  the  same  as  always,’  thought  Natasha,  feeling 
with  horror  an  aversion  rising  up  in  her  for  all  her  family,  because  they 
were  always  the  same. 

After  tea  Nikolay,  Sonya,  and  Natasha  went  into  the  divan-room  to 
their  favourite  corner,  where  their  most  intimate  talks  always  began. 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


4§V 


X 

‘Does  it  happen  to  you,’  said  Natasha  to  her  brother,  when  they  were 
settled  in  the  divan-room,  ‘to  feel  that  nothing  will  ever  happen — nothing; 
that  all  that  is  good  is  past?  And  it’s  not  exactly  a  bored  feeling,  but 
melancholy?’ 

‘I  should  think  so!’  said  he.  ‘It  has  sometimes  happened  to  me  that 
when  everything’s  all  right,  and  every  one’s  cheerful,  it  suddenly  strikes 
one  that  one’s  sick  of  it  all,  and  all  must  die.  Once  in  the  regiment  when 
I  did  not  go  to  some  merrymaking,  and  there  the  music  was  playing  .  .  . 
and  I  felt  all  at  once  so  dreary  .  .  .’ 

‘Oh,  I  know  that  feeling;  I  know  it,  I  know  it,’  Natasha  assented;  ‘even 
when  I  was  quite  little,  I  used  to  have  that  feeling.  Do  you  remember, 
once  I  was  punished  for  eating  some  plums,  and  you  were  all  dancing, 
and  I  sat  in  the  schoolroom  sobbing.  I  shall  never  forget  it;  I  felt  sad  and 
sorry  for  every  one,  sorry  for  myself,  and  for  every — every  one.  And  what 
was  the  chief  point,  I  wasn’t  to  blame,’  said  Natasha;  ‘do  you  remember?’ 

‘I  remember,’  said  Nikolay.  ‘I  remember  that  I  came  to  you  afterwards, 
and  I  longed  to  comfort  you,  but  you  know,  I  felt  ashamed  to.  Awfully 
funny  we  used  to  be.  I  had  a  wooden  doll  then,  and  I  wanted  to  give  it 
you.  Do  you  remember?’ 

‘And  do  you  remember,’  said  Natasha,  with  a  pensive  smile,  ‘how  long, 
long  ago,  when  we  were  quite  little,  uncle  called  us  into  the  study  in  the 
old  house,  and  it  was  dark ;  we  went  in,  and  all  at  once  there  stood  .  .  .’ 

‘A  negro,’  Nikolay  finished  her  sentence  with  a  smile  of  delight;  ‘ok 
course,  I  remember.  To  this  day  I  don’t  know  whether  there  really  was  a 
negro,  or  whether  we  dreamed  it,  or  were  told  about  it.’ 

‘He  was  grey-headed,  do  you  remember,  and  had  white  teeth;  he  stood 
and  looked  at  us  .  .  .’ 

‘Do  you  remember,  Sonya?’  asked  Nikolay. 

‘Yes,  yes,  I  do  remember  something  too,’  Sonya  answered  timidly. 

‘You  know  I  have  often  asked  both  papa  and  mamma  about  that 
negro,’  said  Natasha.  ‘They  say  there  never  was  a  negro  at  all.  But  you 
remember  him!’ 

‘Of  course,  I  do.  I  remember  his  teeth,  as  if  it  were  to-day.’ 

‘How  strange  it  is,  as  though  it  were  a  dream.  I  like  that.’ 

‘And  do  you  remember  how  we  were  rolling  eggs  in  the  big  hall,  and  all 
of  a  sudden  two  old  women  came  in,  and  began  whirling  round  on  the 
carpet.  Did  that  happen  or  not?  Do  you  remember  what  fun  it  was?’ 

‘Yes.  And  do  you  remember  how  papa,  in  a  blue  coat,  fired  a  gun  off 
on  the  steps?’ 

Smiling  with  enjoyment,  they  went  through  their  reminiscences;  not 
the  melancholy  memories  of  old  age,  but  the  romantic  memories  of 
youth,  those  impressions  of  the  remotest  past  in  which  dreamland  melts 
into  reality.  They  laughed  with  quiet  pleasure. 


490  WARANDPEACE 

Sonya  was,  as  always,  left  behind  by  them,  though  their  past  had  been 
spent  together. 

Sonya  did  not  remember  much  of  what  they  recalled,  and  what  she 
did  remember,  did  not  rouse  the  same  romantic  feeling  in  her.  She  was 
simply  enjoying  their  pleasure,  and  trying  to  share  it. 

She  could  only  enter  into  it  fully  when  they  recalled  Sonya’s  first  ar¬ 
rival.  Sonya  described  how  she  had  been  afraid  of  Nikolay,  because  he 
had  cording  on  his  jacket,  and  the  nurse  had  told  her  that  they  would  tie 
her  up  in  cording  too. 

‘And  I  remember,  I  was  told  you  were  found  under  a  cabbage,’  said 
Natasha;  ‘and  I  remember  I  didn’t  dare  to  disbelieve  it  then,  though  I 
knew  it  was  untrue,  and  I  felt  so  uncomfortable.’ 

During  this  conversation  a  maid  popped  her  head  in  at  a  door  leading 
into  the  divan-room. 

‘Miss,  they’ve  brought  you  a  cock,’  she  said  in  a  whisper. 

‘I  don’t  want  it,  Polya;  tell  them  to  take  it  away,’  said  Natasha. 

In  the  middle  of  their  talk  in  the  divan-room,  Dimmler  came  into  the 
room,  and  went  up  to  the  harp  that  stood  in  the  corner.  He  took  off  the 
cloth-case,  and  the  harp  gave  a  jarring  sound.  ‘Edward  Karlitch,  do, 
please,  play  my  favourite  nocturne  of  M.  Field,’  said  the  voice  of  the 
old  countess  from  the  drawing-room. 

Dimmler  struck  a  chord,  and  turning  to  Natasha,  Nikolay,  and  Sonya, 
he  said. 

‘How  quiet  you  young  people  are!’ 

‘Yes,  we’re  talking  philosophy,’  said  Natasha,  looking  round  for  a 
minute,  and  going  on  with  the  conversation.  They  were  talking  now  about 
dreams. 

Dimmler  began  to  play.  Natasha  went  noiselessly  on  tiptoe  to  the  table, 
took  the  candle,  carried  it  away,  and  going  back,  sat  quietly  in  her  place. 

It  was  dark  in  the  room,  especially  where  they  were  sitting  on  the  sofa, 
but  the  silver  light  of  the  full  moon  shone  in  at  the  big  windows  and  lay 
on  the  floor. 

‘Do  you  know,  I  think,’  said  Natasha,  in  a  whisper,  moving  up  to 
Nikolay  and  Sonya,  when  Dimmler  had  finished,  and  still  sat,  faintly 
twanging  the  strings,  in  evident  uncertainty  whether  to  leave  off  playing 
or  begin  something  new,  ‘that  one  goes  on  remembering,  and  remember-  ■ 
ing;  one  remembers  till  one  recalls  what  happened  before  one  was  in 
this  world.  .  .  .’ 

‘That’s  metempsychosis,’  said  Sonya,  who  had  been  good  at  lessons, 
and  remembered  all  she  had  learned.  ‘The  Egyptians  used  to  believe  that 
our  souls  had  been  in  animals,  and  would  go  into  animals  again.’ 

‘No,  do  you  know,  I  don’t  believe  that  we  were  once  in  animals,’  said 
Natasha,  still  in  the  same  whisper,  though  the  music  was  over;  ‘but  I 
know  for  certain  that  we  were  once  angels  somewhere  beyond,  and  we 
have  been  here,  and  that’s  why  we  remember  everything.  .  .  .’ 

‘May  I  join  you?’  said  Dimmler,  coming  up  quietly,  and  he  sat  down 
by  them. 


WARANDPEACE  491 

‘If  we  had  been  angels,  why  should  we  have  fallen  lower?’  said  Niko¬ 
lay.  ‘No,  that  can’t  be!’ 

‘Not  lower  .  .  .  who  told  you  we  were  lower?  .  .  .  This  is  how  I  know 
I  have  existed  before,’  Natasha  replied,  with  conviction:  ‘The  soul  is  im¬ 
mortal,  you  know  ...  so,  if  I  am  to  live  for  ever,  I  have  lived  before 
too,  I  have  lived  for  all  eternity.’ 

‘Yes,  but  it’s  hard  for  us  to  conceive  of  eternity,’  said  Dimmler,  who 
had  joined  the  young  people,  with  a  mildly  condescending  smile,  but  now 
talked  as  quietly  and  seriously  as  they  did. 

‘Why  is  it  hard  to  conceive  of  eternity?’  said  Natasha.  ‘There  will  be 
to-day,  and  there  will  be  to-morrow,  and  there  will  be  for  ever,  and  yes¬ 
terday  has  been,  and  the  day  before.  .  .  .’ 

‘Natasha!  now  it’s  your  turn.  Sing  me  something,’  called  the  voice  of 
the  countess.  ‘Why  are  you  sitting  there  so  quietly,  like  conspirators?’ 

‘Mamma,  I  don’t  want  to  a  bit!’  said  Natasha,  but  she  got  up  as  she 
said  it. 

None  of  them,  not  even  Dimmler,  who  was  not  young,  wanted  to  break 
off  the  conversation,  and  come  out  of  the  corner  of  the  divan-room;  but 
Natasha  stood  up,  and  Nikolay  sat  down  to  the  clavichord.  Standing,  as 
she  always  did,  in  the  middle  of  the  room,  and  choosing  the  place  where 
the  resonance  was  greatest,  Natasha  began  singing  her  mother’s  favourite 
song. 

She  had  said  she  did  not  want  to  sing,  but  it  was  long  since  she  had 
sung,  and  long  before  she  sang  again  as  she  sang  that  evening.  Count 
Ilya  Andreitch  listened  to  her  singing  from  his  study,  where  he  was  talk¬ 
ing  to  Mitenka,  and  like  a  schoolboy  in  haste  to  finish  his  lesson  and  run 
out  to  play,  he  blundered  in  his  orders  to  the  steward,  and  at  last  paused, 
and  Mitenka  stood  silent  and  smiling  before  him,  listening  too.  Nikolay 
never  took  his  eyes  off  his  sister,  and  drew  his  breath  when  she  did.  Sonya, 
as  she  listened,  thought  of  the  vast  difference  between  'her  and  her  friend, 
and  how  impossible  it  was  for  her  to  be  in  ever  so  slight  a  degree  fascinat¬ 
ing  like  her  cousin.  The  old  countess  sat  with  a  blissful,  but  mournful 
smile,  and  tears  in  her  eyes,  and  now  and  then  she  shook  her  head.  She, 
too,  was  thinking  of  Natasha  and  of  her  own  youth,  and  of  how  there 
was  something  terrible  and  unnatural  in  Natasha’s  marrying  Prince 
Andrey. 

Dimmler,  sitting  by  the  countess,  listened  with  closed  eyes.  ‘No, 
countess,’  he  said,  at  last,  ‘that’s  a  European  talent;  she  has  no  need  of 
teaching:  that  softness,  tenderness,  strength  .  .  .’ 

‘Ah,  I’m  afraid  for  her,  I’m  afraid,’  said  the  countess,  not  remembering 
with  whom  she  was  speaking.  Her  motherly  instinct  told  her  that  there 
was  too  much  of  something  in  Natasha,  and  that  it  would  prevent  her 
being  happy. 

Natasha  had  not  finished  singing  when  fourteen-year-old  Petya  ran  in 
great  excitement  into  the  room  to  announce  the  arrival  of  the  mummers. 

Natasha  stopped  abruptly. 

‘Idiot!’  she  screamed  at  her  brother.  She  ran  to  a  chair,  sank  into  it, 


492  WARANDPEACE 

and  broke  into  such  violent  sobbing  that  it  was  a  long  while  before  she 
could  stop. 

‘It’s  nothing,  mamma,  it’s  nothing  really,  it’s  all  right;  Petya  startled 
me,’  she  said,  trying  to  smile;  but  the  tears  still  flowed,  and  the  sobs  still 
choked  her. 

The  mummers — house-serfs  dressed  up  as  bears,  Turks,  tavern-keep¬ 
ers,  and  ladies — awe-inspiring  or  comic  figures,  at  first  huddled  shyly  to¬ 
gether  in  the  vestibule,  bringing  in  with  them  the  freshness  of  the  cold 
outside,  and  a  feeling  of  gaiety.  Then,  hiding  behind  one  another,  they 
crowded  together  in  the  big  hall ;  and  at  first  with  constraint,  but  after¬ 
wards  with  more  liveliness  and  unanimity,  they  started  singing  songs,  and 
performing  dances,  and  songs  with  dancing,  and  playing  Christmas  games. 
The  countess  after  identifying  them,  and  laughing  at  their  costumes,  went 
away  to  the  drawing-room.  Count  Ilya  Andreitch  sat  with  a  beaming  smile 
in  the  big  hall,  praising  their  performances.  The  young  people  had  disap¬ 
peared. 

Half  an  hour  later  there  appeared  in  the  hall  among  the  other  mummers 
an  old  lady  in  a  crinoline — this  was  Nikolay.  Petya  was  a  Turkish  lady, 
Dimmler  was  a  clown,  Natasha  a  hussar,  and  Sonya  a  Circassian  with 
eyebrows  and  moustaches  smudged  with  burnt  cork. 

After  those  of  the  household  who  were  not  dressed  up  had  expressed 
condescending  wonder  and  approval,  and  had  failed  to  recognise  them, 
the  young  people  began  to  think  their  costumes  so  good  that  they  must 
display  them  to  some  one  else. 

Nikolay,  who  wanted  to  drive  them  all  in  his  sledge,  as  the  road  was  in 
capital  condition,  proposed  to  drive  to  their  so-called  uncle’s,  taking 
about  a  dozen  of  the  house-serfs  in  their  mummer-dress  with  them. 

‘No;  why  should  you  disturb  the  old  fellow?’  said  the  countess.  ‘Be¬ 
sides  you  wouldn’t  have  room  to  turn  round  there.  If  you  must  go,  let  it 
be  to  the  Melyukovs.’ 

Madame  Melyukov  was  a  widow  with  a  family  of  children  of  various 
ages,  and  a  number  of  tutors  and  governesses  living  in  her  house,  four 
versts  from  the  Rostovs’. 

‘That’s  a  good  idea,  my  love,’  the  old  count  assented,  beginning  to  be 
aroused.  ‘Only  let  me  dress  up  and  I’ll  go  with  you.  I’ll  make  Pashette 
open  her  eyes.’ 

But  the  countess  would  not  agree  to  the  count’s  going;  for  several  days 
he  had  had  a  bad  leg.  It  was  decided  that  the  count  must  not  go,  but  that 
if  Luisa  Ivanovna  (Madame  Schoss)  would  go  with  them,  the  young 
ladies  might  go  to  Madame  Melyukov’s.  Sonya,  usually  so  shy  and  reti¬ 
cent,  was  more  urgent  than  any  in  persuading  Luisa  Ivanovna  not  to 
refuse. 

Sonya’s  disguise  was  the  best  of  all.  Her  moustaches  and  eyebrows  were 
extraordinarily  becoming  to  her.  Every  one  told  her  she  looked  very 
pretty,  and  she  was  in  a  mood  of  eager  energy  unlike  her.  Some  inner  voice 
told  her  that  now  or  never  her  fate  would  be  sealed,  and  in  her  masculine 
attire  she  seemed  quite  another  person.  Luisa  Ivanovna  consented  to  go; 


WARANDPEACE  493 

and  half  an  hour  later  four  sledges  with  bells  drove  up  to  the  steps,  their 
runners  crunching,  with  a  clanging  sound,  over  the  frozen  snow. 

Natasha  was  foremost  in  setting  the  note  tone  of  holiday  gaiety;  and 
that  gaiety,  reflected  from  one  to  another,  grew  wilder  and  wilder,  and 
reached  its  climax  when  they  all  went  out  into  the  frost,  and  talking,  and 
calling  to  one  another,  laughing  and  shouting,  got  into  the  sledges. 

Two  of  the  sledges  were  the  common  household  sledges;  the  third  was 
the  old  count’s,  with  a  trotting  horse  from  Orlov’s  famous  stud ;  the  fourth, 
Nikolay’s  own,  with  his  own  short,  shaggy,  raven  horse  in  the  shafts. 
Nikolay,  in  his  old  lady’s  crinoline  and  a  hussar’s  cloak  belted  over  it, 
stood  up  in  the  middle  of  the  sledge  picking  up  the  reins.  It  was  so  light 
that  he  could  see  the  metal  discs  of  the  harness  shining  in  the  moonlight, 
and  the  eyes  of  the  horses  looking  round  in  alarm  at  the  noise  made  by  the 
party  under  the  portico  of  the  approach. 

Sonya,  Natasha,  Madame  Schoss,  and  two  maids  got  into  Nikolay’s 
sledge.  In  the  count’s  sledge  were  Dimmler  with  his  wife  and  Petya;  the 
other  mummers  were  seated  in  the  other  two  sledges. 

‘You  go  on  ahead,  Zahar!’  shouted  Nikolay  to  his  father’s  coachman, 
so  as  to  have  a  chance  of  overtaking  him  on  the  road. 

The  count’s  sledge  with  Dimmler  and  the  others  of  his  party  started 
forward,  its  runners  creaking  as  though  they  were  frozen  to  the  snow, 
and  the  deep-toned  bell  clanging.  The  trace-horses  pressed  close  to  the 
shafts  and  sticking  in  the  snow  kicked  it  up,  hard  and  glittering  as  sugar. 

Nikolay  followed  the  first  sledge:  behind  him  he  heard  the  noise  and 
crunch  of  the  other  two.  At  first  they  drove  at  a  slow  trot  along  the  nar¬ 
row  road.  As  they  drove  by  the  garden,  the  shadows  of  the  leafless  trees 
often  lay  right  across  the  road  and  hid  the  bright  moonlight.  But  as  soon 
as  they  were  out  of  their  grounds,  the  snowy  plain,  glittering  like  diamond 
with  bluish  lights  in  it,  lay  stretched  out  on  all  sides,  all  motionless  and 
bathed  in  moonlight.  Now  and  again  a  hole  gave  the  first  sledge  a  jolt; 
the  next  was  jolted  in  just  the  same  way,  and  the  next,  and  the  sledges 
followed  one  another,  rudely  breaking  the  iron-bound  stillness. 

‘A  hare’s  track,  a  lot  of  tracks!’  Natasha's  voice  rang  out  in  the  frost- 
bound  air. 

‘How  light  it  is,  Nikolenka,’  said  the  voice  of  Sonya. 

Nikolay  looked  round  at  Sonya,  and  bent  down  to  look  at  her  face 
closer.  It  was  a  quite  new,  charming  face  with  black  moustaches,  and 
eyebrows  that  peeped  up  at  him  from  the  sable  fur — so  close  yet  so  dis¬ 
tant — in  the  moonlight. 

‘That  used  to  be  Sonya,’  thought  Nikolay.  He  looked  closer  at  her  and 
smiled. 

‘What  is  it,  Nikolenka?’ 

‘Nothing,’  he  said,  and  turned  to  his  horses  again. 

As  they  came  out  on  the  trodden  highroad,  polished  by  sledge  runners, 
and  all  cut  up  by  the  tracks  of  spiked  horseshoes — visible  in  the  snow  in 
the  moonlight — the  horses  of  their  own  accord  tugged  at  the  reins  and 
quickened  their  pace.  The  left  trace-horse,  arching  his  head,  pulled  in 


404  WAR  AND  PEACE 

jerks  at  his  traces.  The  shaft-horse  swayed  to  and  fro,  pricking  up  his 
ears  as  though  to  ask:  ‘Are  we  to  begin  or  is  it  too  soon?’  Zahar’s  sledge 
could  be  distinctly  seen,  black  against  the  white  snow,  a  long  way  ahead 
now,  and  its  deep-toned  bell  seemed  to  be  getting  further  away.  They  could 
hear  shouts  and  laughter  and  talk  from  his  sledge. 

‘Now  then,  my  darlings!’  shouted  Nikolay,  pulling  a  rein  on  one  side, 
and  moving  his  whip  hand.  It  was  only  from  the  wind  seeming  to  blow 
more  freely  in  their  faces,  and  from  the  tugging  of  the  pulling  trace- 
horses,  quickening  their  trot,  that  they  saw  how  fast  the  sledge  was  flying 
along.  Nikolay  looked  behind.  The  other  sledges,  with  crunching  runners, 
with  shouts,  and  cracking  of  whips,  were  hurrying  after  them.  Their  shaft- 
horse  was  moving  vigorously  under  the  yoke,  with  no  sign  of  slackening, 
and  every  token  of  being  ready  to  go  faster  and  faster  if  required. 

Nikolay  overtook  the  first  sledge.  They  drove  down  a  hill,  and  into  a 
wide,  trodden  road  by  a  meadow  near  a  river. 

‘Where  are  we?’  Nikolay  wondered.  ‘Possibly  Kosoy  Meadow,  I  sup¬ 
pose.  But  no;  this  is  something  new  I  never  saw  before.  This  is  not  the 
Kosoy  Meadow  nor  Demkin  hill.  It’s  something — there’s  no  knowing 
what.  It’s  something  new  and  fairy-like.  Well,  come  what  may!’  And 
shouting  to  his  horses,  he  began  to  drive  by  the  first  sledge.  Zahar  pulled 
up  his  horses  and  turned  his  face,  which  was  white  with  hoar-frost  to  the 
eyebrows. 

Nikolay  let  his  horses  go;  Zahar,  stretching  his  hands  forward,  urged 
his  on.  ‘Come,  hold  on,  master,’  said  he. 

The  sledges  dashed  along  side  by  side,  even  more  swiftly,  and  the 
horses’  hoofs  flew  up  and  down  more  and  more  quickly.  Nikolay  began 
to  get  ahead.  Zahar,  still  keeping  his  hands  stretched  forward,  raised  one 
hand  with  the  reins. 

‘Nonsense,  master,’  he  shouted.  Nikolay  put  his  three  horses  into  a 
gallop  and  outstripped  Zahar.  The  horses  scattered  the  fine  dry  snow  in 
their  faces;  close  by  they  heard  the  ringing  of  the  bells  and  the  horses’  i 
legs  moving  rapidly  out  of  step,  and  they  saw  the  shadows  of  the  sledge  ; 
behind.  From  different  sides  came  the  crunch  of  runners  over  the  snow,  i 
and  the  shrieks  of  girls.  Stopping  his  horses  again,  Nikolay  looked  round 
him.  All  around  him  lay  still  the  same  enchanted  plain,  bathed  in  moon¬ 
light,  with  stars  scattered  over  its  surface. 

‘Zahar’s  shouting  that  I’m  to  turn  to  the  left,  but  why  to  the  left?’ 
thought  Nikolay.  ‘Are  we  really  going  to  the  Melyukovs’;  is  this  really 
Melyukovka?  God  knows  where  we  are  going,  and  God  knows  what  is 
going  to  become  of  us— and  very  strange  and  nice  it  is  what  is  happen¬ 
ing  to  us.’  He  looked  round  in  the  sledge. 

‘Look,  his  moustache  and  his  eyelashes  are  all  white,’  said  one  of  the 
strange,  pretty,  unfamiliar  figures  sitting  by  him,  with  fine  moustaches 
and  eyebrows. 

‘I  believe  that  was  Natasha,’  thought  Nikolay;  ‘and  that  was  Madame 
Schoss;  but  perhaps  it’s  not  so;  and  that  Circassian  with  the  moustaches 
I  don’t  know,  but  I  love  her.’ 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


495 

‘Aren’t  you  cold?’  he  asked  them.  They  laughed  and  did  not  answer. 
)immler  from  the  sledge  behind  shouted,  probably  something  funny,  but 
hey  could  not  make  out  what  he  said. 

‘Yes,  yes,’  voices  answered,  laughing. 

But  now  came  a  sort  of  enchanted  forest  with  shifting,  black  shadows, 
nd  the  glitter  of  diamonds,  and  a  flight  of  marble  steps,  and  silver  roofs 
f  enchanted  buildings,  and  the  shrill  whine  of  some  beasts.  ‘And  if  it 
eally  is  Melyukovka,  then  it’s  stranger  than  ever  that  after  driving,  God 
nows  where,  we  should  come  to  Melyukovka,’  thought  Nikolay. 

It  certainly  was  Melyukovka,  and  footmen  and  maid-servants  were 
unning  out  with  lights  and  beaming  faces. 

‘Who  is  it?’  was  asked  from  the  entrance. 

‘The  mummers  from  the  count’s;  I  can  see  by  the  horses,’  answered 
oices. 

XI 

'elagea  Danilovna  Melyukov,  a  broad-shouldered,  energetic  woman, 
1  spectacles  and  a  loose  house  dress,  was  sitting  in  her  drawing-room,  sur- 
bunded  by  her  daughters,  and  doing  her  utmost  to  keep  them  amused, 
’hey  were  quietly  occupied  in  dropping  melted  wax  into  water  and 
etching  the  shadows  of  the  shapes  it  assumed,  when  they  heard  the 
oise  of  steps  in  the  vestibule,  and  the  voices  of  people  arriving. 

The  hussars,  fine  ladies,  witches,  clowns,  and  bears,  coughing  and  rub- 
ing  the  hoar-frost  off  their  faces,  came  into  the  hall,  w'here  they  were 
urriedly  lighting  candles.  The  clown — Dimmler — and  the  old  lady — 
likolay — opened  the  dance.  Surrounded  by  the  shrieking  children,  the 
lummers  hid  their  faces,  and  disguising  their  voices,  bowed  to  their 
ostess  and  dispersed  about  the  room. 

‘Oh,  there’s  no  recognising  them.  And  Natasha!  See  what  she  looks 
ke!  Really,  she  reminds  me  of  some  one.  How  good  Edward  Karlitch  is! 
didn’t  know  him.  And  how  he  dances!  Oh,  my  goodness,  and  here’s  a 
'ircassian  too,  upon  my  word;  how  it  suits  Sonyushka!  And  who’s  this? 
/ell,  you  have  brought  us  some  fun!  Take  away  the  tables,  Nikita, 
anya.  And  we  were  sitting  so  quiet  and  dull!  ’ 

‘Ha — ha — he!  .  .  .  The  hussar,  the  hussar!  Just  like  a  boy;  and  the 
:gs!  .  .  .  I  can’t  look  at  him,  .  .  .’ voices  cried. 

Natasha,  the  favourite  of  the  young  Melyukovs,  disappeared  with  them 
ito  rooms  at  the  back  of  the  house,  and  burnt  cork  and  various  dressing- 
nwns  and  masculine  garments  were  sent  for  and  taken  from  the  footman 
y  bare,  girlish  arms  through  the  crack  of  the  half-open  door.  In  ten 
linutes  all  the  younger  members  of  the  Melyukov  family  reappeared 
\  fancy  dresses  too. 

Pelagea  Danilovna,  busily  giving  orders  for  clearing  the  room  for  the 
nests  and  preparing  for  their  entertainment,  walked  about  among  the 
lummers  in  her  spectacles,  with  a  suppressed  smile,  looking  close  at 
lem  and  not  recognising  any  one.  She  not  only  failed  to  recognise  the 


406  WARANDPEACE 

Rostovs  and  Dimmler,  but  did  not  even  know  her  own  daughters,  o 
identify  the  masculine  dressing-gowns  and  uniform  in  which  they  wer 
disguised. 

‘And  who  is  this?’  she  kept  saying,  addressing  her  governess  and  gazin; 
into  the  face  of  her  own  daughter  disguised  as  a  Tatar  of  Kazan.  ‘One  o 
the  Rostovs,  I  fancy.  And  you,  my  hussar,  what  regiment  are  you  ir 
pray?’  she  asked  Natasha.  ‘Give  the  Turk  a  preserved  fruit,’  she  said  ti 
the  footman  carrying  round  refreshments;  ‘that’s  not  forbidden  by  hi 
law.’ 

Sometimes,  looking  at  the  strange  and  ludicrous  capers  cut  by  th 
dancers,  who,  having  made  up  their  minds  once  for  all  that  no  one  recog 
nised  them,  were  quite  free  from  shyness,  Pelagea  Danilovna  hid  he 
face  in  her  handkerchief,  and  all  her  portly  person  shook  with  irrepres 
sible,  good-natured,  elderly  laughter. 

‘My  Sashinette,  my  Sashinette!’  she  said. 

After  Russian  dances  and  songs  in  chorus,  Pelagea  Danilovna  made  al 
the  party,  servants  and  gentry  alike,  join  in  one  large  circle.  The; 
brought  in  a  string,  a  ring,  and  a  silver  rouble,  and  began  playing  games 

An  hour  later  all  the  fancy  dresses  were  crumpled  and  untidy.  Th 
corked  moustaches  and  eyebrows  were  wearing  off  the  heated,  perspiring 
and  merry  faces.  Pelagea  Danilovna  began  to  recognise  the  mummers 
She  was  enthusiastic  over  the  cleverness  of  the  dresses  and  the  way  the; 
suited  them,  especially  the  young  ladies,  and  thanked  them  all  for  givin 
them  such  good  fun.  The  guests  were  invited  into  the  drawing-room  fo 
supper,  while  the  servants  were  regaled  in  the  hall. 

‘Oh,  trying  one’s  fate  in  the  bath-house,  that’s  awful!’  was  said  at  th 
supper-table  by  an  old  maiden  lady  who  lived  with  the  Melyukovs. 

‘Why  so?’  asked  the  eldest  daughter  of  the  Melyukovs. 

‘Well,  you  won’t  go  and  try.  It  needs  courage  .  .  .’ 

‘I’ll  go,’  said  Sonya. 

‘Tell  us  what  happened  to  the  young  lady,’  said  the  second  girl. 

‘Well,  it  was  like  this,’  said  the  old  maid.  ‘The  young  lady  went  out 
she  took  a  cock,  two  knives  and  forks,  and  everything  proper,  and  sa 
down.  She  sat  a  little  while,  and  all  of  a  sudden  she  hears  some  one  com 
ing, — -a  sledge  with  bells  driving  up.  She  hears  him  coming.  He  walks  ir 
precisely  in  the  shape  of  a  man,  like  an  officer,  and  sat  down  beside  he 
at  the  place  laid  for  him.’ 

‘Ah!  ah!  .  .  .’  screamed  Natasha,  rolling  her  eyes  with  horror. 

‘But  what  did  he  do?  Did  he  talk  like  a  man?’ 

‘Yes,  like  a  man.  Everything  as  it  should  be,  and  began  to  try  and  wii 
her  over,  and  she  should  have  kept  him  in  talk  till  the  cock  crew;  but  sh 
got  frightened, — simply  took  fright,  and  hid  her  face  in  her  hands.  And  h 
caught  her  up.  Luckily  the  maids  ran  in  that  minute  .  .  .’ 

‘Come,  why  are  you  scaring  them?’  said  Pelagea  Danilovna. 

‘Why,  mamma,  you  tried  your  fate  yourself  .  .  .’  said  her  daughter. 

‘And  how  do  they  try  fate  in  a  granary?’  asked  Sonya. 

‘Why,  at  a  time  like  this  they  go  to  the  granary  and  listen.  And  accord 


WARANDPEACE  497 

ng  to  what  you  hear, — if  there’s  a  knocking  and  a  tapping,  it’s  bad;  but 
f  there’s  a  sound  of  sifting  corn,  it  is  good.  But  sometimes  it  hap¬ 
pens  .  . 

'  ‘Mamma,  tell  us  what  happened  to  you  in  the  granary?’ 

Pelagea  Danilovna  smiled. 

‘Why,  I  have  forgotten  .  .  .’  she  said.  ‘I  know  none  of  you  will  go.’ 

‘No.  I’ll  go.  Pelagea  Danilovna,  do  let  me,  and  I’ll  go,’  said  Sonya. 

‘Oh,  well,  if  you’re  not  afraid.’ 

‘Luisa  Ivanovna,  may  I?’  asked  Sonya. 

1  Whether  they  were  playing  at  the  ring  and  string  game,  or  the  rouble 
»ame,  or  talking  as  now,  Nikolay  did  not  leave  Sonya’s  side,  and  looked 
fit  her  with  quite  new  eyes.  It  seemed  to  him  as  though  to-day,  for  the 
irst  time,  he  had,  thanks  to  that  corked  moustache,  seen  her  fully  as  she 
vas.  Sonya  certainly  was  that  evening  gay.  lively,  and  pretty,  as  Natasha 
lad  never  seen  her  before. 

'  ‘So,  this  is  v»That  she  is,  and  what  a  fool  I  have  been!  ’  he  kept  thinking, 
ooking  at  her  sparkling  eyes,  at  the  happy,  ecstatic  smile  dimpling  her 
cheeks  under  the  moustache.  He  had  never  seen  that  smile  before. 

‘I’m  not  afraid  of  anything,’  said  Sonya.  ‘May  I  go  at  once?’  She  got 
jp.  They  told  Sonya  where  the  granary  was;  how  she  was  to  stand  quite 
silent  and  listen,  and  they  gave  her  a  cloak.  She  threw  it  over  her  head  and 
glanced  at  Nikolay. 

;  ‘How  exquisite  that  girl  is!  ’  he  thought.  ‘And  what  have  I  been  think- 
ng  about  all  this  time?’ 

Sonya  went  out  into  the  corridor  to  go  to  the  granary.  Nikolay  hastily 
'ivent  out  to  the  front  porch,  saying  he  was  too  hot.  It  certainly  was  stuffy 
ndoors  from  the  crowd  of  people. 

Outside  there  was  the  same  still  frost,  the  same  moonlight,  only  even 
brighter  than  before.  The  light  was  so  bright,  and  there  were  so  many 
stars  sparkling  in  the  snow,  that  the  sky  did  not  attract  the  eye,  and  the 
•eal  stars  were  haldly  noticeable.  The  sky  was  all  blackness  and  dreari¬ 
ness,  the  earth  all  brightness. 

‘I’m  a  fool;  a  fool!  What  have  I  been  waiting  for  all  this  time?’  thought 
STikolay ;  and  running  out  into  the  porch  he  went  round  the  corner  of  the 
house  along  the  path  leading  to  the  back  door.  He  knew  Sonya  would  come 
hat  way.  Half-way  there  was  a  pile  of  logs  of  wood,  seven  feet  long.  It  was 
covered  with  snow  and  cast  a  shadow.  Across  it  and  on  one  side  of  it  there 
fell  on  the  snow  and  the  path  a  network  of  shadows  from  the  bare  old 
ime-trees.  The  wall  and  roof  of  the  granary  glittered  in  the  moonlight,  as 
though  hewn  out  of  some  precious  stone.  There  was  the  sound  of  the 
snapping  of  wood  in  the  garden,  and  all  was  perfect  stillness  again.  The 
ungs  seemed  breathing  in,  not  air,  but  a  sort  of  ever-youthful  power 
ind  joy. 

From  the  maid-servants’  entrance  came  the  tap  of  feet  on  the  steps; 
there  was  a  ringing  crunch  on  the  last  step  where  the  snow  was  heaped, 
ind  the  voice  of  the  old  maid  said: 

‘Straight  on,  along  this  path,  miss.  Only  don’t  look  round! ’ 


49§  WARANDPEACE 

‘I’m  not  afraid,’  answered  Sonya’s  voice,  and  Sonya’s  little  feet  in  their 
dancing-shoes  came  with  a  ringing,  crunching  sound  along  the  path  to¬ 
wards  Nikolay. 

Sonya  was  muffled  up  in  the  cloak.  She  was  two  paces  away  when  she 
saw  him.  She  saw  him,  too,  not  as  she  knew  him,  and  as  she  was  always  a 
little  afraid  of  him.  He  was  in  a  woman’s  dress,  with  towzled  hair,  and  a 
blissful  smile  that  was  new  to  Sonya.  She  ran  quickly  to  him. 

‘Quite  different,  and  still  the  same,’  thought  Nikolay,  looking  at  her 
face,  all  lighted  up  by  the  moon.  He  slipped  his  hands  under  the  cloak  that 
covered  her  head,  embraced  her,  drew  her  to  him,  and  kissed  the  lips 
that  wore  a  moustache  and  smelt  of  burnt  cork.  Sonya  kissed  him  full  on 
the  lips,  and  putting  out  her  little  hands  held  them  against  his  cheeks  on 
both  sides. 

‘Sonya!  .  .  .  Nikolenka!  .  .  .’  was  all  they  said.  They  ran  to  the 
granary  and  went  back  to  the  house,  each  at  their  separate  door. 


XII 

When  they  were  all  driving  back  from  Pelagea  Danilovna’s,  Natasha, 
who  always  saw  and  noticed  everything,  managed  a  change  of  places,  so 
that  Luisa  Ivanovna  and  she  got  into  the  sledge  with  Dimmler,  while  ( 
Sonya  was  with  Nikolay  and  the  maids. 

Nikolay  drove  smoothly  along  the  way  back,  making  no  effort  now  to 
get  in  front.  He  kept  gazing  in  the  fantastic  moonlight  at  Sonya,  and 
seeking,  in  the  continually  shifting  light  behind  those  eyebrows  and  mous¬ 
taches,  his  own  Sonya,  the  old  Sonya,  and  the  Sonya  of  to-day,  from  whom 
he  had  resolved  now  never  to  be  parted.  He  watched  her  intently,  and 
when  he  recognised  the  old  Sonya  and  the  new  Sonya,  and  recalled,  as  he 
smelt  it,  that  smell  of  burnt  cork  that  mingled  with  the  thrill  of  the  kiss,  j 
he  drew  in  a  deep  breath  of  the  frosty  air,  and  as  he  saw  the  earth  flying 
by  them,  and  the  sky  shining  above,  he  felt  himself  again  in  fairyland. 

‘Sonya,  is  it  well  with  thee V  he  asked  her  now  and  then. 

‘Yes,’  answered  Sonya.  ‘And  thee?’ 

Half-way  home,  Nikolay  let  the  coachman  hold  the  horses,  ran  for  a 
moment  to  Natasha’s  sledge,  and  stood  on  the  edge  of  it. 

‘Natasha,’  he  whispered  in  French,  ‘do  you  know  I  have  made  up  my 
mind  about  Sonya?’ 

‘Have  you  told  her?’  asked  Natasha,  beaming  all  over  at  once  with 
pleasure. 

‘Ah,  how  strange  you  look  with  that  moustache  and  those  eyebrows, 
Natasha!  Are  you  glad?’ 

‘I’m  so  glad;  so  glad!  I  was  beginning  to  get  cross  with  you.  I  never 
told  you  so,  but  you  have  not  been  treating  her  nicely.  Such  a  heart  as 
she  has,  Nikolenka.  I  am  so  glad!  I’m  horrid  sometimes;  but  I  felt 
ashamed  of  being  happy  without  Sonya,’  Natasha  went  on.  ‘Now,  I’m  so 
glad;  there,  run  back  to  her.’ 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


499 

‘No;  wait  a  moment.  Oh,  how  funny  you  look!’  said  Nikolay,  still  gaz- 
ng  intently  at  her;  and  in  his  sister,  too,  finding  something  new,  extraor- 
linary,  and  tenderly  bewitching  that  he  had  never  seen  in  her  before. 
Natasha,  isn’t  it  fairylike?  Eh?’ 

‘Yes,’  she  answered,  ‘you  have  done  quite  rightly.’ 

‘If  I  had  seen  her  before  as  she  is  now,’  Nikolay  was  thinking.  ‘I  should 
lave  asked  her  long  ago  what  to  do,  and  should  have  done  anything  she 
old  me,  and  it  would  have  been  all  right.’ 

‘So  you’re  glad,’  he  said,  ‘and  I  have  done  right?’ 

‘Oh,  quite  right!  I  had  a  quarrel  with  mamma  about  it  a  little  while 
go.  Mamma  said  she  was  trying  to  catch  you.  How  could  she  say  such  a 
hing!  I  almost  stormed  at  mamma.  I  will  never  let  any  one  say  or  think 
ny  harm  of  her,  for  there’s  nothing  but  good  in  her.’ 

‘So  it’s  all  right?’  said  Nikolay,  once  more  gazing  intently  at  his  sister’s 
xpression  to  find  out  whether  that  were  fhe  truth.  Then  he  jumped  off 
he  sledge  and  ran,  his  boots  crunching  over  the  snow,  to  his  sledge.  The 
ame  happy,  smiling  Circassian,  with  a  moustache  and  sparkling  eyes, 
eeping  from  under  the  sable  hood,  was  still  sitting  there,  and  that  Cir- 
assian  was  Sonya,  and  that  Sonya  was  for  certain  now  his  happy  and 
wing  future  wife. 

On  reaching  home,  the  young  ladies  told  the  countess  how  they  had 
pent  the  time  at  the  Melyukovs’,  and  then  went  to  their  room.  They 
hanged  their  dresses,  but  without  washing  off  their  moustaches,  sat  for  a 
)ng  while  talking  of  their  happiness.  They  talked  of  how  they  would  live 
rhen  they  were  married,  how  their  husbands  would  be  friends,  and  they 
mild  be  happy.  Looking-glasses  were  standing  on  Natasha’s  table,  set 
rere  earlier  in  the  evening  by  Dunyasha,  and  arranged  in  the  traditional 
ay  for  looking  into  the  future. 

‘Only  when  will  that  be?  I’m  so  afraid  it  never  will  be.  .  .  .  It  would 
e  too  happy!’  said  Natasha,  getting  up  and  going  to  the  looking-glasses. 
‘Sit  down,  Natasha,  perhaps  you  will  see  him,’  said  Sonya. 

Natasha  lighted  the  candles  and  sat  down.  ‘I  do  see  some  one  with  a 
ioustache,’  said  Natasha,  seeing  her  own  face. 

‘You  mustn’t  laugh,  miss,’  said  Dunyasha. 

With  the  assistance  of  Sonya  and  the  maid,  Natasha  got  the  mirrors 
ito  the  correct  position.  Her  face  took  a  serious  expression,  and  she  was 
lent.  For  a  long  while  she  went  on  sitting,  watching  the  series  of  retreat- 
g  candles  reflected  in  the  looking-glasses,  and  expecting  (in  accordance 
ith  the  tales  she  had  heard)  at  one  minute  to  see  a  coffin,  at  the  next  to 
e  him,  Prince  Andrey,  in  the  furthest,  dimmest,  indistinct  square.  But 
ady  as  she  was  to  accept  the  slightest  blur  as  the  form  of  a  man  or  of  a 
'ffin,  she  saw  nothing.  She  began  to  blink,  and  moved  away  from  the 
oking-glass. 

‘Why  is  it  other  people  see  things  and  I  never  see  anything?’  she  said, 
"ome,  you  sit  down,  Sonya;  to-day  you  really  must.  Only  look  for  me 
|.  .  I  feel  so  full  of  dread  to-day!’ 


500  WARANDPEACE 

Sonya,  sat  down  to  the  looking-glass,  got  the  correct  position,  and  bega 
looking. 

‘You  will  see,  Sofya  Alexandrovna  will  be  sure  to  see  something,’  whi 
pered  Dunyasha,  ‘you  always  laugh.’ 

Sonya  heard  these  words,  and  heard  Natasha  say  in  a  whisper:  ‘Yes, 
know  she’ll  see  something;  she  saw  something  last  year  too.’  For  thr< 
minutes  all  were  mute. 

‘Sure  to!’  whispered  Natasha,  and  did  not  finish.  ...  All  at  on< 
Sonya  drew  back  from  the  glass  she  was  holding  and  put  her  hand  ovi 
her  eyes.  ‘O  Natasha!  ’  she  said.  ‘Seen  something?  Seen  something?  Wh; 
did  you  see?’  cried  Natasha,  supporting  the  looking-glass.  Sonya  had  set 
nothing.  She  was  just  meaning  to  blink  and  to  get  up,  when  she  heai 
Natasha’s  voice  say:  ‘Sure  to!’  .  .  .  She  did  not  want  to  deceive  eithi 
Dunyasha  or  Natasha,  and  was  weary  of  sitting  there.  She  did  not  kno 
herself  how  and  why  that  exclamation  had  broken  from  her  as  she  co' 
ered  her  eyes. 

‘Did  you  see  him?’  asked  Natasha,  clutching  her  by  the  hand. 

‘Yes.  Wait  a  bit.  .  .  .  I  .  .  .  did  see  him,’  Sonya  could  not  help  sa; 
ing,  not  yet  sure  whether  by  him  Natasha  meant  Nikolay  or  Andrey.  ‘WI 
not  say  I  saw  something?  Other  people  see  things!  And  who  can  te 
whether  I  have  or  have  not?’  flashed  through  Sonya’s  mind. 

‘Yes,  I  saw  him,’  she  said. 

‘How  was  it?  How?  Standing  or  lying  down?’ 

‘No,  I  saw  .  .  .  At  first  there  was  nothing;  then  I  saw  him  lying  dowi 

‘Andrey  lying  down?  Is  he  ill?’  Natasha  asked,  fixing  eyes  of  terror  ( 
her  friend. 

‘No,  on  the  contrary — on  the  contrary,  his  face  was  cheerful,  and  ) 
turned  to  me’ ;  and  at  the  moment  she  was  saying  this,  it  seemed  to  he 
self  that  she  really  had  seen  what  she  described. 

‘Well,  and  then,  Sonya?  .  . 

‘Then  I  could  make  out  more;  something  blue  and  red.  .  . 

‘Sonya,  when  will  he  come  back?  When  shall  I  see  him?  My  God! 
feel  so  frightened  for  him,  and  for  me,  and  frightened  for  everything 
cried  Natasha ;  and  answering  not  a  word  to  Sonya’s  attempts  to  comfo 
her,  she  got  into  bed,  and  long  after  the  candle  had  been  put  out  she  1; 
with  wide-open  eyes  motionless  on  the  bed,  staring  into  the  frosty  moo1 
light  through  the  frozen  window  -panes. 


XIII 

II 

Soon  after  the  Christmas  fetes  were  over,  Nikolay  spoke  to  his  mother  j 
his  love  for  Sonya,  and  his  immovable  resolution  to  marry  her.  T: 
countess  had  long  before  observed  what  was  passing  between  Sonya  a:l 
Nikolay,  and  was  expecting  this  announcement.  She  listened  to  his  wor; 
without  comment,  and  then  told  her  son  that  he  could  marry  whom  : 
chose,  but  that  neither  she  nor  his  father  would  give  their  blessing  to  sui 


WAR  AND  PEACE  501 

marriage.  For  the  first  time  in  his  life  Nikolay  felt  that  his  mother  was 
ispleased  with  him,  that  in  spite  of  all  her  love  for  him  she  would  not  give 
fay  to  him.  Coldly,  without  looking  at  her  son,  she  sent  for  her  husband; 
nd  when  he  came  in,  the  countess  would  have  briefly  and  coldly,  in 
likolay’s  presence,  told  him  her  son’s  intention,  but  she  could  not  control 
erself,  burst  into  tears  of  anger,  and  went  out  of  the  room.  The  old 
ount  began  irresolutely  persuading  and  entreating  Nikolay  to  give  up  his 
fitention.  Nikolay  replied  he  could  not  be  false  to  his  word,  and  his  father, 
ghing  and  visibly  embarrassed,  quickly  cut  short  the  conversation  and 
;,ent  in  to  the  countess.  In  all  difficulties  with  his  son,  the  old  count  could 
ever  lose  his  sense  of  guiltiness  to  him  for  having  wasted  their  fortunes, 
nd  so  he  could  not  feel  angry  with  his  son  for  refusing  to  marry  an  heiress 
nd  choosing  the  portionless  Sonya.  He  only  felt  more  keenly  that  if  their 
ortune  had  not  been  squandered,  no  better  wife  could  have  been  desired 
)r  Nikolay  than  Sonya;  and  that  he,  with  his  Mitenka  and  his  invincible 
ad  habits,  was  alone  to  blame  for  their  fortune  having  been  squandered, 
he  father  and  mother  did  not  speak  of  the  subject  again  with  their  son; 
Lit  a  few  days  later  the  countess  sent  for  Sonya  to  her  room,  and  with  a 
I'uelty  that  surprised  them  both,  the  countess  upbraided  her  niece  for 
luring  her  son  and  for  ingratitude.  Sonya,  with  downcast  eyes,  listened  in 
lence  to  the  countess’s  cruel  words,  and  did  not  understand  what  was 
cpected  of  her.  She  was  ready  to  sacrifice  everything  for  her  benefactors, 
he  idea  of  self-sacrifice  was  her  favourite  idea.  But  in  this  case  she  could 
bt  see  whom  and  what  she  ought  to  sacrifice.  She  could  not  help  loving 
ie  countess  and  all  the  Rostov  family,  but  neither  could  she  help  loving 
ikolay  and  knowing  that  his  happiness  depended  on  that  love.  She  was 
lent  and  dejected;  she  made  no  reply.  Nikolay  could  not,  so  he  fancied, 
idure  this  position  any  longer,  and  he  went  in  to  his  mother  to  have  it 
it  with  her.  Nikolay  first  besought  his  mother  to  forgive  him  and  Sonya 
id  to  agree  to  their  marriage;  then  threatened  his  mother  that  if  Sonya 
ere  persecuted  he  would  at  once  marry  her  in  secret.  The  countess,  with 
; coldness  her  son  had  never  seen  before,  replied  that  he  was  of  full  age, 
at  Prince  Andrey  was  marrying  without  his  father’s  consent,  and  that 
could  do  the  same,  but  that  she  would  never  receive  that  intriguing 
leature  as  her  daughter. 

Stung  to  fury  by  the  words  ‘intriguing  creature,’  Nikolay,  raising  his 
lice,  told  his  mother  that  he  had  never  expected  her  to  try  and  force  him 
'  sell  his  feelings,  and  that  since  it  was  so,  then  for  the  last  time  he  .  .  . 
At  he  had  not  time  to  utter  the  fatal  word,  which  his  mother  seemed,  from 
It  expression,  to  be  awaiting  in  terror,  and  which  would,  perhaps,  have 
itnained  a  cruel  memory  between  them  for  ever.  He  had  not  time  to 
|ish,  because  Natasha,  who  had  been  listening  at  the  door,  ran  into  the 
|om  with  a  pale  and  set  face. 

‘Nikolenka,  you  are  talking  nonsense;  hush,  hush,  hush!  I  tell  you 
hsh!’  .  .  .  she  almost  screamed  to  overpower  his  voice. 

‘Mamma,  darling,  it’s  not  at  all  so  .  . .  my  sweet,  poor  darling,’  she  said, 
irning  to  her  mother,  who  gazed  in  terror  at  her  son,  feeling  herself  on  the 


502  WARANDPEACE 

edge  of  an  abyss;  but  in  the  obstinacy  and  heat  of  the  conflict  unwilling 
and  unable  to  give  in.  ‘Nikolenka,  I’ll  explain  to  you;  you  go  away- 
listen,  mamma,  darling,’  she  said  to  her  mother. 

Her  words  were  incoherent,  but  they  attained  the  effect  at  which  sht 
was  aiming. 

The  countess,  with  a  deep  sob,  hid  her  face  on  her  daughter’s  bosom 
while  Nikolay  got  up,  clutched  at  his  head,  and  went  out  of  the  room. 

Natasha  set  to  work  to  bring  about  a  reconciliation,  and  succeeded  s< 
far  that  Nikolay  received  a  promise  from  his  mother  that  Sonya  shouk 
not  be  worried,  and  himself  made  a  promise  that  he  would  take  no  step 
without  his  parents’  knowledge. 

Firmly  resolved  to  settle  things  in  his  regiment,  to  retire,  come  home 
and  marry  Sonya,  Nikolay  at  the  beginning  of  January  went  back  to  hi 
regiment,  sad  and  serious  at  being  on  bad  terms  with  his  parents,  but,  as  i 
seemed  to  him,  passionately  in  love. 

After  Nikolay’s  departure,  it  was  more  depressing  than  ever  in  thi I 
Rostovs’  house.  The  countess  fell  ill  from  the  emotional  strains  she  hat 
passed  through. 

Sonya  was  depressed  at  parting  from  Nikolay,  and  still  more  at  thi 
hostile  tone  the  countess  could  not  help  adopting  towards  her.  The  conn 
was  more  worried  than  ever  by  the  difficulties  of  his  position,  which  callei 
for  some  decisive  action.  It  was  necessary  to  sell  the  Moscow  house  am 
the  estate  near  Moscow,  and  to  do  so  it  was  necessary  to  go  to  Moscow 
But  the  countess’s  illness  forced  them  to  put  off  going  from  day  to  day 
Natasha,  who  had  at  first  borne  the  separation  from  her  betrothed  s<j 
easily  and  even  cheerfully,  grew  now  more  impatient  and  overstrung  ever; 
day.  The  thought  that  her  best  time,  that  might  have  been  spent  in 
loving  him,  was  being  wasted  like  this  for  no  object,  continually  frettei 
her.  Prince  Andrey’s  letters  generally  angered  her.  It  mortified  her  t| 
think  that  while  she  was  simply  living  in  the  thought  of  him,  he  wa 
living  a  real  life,  seeing  new  places  and  new  people  who  were  interestin; 
to  him.  The  more  interesting  his  letters  were,  the  more  they  vexed  hei 
Her  letters  to  him,  far  from  giving  her  comfort,  were  looked  upon  b; 
her  as  a  wearisome  and  artificial  duty.  She  could  not  write,  because  sh 
could  not  attain  to  expressing  truly  in  a  letter  a  thousandth  part  of  wha 
she  habitually  expressed  in  voice  and  smile  and  eyes.  She  wrote  hir 
formal  letters,  all  on  one  pattern.  She  did  not  attach  the  smallest  im 
portance  to  them  herself,  and  the  countess  corrected  the  mistakes  i 
spelling  in  the  rough  copy  of  them.  The  countess’s  health  still  did  nc 
mend,  but  the  visit  to  Moscow  could  be  deferred  no  longer.  The  troussea 
had  to  be  got,  the  house  had  to  be  sold,  and  Prince  Andrey  was  to  arriv 
first  in  Moscow,  where  his  father  was  spending  the  winter,  and  Natash 
believed  that  he  had  already  arrived  there.  The  countess  was  left  in  th 
country,  and  towards  the  end  of  January  the  count  took  Sonya  an 
Natasha  with  him  to  Moscow. 


PART  VIII 


I 

After  Prince  Andrey’s  engagement  to  Natasha,  Pierre  suddenly,  for  no 
apparent  reason,  felt  it  impossible  to  go  on  living  in  the  same  way  as 
before.  Firm  as  his  belief  was  in  the  truths  revealed  to  him  by  his  bene¬ 
factor,  the  old  freemason,  and  happy  as  he  had  been  at  first  in  the  task 
of  perfecting  his  inner  spiritual  self,  to  which  he  had  devoted  himself  with 
such  ardour,  yet  after  Prince  Andrey’s  engagement  to  Natasha,  and  the 
death  of  Osip  Alexyevitch,  the  news  of  which  reached  him  almost  simul¬ 
taneously,  the  whole  zest  of  his  religious  life  seemed  to  have  suddenly 
vanished.  Nothing  but  the  skeleton  of  life  remained:  his  house  with  his 
brilliant  wife,  now  basking  in  the  favours  of  a  very  grand  personage  in- 
:  deed,  the  society  of  all  Petersburg,  and  his  service  at  court  with  its 
tedious  formalities.  And  that  life  suddenly  filled  Pierre  with  unexpected 
loathing.  He  gave  up  keeping  his  diary,  avoided  the  society  of  brother- 
masons,  took  to  visiting  the  club  again  and  to  drinking  a  great  deal; 
associated  once  more  with  gay  bachelor  companions,  and  began  to 

Ilead  a  life  so  dissipated  that  Countess  Elena  Vassilyevna  thought  it 
necessary  to  make  severe  observations  to  him  on  the  subject.  Pierre  felt 
that  she  was  right;  and  to  avoid  compromising  his  wife,  he  went  away  to 
Moscow. 

In  Moscow,  as  soon  as  he  entered  his  huge  house  with  the  faded  and 
fading  princesses,  his  cousins,  and  the  immense  retinue  of  servants,  as 
.  soon  as,  driving  through  the  town,  he  saw  the  Iversky  chapel  with  the 
lights  of  innumerable  candles  before  the  golden  setting  of  the  Madonna, 
the  square  of  the  Kremlin  with  its  untrodden  snow,  the  sledge-drivers, 
and  the  hovels  of  Sivtsev  Vrazhok;  saw  the  old  Moscow  gentlemen  quietly 
going  on  with  their  daily  round,  without  hurry  or  desire  of  change; 
f  saw  the  old  Moscow  ladies,  the  Moscow  balls,  and  the  English  Club— 
he  felt  himself  at  home,  in  a  quiet  haven  of  rest.  In  Moscow  he  felt  com- 
j|  fortable,  warm,  at  home,  and  snugly  dirty,  as  in  an  old  dressing-gown, 
All  Moscow  society,  from  the  old  ladies  to  the  children,  welcomed 
Pierre  back  like  a  long-expected  guest,  whose  place  was  always  ready 
for  him,  and  had  never  been  filled  up.  For  the  Moscow  world,  Pierre 
was  the  most  delightful,  kind-hearted,  intellectual,  good-humoured,  and 
generous  eccentric,  and  a  heedless  and  genial  Russian  gentleman  of  the 
good  old  school.  His  purse  was  always  empty,  because  it  was  always  open 
to  every  one. 

Benefit-entertainments,  poor  pictures  and  statues,  benevolent  societies, 
gypsy  choruses,  schools,  subscription  dinners,  drinking  parties,  the 

S°3 


5°4  WAR  AND  PEACE 

masons,  churches,  and  books — no  one  and  nothing  ever  met  with  a  refusal, 
and  had  it  not  been  for  two  friends,  who  had  borrowed  large  sums  of 
money  from  Pierre  and  constituted  themselves  guardians  of  a  sort  over 
him,  he  would  have  parted  with  everything.  Not  a  dinner,  not  a  soiree 
took  place  at  the  club  without  him. 

As  soon  as  he  was  lolling  in  his  place  on  the  sofa,  after  a  couple  of 
bottles  of  margot,  he  was  surrounded  by  a  circle  of  friends,  and  argu¬ 
ments,  disputes,  and  jokes  sprang  up  round  him.  Where  there  were  quar¬ 
rels,  his  kindly  smile  and  casually  uttered  jokes  were  enough  to  reconcile 
the  antagonists.  The  masonic  dining  lodges  were  dull  and  dreary  when 
he  was  absent. 

WThen  after  a  bachelor  supper,  with  a  weak  and  good-natured  smile, 
he  yielded  to  the  entreaties  of  the  festive  party  that  he  would  drive  off 
with  them  to  share  their  revels,  there  were  shouts  of  delight  and  triumph. 
At  balls  he  danced  if  there  were  a  lack  of  partners.  Girls  and  young 
married  ladies  liked  him,  because  he  paid  no  special  attention  to  any  one, 
but  was  equally  amiable  to  all,  especially  after  supper.  ‘He  is  charming; 
he  is  of  no  sex,’  they  used  to  say  of  him. 

Pierre  was  just  a  kammerherr,  retired  to  end  his  days  in  Moscow,  like 
hundreds  of  others.  How  horrified  he  would  have  been  if,  seven  years 
before,  when  he  had  just  come  home  from  abroad,  any  one  had  told  him 
that  there  was  no  need  for  him  to  look  about  him  and  rack  his  brains, 
that  the  track  had  long  ago  been  trodden,  marked  out  from  all  eternity 
for  him,  and  that,  struggle  as  he  would,  he  would  be  just  such  another 
as  all  men  in  his  position.  He  could  not  have  believed  it  then!  Had  he 
not  longed  with  his  whole  heart  to  establish  a  republic  in  Russia;  then 
to  be  himself  a  Napoleon;  then  to  be  a  philosopher;  and  then  a  great 
strategist  and  the  conqueror  of  Napoleon?  Had  he  not  passionately  desired 
and  believed  in  the  regeneration  of  the  sinful  race  of  man  and  the  school¬ 
ing  of  himself  to  the  highest  point  of  perfect  virtue?  Plad  he  not  founded 
schools  and  hospitals  and  liberated  his  serfs? 

But  instead  of  all  that,  here  he  was  the  wealthy  husband  of  a  faithless 
wife,  a  retired  kammerherr,  fond  of  dining  and  drinking,  fond,  too,  as  he 
unbuttoned  his  waistcoat  after  dinner,  of  indulging  in  a  little  abuse  of 
the  government,  a  member  of  the  Moscow  English  Club,  and  a  universal 
favourite  in  Moscow  society.  For  a  long  while  he  could  not  reconcile 
himself  to  the  idea  that  he  was  precisely  the  retired  Moscow  kammerherr, 
the  very  type  he  had  so  profoundly,  scorned  seven  years  before. 

Sometimes  he  consoled  himself  by  the  reflection  that  it  did  not  count, 
that  he  was  only  temporarily  leading  this  life.  But  later  on  he  was  horri¬ 
fied  by  another  reflection,  that  numbers  of  other  men,  with  the  same 
idea  of  its  being  temporary,  had  entered  that  life  and  that  club  with  all 
their  teeth  and  a  thick  head  of  hair,  only  to  leave  it  when  they  were 
toothless  and  bald. 

In  moments  of  pride,  when  he  was  reviewing  his  position,  it  seemed 
to  him  that  he  was  quite  different,  distinguished  in  some  way  from  the 


WARANDPEACE  505 

retired  kammerherrs  he  had  looked  upon  with  contempt  in  the  past; 
that  they  were  vulgar  and  stupid,  at  ease  and  satisfied  with  their  position, 
‘while  I  am  even  now  still  dissatisfied;  I  still  long  to  do  something  for 
humanity,’  he  would  assure  himself  in  moments  of  pride.  ‘But  possibly 
all  of  them  too,  my  fellows,  struggled  just  as  I  do,  tried  after  something 
new,  sought  a  path  in  life  for  themselves,  and  have  been  brought  to  the 
same  point  as  I  have  by  the  force  of  surroundings,  of  society,  of  family, 
that  elemental  force  against  which  man  is  powerless,’  he  said  to  himself  in 
moments  of  modesty.  And  after  spending  some  time  in  Moscow  he  no 
longer  scorned  his  companions  in  destiny,  but  began  even  to  love  them, 
respect  them,  and  pity  them  like  himself. 

Pierre  no  longer  suffered  from  moments  of  despair,  melancholy,  and 
loathing  for  life  as  he  had  done.  But  the  same  malady  that  had  mani¬ 
fested  itself  in  acute  attacks  in  former  days  was  driven  inwards  and 
never  now  left  him  for  an  instant.  ‘What  for?  What’s  the  use?  What  is 
it  is  going  on  in  the  world?’  he  asked  himself  in  perplexity  several  times  a 
day,  instinctively  beginning  to  sound  the  hidden  significance  in  the  phe¬ 
nomena  of  life.  But  knowing  by  experience  that  there  was  no  answer  to 
these  questions,  he  made  haste  to  try  and  turn  away  from  them,  took 
up  a  book,  or  hurried  off  to  the  club,  or  to  Apollon  Nikolaevitch’s  to 
chat  over  the  scandals  of  the  town. 

‘Elena  Vassilyevna,  who  has  never  cared  for  anything  but  her  own 
body,  and  is  one  of  the  stupidest  women  in  the  world,’  Pierre  thought, 
‘is  regarded  by  people  as  the  acme  of  wit  and  refinement,  and  is  the 
object  of  their  homage.  Napoleon  Bonaparte  was  despised  by  every  one 
while  he  was  really  great,  and  since  he  became  a  pitiful  buffoon  the  Em¬ 
peror  Francis  seeks  to  offer  him  his  daughter  in  an  illegal  marriage. 
The  Spaniards,  through  their  Catholic  Church,  return  thanks  to  God 
for  their  victory  over  the  French  on  the  14th  of  June,  and  the  French, 
through  the  same  Catholic  Church,  return  thanks  to  God  for  their  victory 
over  the  Spaniards  on  the  same  14th  of  June.  My  masonic  brothers  swear 
in  blood  that  they  are  ready  to  sacrifice  all  for  their  neighbour,  but  they 
don’t  give  as  much  as  one  rouble  to  the  collections  for  the  poor,  and  they 
intrigue  between  Astraea  and  the  manna-seekers,  and  are  in  a  ferment 
about  the  authentic  Scottish  rug,  and  an  act,  of  which  the  man  who 
wrote  it  did  not  know  the  meaning  and  no  one  has  any  need.  We  all 
profess  the  Christian  law  of  forgiveness  of  sins  and  love  for  one’s  neigh¬ 
bour — the  law,  in  honour  of  which  we  have  raised  forty  times  forty 
churches  in  Moscow — but  yesterday  wTe  knouted  to  death  a  deserter;  and 
the  minister  of  that  same  law  of  love  and  forgiveness,  the  priest,  gave 
the  soldier  the  cross  to  kiss  before  his  punishment.’ 

Such  were  Pierre’s  reflections,  and  all  this  universal  deception  recog¬ 
nised  by  all,  used  as  he  was  to  seeing  it,  was  always  astounding  him,  as 
though  it  were  something  new.  ‘I  understand  this  deceit  and  tangle  of 
cross-purposes,’  he  thought,  ‘but  how  am  I  to  tell  them  all  I  understand? 
I  have  tried  and  always  found  that  they  understood  it  as  I  did,  at  the 


506  WARANDPEACE 

bottom  of  their  hearts,  but  were  only  trying  not  to  see  it.  So  I  suppose 
it  must  be  so!  But  me — what  refuge  is  there  for  me?’  thought  Pierre. 

He  suffered  from  an  unlucky  faculty — common  to  many  men,  espe¬ 
cially  Russians — the  faculty  of  seeing  and  believing  in  the  possibility 
of  good  and  truth,  and  at  the  same  time  seeing  too  clearly  the  evil  and 
falsity  of  life  to  be  capable  of  taking  a  serious  part  in  it.  Every  sphere 
of  activity  was  in  his  eyes  connected  with  evil  and  deception.  Whatever  he 
tried  to  be,  whatever  he  took  up,  evil  and  falsity  drove  him  back  again 
and  cut  him  off  from  every  field  of  energy.  And  meanwhile  he  had  to 
live,  he  had  to  be  occupied.  It  was  too  awful  to  lie  under  the  burden  of 
those  insoluble  problems  of  life,  and  he  abandoned  himself  to  the  first 
distraction  that  offered,  simply  to  forget  them.  He  visited  every  possible 
society,  drank  a  great  deal,  went  in  for  buying  pictures,  building,  and 
above  all  reading. 

He  read  and  re-read  everything  he  came  across.  On  getting  home 
he  would  take  up  a  book,  even  while  his  valets  were  undressing  him, 
and  read  himself  to  sleep;  and  from  sleep  turned  at  once  to  gossip  in 
the  drawing-rooms  and  the  club;  from  gossip  to  carousals  and  women; 
from  dissipation  back  again  to  gossip,  reading,  and  wine.  Wine  was  more 
and  more  becoming  a  physical  necessity  to  him,  and  at  the  same  time 
a  moral  necessity.  Although  the  doctors  told  him  that  in  view  of  his 
corpulence  wine  was  injurious  to  him,  he  drank  a  very  great  deal.  He 
never  felt  quite  content  except  when  he  had,  almost  unconsciously,  lifted 
several  glasses  of  wine  to  his  big  mouth.  Then  he  felt  agreeably  warm 
all  over  his  body,  amiably  disposed  towards  all  his  fellows,  and  mentally 
ready  to  respond  superficially  to  every  idea,  without  going  too  deeply 
into  it.  It  was  only  after  drinking  a  bottle  or  two  of  wine  that  he  felt 
vaguely  that  the  terrible  tangled  skein  of  life  which  had  terrified  him 
so  before  was  not  so  terrible  as  he  had  fancied.  With  a  buzzing  in  his 
head,  chatting,  listening  to  talk  or  reading  after  dinner  and  supper,  he 
invariably  saw  that  tangled  skein  on  some  one  of  its  sides.  It  was  only 
under  the  influence  of  wine  that  he  said  to  himself:  ‘Never  mind.  I’ll 
disentangle  it  all ;  here  I  have  a  solution  all  ready.  But  now’s  not  the  time. 
I’ll  go  into  all  that  later  on!’  But  that  later  on  never  came. 

In  the  morning,  before  breakfast,  all  the  old  questions  looked  as  in¬ 
soluble  and  fearful  as  ever,  and  Pierre  hurriedly  snatched  up  a  book 
and  rejoiced  when  any  one  came  in  to  see  him. 

Sometimes  Pierre  remembered  what  he  had  been  told  of  soldiers  under 
fire  in  ambuscade  when  they  have  nothing  to  do,  how  they  try  hard 
to  find  occupation  so  as  to  bear  their  danger  more  easily.  And  Pierre 
pictured  all  men  as  such  soldiers  trying  to  find  a  refuge  from  life:  some 
in  ambition,  some  in  cards,  some  in  framing  laws,  some  in  women,  some 
in  playthings,  some  in  horses,  some  in  politics,  some  in  sport,  some  in 
wine,  some  in  the  government  service.  ‘Nothing  is  trivial,  nothing  is  im¬ 
portant,  everything  is  the  same;  only  to  escape  from  it  as  best  one  can,’ 
thought  Pierre.  ‘Only  not  to  see  it,  that  terrible  it.’ 


At  the  beginning  of  the  winter  Prince  Nikolay  Andreitch  Bolkonsky  and 
his  daughter  moved  to  Moscow.  His  past,  his  intellect  and  originality, 
and  still  more  the  falling  off  at  about  that  time  of  the  popular  enthusiasm 
for  the  rule  of  the  Tsar  Alexander  and  the  anti-French  and  patriotic 
sentiments  then  prevailing  at  Moscow,  all  contributed  to  make  Prince 
Nikolay  Andreitch  at  once  an  object  of  peculiar  veneration  and  the 
centre  of  the  Moscow  opposition  to  the  government. 

The  prince  had  greatly  aged  during  that  year.  He  had  begun  to  show 
unmistakable  signs  of  failing  powers,  sudden  attacks  of  drowsiness,  and 
forgetfulness  of  events  nearest  in  time,  and  exact  memory  of  remote 
incidents,  and  a  childlike  vanity  in  playing  the  part  of  leader  of  the 
Moscow  opposition.  But  in  spite  of  that,  when  the  old  man  came  into 
the  drawing-room  in  the  evenings  to  tea,  in  his  wig  and  fur  coat,  and  on 
being  incited  to  do  so  by  some  one,  began  uttering  abrupt  observations 
on  the  past,  or  still  more  abrupt  and  harsh  criticisms  on  the  present — 
he  aroused  the  same  feeling  of  esteem  and  reverence  in  all  his  guests.  For 
visitors,  that  old-fashioned  house,  with  its  huge  mirrors,  pre-revolutionary 
furniture,  and  powdered  lackeys,  and  the  stern  and  shrewd  old  man, 
himself  a  relic  of  a  past  age,  with  the  gentle  daughter  and  the  pretty 
Frenchwoman,  both  so  reverently  devoted  to  him,  made  a  stately  and 
agreeable  spectacle.  But  those  visitors  did  not  reflect  that,  apart  from 
the  couple  of  hours  during  which  they  saw  the  household,  there  were 
twenty-two  hours  of  the  day  and  night  during  which  the  secret,  private 
life  of  the  house  went  on  its  accustomed  way. 

That  inner  life  had  become  very  hard  for  Princess  Marya  of  late  in 
Moscow.  She  was  deprived  in  Moscow  of  her  two  greatest  pleasures — 
talks  with  God’s  folk  and  the  solitude  which  had  refreshed  her  spirit 
it  Bleak  Hills,  and  she  had  none  of  the  advantages  and  pleasures  of 
:own  life.  She  did  not  go  into  society;  every  one  knew  that  her  father 
.vould  not  allow  her  to  go  anywhere  without  him,  and  owing,  to  his 
ailing  health  he  could  go  nowhere  himself.  She  was  not  even  invited 
low  to  dinner-parties  or  balls.  Princess  Marya  had  laid  aside  all  hopes 
>f  marriage.  She  saw  the  coldness  and  hostility  with  which  the  old  prince 
eceived  and  dismissed  the  young  men,  possible  suitors,  who  sometimes 
tppeared  at  the  house.  Friends,  Princess  Marya  now  had  none;  during 
his  stay  in  Moscow  she  had  lost  all  faith  in  the  two  friends  who  had 
teen  nearest  to  her.  Mademoiselle  Bourienne,  with  whom  she  had  never 
>een  able  to  be  perfectly  open,  she  now  regarded  with  dislike,  and  for 
ertain  reasons  kept  at  a  distance.  Julie,  with  whom  Princess  Marya 
ad  kept  up  an  unbroken  correspondence  for  five  years,  was  in  Moscow. 
V’hen  Princess  Marya  renewed  her  personal  relations  with  her,  she  felt 
er  former  friend  to  be  utterly  alien  to  her.  Julie,  who  had  become,  by 
ie  death  of  her  brothers,  one  of  the  wealthiest  heiresses  in  Moscow, 


5°8  WARANDPEACE 

was  at  that  time  engrossed  in  a  giddy  whirl  of  fashionable  amusements. 
She  was  surrounded  by  young  men,  whom  she  believed  to  have  become 
suddenly  appreciative  of  her  qualities.  Julie  was  at  that  stage  when  a 
young  lady  is  somewhat  past  her  first  youth  in  society  and  feels  that 
her  last  chance  of  marrying  has  come,  and  that  now  or  never  her  fate 
must  be  decided.  With  a  mournful  smile  Princess  Marya  reflected  every 
Thursday  that  she  had  now  no  one  to  write  to,  seeing  that  Julie  was 
here  and  saw  her  every  week,  though  her  friend’s  actual  presence  gave 
her  no  sort  of  pleasure.  Like  the  old  French  emigre,  who  declined  to  marry 
the  lady  with  whom  he  had  for  so  many  years  spent  his  evenings,  she 
regretted  that  julie  was  here  and  she  had  no  one  to  write  to.  In  Moscow 
Princess  Marya  had  no  one  to  speak  to,  no  one  to  confide  her  sorrows  to, 
and  many  fresh  sorrows  fell  to  her  lot  about  this  time.  The  time  for 
Prince  Andrey’s  return  and  marriage  was  approaching,  and  his  commission 
to  her  to  prepare  her  father’s  mind  was  so  far  from  being  successfully 
carried  out  that  the  whole  thing  seemed  hopeless;  and  any  reference 
to  the  young  Countess  Rostov  infuriated  the  old  prince,  who  was  for 
the  most  part  out  of  humour  at  all  times  now.  Another  trouble  that 
weighed  on  Princess  Marya  of  late  was  due  to  the  lessons  she  gave  to  her 
six-year-old  nephew.  In  her  relations  with  little  Nikolay  she  recognised 
to  her  consternation  symptoms  of  her  father’s  irritable  character  in  her¬ 
self.  However  often  she  told  herself  that  she  must  not  let  herself  lose 
her  temper,  when  teaching  her  nephew,  almost  every  time  she  sat  down 
with  a  pointer  showing  him  the  French  alphabet,  she  so  longed  to  hasten, 
to  make  easy  the  process  of  transferring  her  knowledge  to  the  child,  whoi 
was  by  now  always  afraid  his  auntie  would  be  angry  the  next  moment, 
that  at  the  slightest  inattention  she  was  quivering  in  nervous  haste  and 
vexation,  she  raised  her  voice  and  sometimes  pulled  him  by  his  little 
hand  and  stood  him  in  the  corner.  When  she  had  stood  him  in  the  corner 
she  would  begin  to  cry  herself  over  her  evil,  wicked  nature,  and  little 
Nikolay,  his  sobs  vying  with  hers,  would  come  unbidden  out  of  the 
corner  to  pull  her  wet  hands  from  her  face  and  try  to  comfort  her.  But 
the  greatest,  far  the  greatest  of  the  princess’s  burdens  was  her  father’s  i 
irascibility,  which  was  invariably  directed  against  his  daughter,  and  hac 
of  late  reached  the  point  of  cruelty.  Had  he  forced  her  to  spend  the 
night  bowing  to  the  ground,  had  he  beaten  her,  or  made  her  carry  ir 
wood  and  water,  it  would  never  have  entered  her  head  that  her  positior 
was  a  hard  one.  But  this  loving  despot — most  cruel  of  all  because  he 
loved,  and  for  that  very  reason  tortured  himself  and  her — knew  not  onl} 
how  to  mortify  and  humiliate  her,  but  of  set  purpose,  to  prove  to  her  tha 
she  was  always  to  blame  in  everything.  Of  late  he  had  taken  a  new  de 
parture,  which  caused  Princess  Marya  more  misery  than  anything— 
that  was  his  closer  and  closer  intimacy  with  Mademoiselle  Bourienne 
The  idea,  that  had  occurred  to  him  in  jest  at  the  first  moment  of  receivinj 
the  news  of  his  son’s  intentions,  that  if  Andrey  got  married  he,  toe 
would  marry  Mademoiselle  Bourienne,  obviously  pleased  him,  and  he  ha< 
of  late — simply,  as  Princess  Marya  fancied,  to  annoy  her — persisted  ii 


WARANDPEACE  509 

being  particularly  gracious  to  Mademoiselle  Bourienne  and  manifesting 
his  dissatisfaction  -with  his  daughter  by  demonstrations  of  love  for  the 
Frenchwoman. 

One  day  in  Princess  Marya’s  presence  (it  seemed  to  her  that  her  father 
did  it  on  purpose  because  she  was  there)  the  old  prince  kissed  Made¬ 
moiselle  Bourienne’s  hand,  and  drawing  her  to  him  embraced  her  affec¬ 
tionately.  Princess  Marya  flushed  hotly  and  ran  out  of  the  room.  A  few 
minutes  later,  Mademoiselle  Bourienne  went  into  Princess  Marya’s  room, 
smiling  and  making  some  cheerful  remarks  in  her  agreeable  voice.  Princess 
Marya  hastily  wiped  away  her  tears,  with  resolute  steps  went  up  to  the 
Frenchwoman,  and  obviously  unconscious  of  what  she  was  doing,  with 
wrathful  haste  and  breaks  in  her  voice  she  began  screaming  at  her: 

‘It’s  loathsome,  vile,  inhuman  to  take  advantage  of  feebleness  .  .  .’ 
She  could  not  go  on.  ‘Go  out  of  my  room,’  she  cried,  and  broke  into  sobs. 

The  next  day  the  old  prince  did  not  say'a  word  to  his  daughter,  But  she 
noticed  that  at  dinner  he  gave  orders  for  the  dishes  to  be  handed  to 
Mademoiselle  Bourienne  first.  When  towards  the  end  of  dinner,  the  foot¬ 
man  from  habit  handed  the  coffee,  beginning  with  the  princess,  the  old 
prince  flew  into  a  sudden  frenzy  of  rage,  flung  his  cane  at  Filipp,  and 
immediately  gave  orders  for  him  to  be  sent  for  a  soldier. 

‘He  won’t  obey  .  .  .  twice  I  told  him!  .  .  .  and  he  didn’t  obey.  She’s 
the  first  person  in  this  house,  she’s  my  best  friend,’  screamed  the  old 
prince.  ‘And  if  you  allow  yourself,’  he  shouted  in  a  fury,  for  the  first  time 
addressing  Princess  Marya,  ‘ever  again,  as  you  dared  yesterday  ...  to 
forget  yourself  in  her  presence,  I’ll  show  you  who  is  master  in  this  house. 
Away!  don’t  let  me  set  eyes  on  you!  Beg  her  pardon!’ 

Princess  Marya  begged  Amalia  Yevgenyevna’s  pardon  and  also  her 
’ather’s,  both  for  herself  and  the  footman  Filipp,  who  implored  her 
ntervention. 

At  such  moments  the  feeling  that  prevailed  in  Princess  Marya’s  soul 
vas  akin  to  the  pride  of  sacrifice.  And  all  of  a  sudden  at  such  moments, 
hat  father  whom  she  was  judging  would  look  for  his  spectacles,  fumbling 
)y  them  and  not  seeing  them,  or  would  forget  what  had  just  happened, 
>r  would  take  a  tottering  step  with  his  weak  legs,  and  look  round  to  see 
vhether  any  one  had  noticed  his  feebleness,  or  what  was  worst  of  all, 
it  dinner  when  there  were  no  guests  to  excite  him,  he  would  suddenly 
all  asleep,  letting  his  napkin  drop  and  his  shaking  head  sink  over  his 
;>late.  ‘He  is  old  and  feeble,  and  I  dare  to  judge  him!’  she  thought,  re- 
-olted  by  herself. 

Ill 

n  the  year  1811  there  was  living  in  Moscow  a  French  doctor  called 
Tetivier,  who  was  rapidly  coming  into  fashion.  He  was  a  very  tall, 
andsome  man,  polite  as  only  a  Frenchman  is,  and  was  said  by  every 
ne  in  Moscow  to  be  an  extraordinarily  clever  doctor.  He  was  received 
1  the  very  best  houses,  not  merely  as  a  doctor,  but  as  an  equal. 


5io  WARANDPEACE 

Prince  Nikolay  Andreitch  had  always  ridiculed  medicine,  but  of  late 
he  had  by  Mademoiselle  Bourienne’s  advice  allowed  this  doctor  to  see 
him,  and  had  become  accustomed  to  his  visits.  Metivier  used  to  see  the 
old  prince  twice  a  week. 

On  St.  Nikolay’s  day,  the  name-day  of  the  old  prince,  all  Moscow  was 
driving  up  to  the  approach  of  his  house,  but  he  gave  orders  for  no  one 
to  be  admitted  to  see  him.  Only  a  few  guests,  of  whom  he  gave  a  list  to 
Princess  Marya,  were  to  be  invited  to  dinner. 

Metivier,  who  arrived  in  the  morning  with  his  felicitations,  thought 
himself  as  the  old  prince’s  doctor  entitled  to  jorcer  la  consigne,  as  he  told 
Princess  Marya,  and  went  in  to  the  prince.  It  so  happened  that  on  that 
morning  of  his  name-day  the  old  prince  was  in  one  of  his  very  worst 
tempers.  He  had  spent  the  whole  morning  wandering  about  the  house, 
finding  fault  with  every  one,  and  affecting  not  to  understand  what  was 
said  to  him  and  to  be  misunderstood  by  everybody.  Princess  Marya  knew 
that  mood  well  from  subdued  and  fretful  grumbling,  which  usually  found 
vent  in  a  violent  outburst  of  fury,  and  as  though  facing  a  cocked  and 
loaded  gun,  she  went  all  the  morning  in  expectation  of  an  explosion.  The 
morning  passed  off  fairly  well,  till  the  doctor’s  arrival.  After  admitting 
the  doctor,  Princess  Marya  sat  down  with  a  book  in  the  drawing-room 
near  the  door,  where  she  could  hear  all  that  passed  in  the  prince’s  study. 

At  first  she  heard  Metivier’s  voice  alone,  then  her  father’s  voice,  then 
both  voices  began  talking  at  once.  The  door  flew  open,  and  in  the  doorway 
she  saw  the  handsome,  terrified  figure  of  Metivier  with  his  shock  of 
black  hair,  and  the  old  prince  in  a  skull-cap  and  dressing-gown,  his  face 
hideous  with  rage  and  his  eyes  lowered. 

‘You  don’t  understand,’  screamed  the  old  prince,  ‘but  I  do!  French 
spy,  slave  of  Bonaparte,  spy,  out  of  my  house — away,  I  tell  you!’  And 
he  slammed  the  door.  Metivier,  shrugging  his  shoulders,  went  up  to 
Mademoiselle  Bourienne,  who  ran  out  of  the  next  room  at  the  noise. 

‘The  prince  is  not  quite  well,  bile  and  rush  of  blood  to  the  head.  Calm 
yourself,  I  will  look  in  to-morrow,’  said  Metivier;  and  putting  his  fingers 
to  his  lips  he  hurried  off. 

Through  the  door  could  be  heard  steps  shuffling  in  slippers  and  shouts: 
‘Spies,  traitors,  traitors  everywhere!  Not  a  minute  of  peace  in  my  own 
house!  ’ 

After  Metivier’s  departure  the  old  prince  sent  for  his  daughter,  and 
the  whole  fury  of  his  passion  spent  itself  on  her.  She  was  to  blame  for 
the  spy’s  having  been  admitted  to  see  him.  Had  not  he  told  her,  told 
her  to  make  a  list,  and  that  those  not  on  the  list  were  on  no  account  to 
be  admitted?  Why  then  had  that  scoundrel  been  shown  up?  She  was  to 
blame  for  everything.  With  her  he  could  not  have  a  minute  of  peace,  could 
not  die  in  peace,  he  told  her. 

‘No,  madame,  we  must  part,  we  must  part,  I  tell  you!  I  can  put  up 
with  no  more,’  he  said,  and  went  out  of  the  room.  And  as  though  afraid 
she  might  find  some  comfort,  he  turned  back  and  trying  to  assume  an  air 
of  calmness,  he  added:  ‘And  don’t  imagine  that  I  have  said  this  in  a 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


5ii 

moment  of  temper;  no,  I’m  quite  calm  and  I  have  thought  it  well  over, 
and  it  shall  be  so — you  shall  go  away,  and  find  some  place  for  your¬ 
self!  .  .  But  he  could  not  restrain  himself,  and  with  the  vindictive 
fury  which  can  only  exist  where  a  man  loves,  obviously  in  anguish,  he 
shook  his  fists  and  screamed  at  her:  ‘Ah!  if  some  fool  would  marry  her!’ 
He  slammed  the  door,  sent  for  Mademoiselle  Bourienne,  and  subsided 
into  his  study. 

At  two  o’clock  the  six  persons  he  had  selected  arrived  to  dinner.  Those 
guests — the  celebrated  Count  Rastoptchin,  Prince  Lopuhin  and  his 
nephew,  General  Tchatrov,  an  old  comrade  of  the  prince’s  in  the  field, 
and  of  the  younger  generation  Pierre  and  Boris  Drubetskoy  were  awaiting 
him  in  the  drawing-room.  Boris,  who  had  come  on  leave  to  Moscow 
shortly  before,  had  been  anxious  to  be  presented  to  Prince  Nikolay 
Andreitch,  and  had  succeeded  in  so  far  ingratiating  himself  in  his  favour, 
that  the  old  prince  made  in  his  case  afi  exception  from  his  usual  rule 
of  excluding  all  young  unmarried  men  from  his  house. 

The  prince  did  not  receive  what  is  called  ‘society,’  but  his  house  was 
the  centre  of  a  little  circle  into  which — though  it  was  not  talked  of  much 
in  the  town — it  was  more  flattering  to  be  admitted  than  anywhere  else. 
Boris  had  grasped  that  fact  a  week  previously,  when  he  heard  Rastoptchin 
tell  the  commander-in-chief  of  Moscow,  who  had  invited  him  to  dine  on 
St.  Nikolay’s  day,  that  he  could  not  accept  his  invitation. 

‘On  that  day  I  always  go  to  pay  my  devotions  to  the  relics  of  Prince 
Nikolay  Andreitch.’ 

‘Oh  yes,  yes  .  .  assented  the  commander-in-chief.  ‘How  is  he?  .  . 

The  little  party  assembled  before  dinner  in  the  old-fashioned,  lofty 
drawing-room,  with  its  old  furniture,  was  like  the  solemn  meeting  of 
some  legal  council  board. 

All  sat  silent,  or  if  they  spoke,  spoke  in  subdued  tones.  Prince  Nikolay 
Andreitch  came  in,  serious  and  taciturn.  Princess  Marya  seemed  meeker 
and  more  timid  than  usual.  The  guests  showed  no  inclination  to  address 
their  conversation  to  her,  for  they  saw  that  she  had  no  thought  for  what 
they  were  saying.  Count  Rastoptchin  maintained  the  conversation  alone, 
relating  the  latest  news  of  the  town  and  the  political  world.  Lopuhin  and 
the  old  general  took  part  in  the  conversation  at  rare  intervals.  Prince 
Nikolay  Andreitch  listened  like  a  presiding  judge  receiving  a  report 
submitted  to  him,  only  testifying  by  his  silence,  or  from  time  to  time  by  a 
brief  word,  that  he  was  taking  cognizance  of  the  facts  laid  before  him. 

The  tone  of  the  conversation  was  based  on  the  assumption  that  no 
one  approved  of  what  was  being  done  in  the  political  world.  Incidents 
were  related  obviously  confirming  the  view  that  everything  was  going 
ijfrom  bad  to  worse.  But  in  every  story  that  was  told,  and  in  every 
criticism  that  was  offered,  what  was  striking  was  the  way  that  the  speaker 
checked  himself,  or  was  checked,  every  time  the  line  was  reached  where 
1  criticism  might  have  reference  to  the  person  of  the  Tsar  himself. 

At  dinner  the  conversation  turned  on  the  last  political  news,  Napoleon’s 
;eizure  of  the  possessions  of  the  Duke  of  Oldenburg,  and  the  Russian  note, 


512  WARANDPEACE 

hostile  to  Napoleon,  which  had  been  despatched  to  all  the  European  courts. 

‘Bonaparte  treats  all  Europe  as  a  pirate  does  a  captured  vessel,’  said 
Rastoptchin,  repeating  a  phrase  he  had  uttered  several  times  before. 
‘One  only  marvels  at  the  long-suffering  or  the  blindness  of  the  ruling 
sovereigns.  Now  it's  the  Pope’s  turn,  and  Bonaparte  doesn’t  scruple  to  try 
and  depose  the  head  of  the  Catholic  Church,  and  no  one  says  a  word. 
Our  Emperor  alone  has  protested  against  the  seizure  of  the  possessions 
of  the  Duke  of  Oldenburg.  And  even  .  .  .’  Count  Rastoptchin  broke  off, 
feeling  that  he  was  on  the  very  border  line  beyond  which  criticism  was 
impossible. 

‘Other  domains  have  been  offered  him  instead  of  the  duchy  of  Olden¬ 
burg,’  said  the  old  prince.  ‘He  shifts  the  dukes  about,  as  I  might  move 
my  serfs  from  Bleak  Hills  to  Bogutcharovo  and  the  Ryazan  estates.’ 

‘The  Duke  of  Oldenburg  supports  his  misfortune  with  admirable  force 
of  character  and  resignation,’  said  Boris,  putting  in  his  word  respectfully. 
He  said  this  because  on  his  journey  from  Petersburg  he  had  had  the 
honour  of  being  presented  to  the  duke.  The  old  prince  looked  at  the  young 
man  as  though  he  would  have  liked  to  say  something  in  reply,  but  changed 
his  mind,  considering  him  too  young. 

‘I  have  read  our  protest  about  the  Oldenburg  affair,  and  I  was  surprised 
at  how  badly  composed  the  note  was,’  said  Count  Rastoptchin  in  the 
casual  tone  of  a  man  criticising  something  with  which  he  is  very  familiar. 

Pierre  looked  at  Rastoptchin  in  naive  wonder,  unable  to  understand 
why  he  should  be  troubled  by  the  defective  composition  of  the  note. 

‘Does  it  matter  how  the  note  is  worded,  count,’  he  said,  ‘if  the  meaning 
is  forcible?’ 

‘My  dear  fellow,  with  our  five  hundred  thousand  troops,  it  should  be 
easy  to  have  a  good  style,’  said  Count  Rastoptchin. 

Pierre  perceived  the  point  of  Count  Rastoptchin’s  dissatisfaction  with 
the  wording  of  the  note. 

‘I  should  have  thought  there  were  scribblers  enough  to  write  it,’  said 
the  old  prince.  ‘Up  in  Petersburg  they  do  nothing  but  write — not  notes 
only,  but  new  laws  they  keep  writing.  My  Andryusha  up  there  has  written 
a  whole  volume  of  new  laws  for  Russia.  Nowadays  they’re  always  at  it!’  : 
And  he  laughed  an  unnatural  laugh. 

The  conversation  paused  for  a  moment;  the  old  general  cleared  his 
throat  to  draw  attention. 

‘Did  you  hear  of  the  last  incident  at  the  review  in  Petersburg?  Didn’t 
the  new  French  ambassadors  expose  themselves!’ 

‘Eh?  Yes,  I  did  hear  something;  he  said  something  awkward  in  the 
presence  of  his  majesty.’ 

‘His  majesty  drew  his  attention  to  the  grenadier  division  and  the 
parade  march,’  pursued  the  general;  ‘and  it  seems  the  ambassador  took 
no  notice  and  had  the  insolence  to  say  “We  in  France,”  says  he,  “don’t 
pay  attention  to  such  trivial  matters.”  The  emperor  did  not  vouchsafe 
him  a  reply.  At  the  review  that  followed  the  emperor,  they  say,  did  not  i 
once  deign  to  address  him.’ 


WARANDPEACE  513 

Every  one  was  silent;  upon  this  fact  which  related  to  the  Tsar  per¬ 
sonally,  no  criticism  could  be  offered. 

‘Impudent  rogues!’  said  the  old  prince.  ‘Do  you  know  Metivier?  I 
turned  him  out  of  the  house  to-day.  He  was  here,  he  was  allowed  to  come 
in,  in  spite  of  my  begging  no  one  should  be  admitted,’  said  the  old  prince, 
glancing  angrily  at  his  daughter.  And  he  told  them  his  whole  conversation 
with  the  French  doctor  and  his  reasons  for  believing  Metivier  to  be  a 
spy.  Though  his  reasons  were  very  insufficient  and  obscure,  no  one  raised 
an  objection. 

After  the  meat,  champagne  was  handed  round.  The  guests  rose  from 
their  places  to  congratulate  the  old  prince.  Princess  Marya  too  went  up 
to  him.  He  glanced  at  her  with  a  cold,  spiteful  glance,  and  offered  her 
his  shaven,  wrinkled  cheek.  The  whole  expression  of  his  face  told  her  that 
their  morning’s  conversation  was  not  forgotten,  that  his  resolution  still 
held  good,  and  that  it  was  only  owing  to  die  presence  of  their  visitors  that 
he  did  not  tell  her  so  now. 

When  they  went  into  the  drawing-room  to  coffee,  the  old  men  sat 
together. 

Prince  Nikolay  Andreitch  grew  more  animated,  and  began  to  express 
his  views  on  the  impending  war.  He  said  that  our  wars  with  Bonaparte 
would  be  unsuccessful  so  long  as  we  sought  alliances  with  the  Germans 
and  went  meddling  in  European  affairs,  into  which  we  had  been  drawn 
by  the  Peace  of  Tilsit.  We  had  no  business  to  fight  for  Austria  or  against 
Austria.  Our  political  interests  all  lay  in  the  East,  and  as  regards  Bona¬ 
parte,  the  one  thing  was  an  armed  force  on  the  frontier,  and  a  firm  policy, 
and  he  would  never  again  dare  to  cross  the  Russian  frontier,  as  he  had 
done  in  1807. 

‘And  how  should  we,  prince,  fight  against  the  French!’  said  Count 
Rastoptchin.  ‘Can  we  arm  ourselves  against  our  teachers  and  divinities? 
Look  at  our  young  men,  look  at  our  ladies.  Our  gods  are  the  French,  and 
Paris — our  Paradise.’ 

He  began  talking  more  loudly,  obviously  with  the  intention  of  being 
heard  by  every  one. 

‘Our  fashions  are  French,  our  ideas  are  French,  our  feelings  are  French! 
You  have  sent  Metivier  about  his  business  because  he’s  a  Frenchman 
and  a  scoundrel,  but  our  ladies  are  crawling  on  their  hands  and  knees 
after  him.  Yesterday  I  was  at  an  evening  party,  and  out  of  five  ladies 
three  were  Catholics  and  had  a  papal  indulgence  for  embroidering  on 
Sundays.  And  they  sitting  all  but  naked,  like  the  signboards  of  some 
public  bath-house,  if  you’ll  excuse  my  saying  so.  Ah,  when  one  looks  at 
our  young  people,  prince,  one  would  like  to  take  Peter  the  Great’s  old 
cudgel  out  of  the  museum  and  break  a  few  ribs  in  the  good  old  Russian 
style,  to  knock  the  nonsense  out  of  them!’ 

All  were  Silent.  The  old  prince  looked  at  Rastoptchin  with  a  smile  on 
his  face  and  shook  his  head  approvingly. 

‘Well,  good-bye,  your  excellency;  don’t  you  be  ill,’  said  Rastoptchin, 


514  WARANDPEACE 

getting  up  with  the  brisk  movements  characteristic  of  him,  and  holding 

out  his  hand  to  the  old  prince. 

‘Good-bye,  my  dear  fellow.  Your  talk  is  a  music  I’m  always  glad  to 
listen  to!’  said  the  old  prince,  keeping  hold  of  his  hand  and  offering  him 
his  cheek  for  a  kiss.  The  others,  too,  got  up  when  Rastoptchin  did. 


IV 

Prtncess  Marya,  sitting  in  the  drawing-room,  and  hearing  the  old  men’s 
talk  and  criticisms,  did  not  understand  a  word  of  what  she  was  hearing. 
She  thought  of  nothing  but  whether  all  their  guests  were  noticing  her 
father’s  hostile  attitude  to  her.  She  did  not  even  notice  the  marked 
attention  and  amiability  shown  her  during  the  whole  of  dinner  by  Dru- 
betskoy,  who  was  that  day  paying  them  his  third  visit. 

Princess  Marya  turned  with  an  absent-minded,  questioning  glance 
to  Pierre,  who,  with  a  smile  on  his  face,  came  up  to  her,  hat  in  hand, 
the  last  of  the  guests,  after  the  prince  had  gone  out,  and  they  were  left 
alone  together  in  the  drawing-room. 

‘Can  Ivstay  a  little  longer?’  he  said,  dropping  his  bulky  person  into  a 
low  chair  beside  Princess  Marya. 

‘Oh,  yes,’  she  said.  ‘You  noticed  nothing?’  her  eyes  asked. 

Pierre  was  in  an  agreeable,  after-dinner  mood.  He  looked  straight 
before  him  and  smiled  softly.  ‘Have  you  known  that  young  man  long, 
princess?’  he  said. 

‘Which  one?’ 

‘Drubetskoy.’ 

‘No,  not  long.  .  .  .’ 

‘Well,  do  you  like  him?’ 

‘Yes;  he’s  a  very  agreeable  young  man.  Why  do  you  ask  me?’  said 
Princess  Marya,  still  thinking  of  her  conversation  in  the  morning  with 
her  father. 

‘Because  I  have  observed,  that  when  a  young  man  comes  from  Peters¬ 
burg  to  Moscow  on  leave,  it  is  invariably  with  the  object  of  marrying 
an  heiress.’ 

‘Have  you  observed  that?’  said  Princess  Marya. 

‘Yes,’  Pierre  went  on  with  a  smile,  ‘and  that  young  man  now  manages 
matters  so  that  wherever  there  are  wealthy  heiresses — there  he  is  to  be 
found.  I  can  read  him  like  a  book.  He  is  hesitating  now  which  to  attack, 
you  or  Mademoiselle  Julie  Karagin.  He  is  very  attentive  to  her.’ 

‘Does  he  visit  them?’ 

‘Yes,  very  often.  And  do  you  know  the  new-fashioned  method  of 
courting?’  said  Pierre,  smiling  good-humouredly,  and  obviously  feeling  1 
in  that  light-hearted  mood  of  good-natured  irony,  for  which  he  had  so  ■ 
often  reproached  himself  in  his  diary. 

‘No,’  said  Princess  Marya. 


WARANDPEACE  5*5 

‘To  please  the  Moscow  girls  nowadays  one  has  to  be  melancholy.  He 
is  very  melancholy  with  Mademoiselle  Karagin,’  said  Pierre. 

‘Really!’  said  Princess  Marya,  looking  at  the  kindly  face  of  Pierre, 
and  thinking  all  the  time  of  her  own  trouble.  ‘It  would  ease  my  heart,’ 
she  was  thinking,  ‘if  I  could  make  up  my  mind  to  confide  all  I  am  feeling 
to  some  one.  And  it  is  just  Pierre  I  should  like  to  tell  it  all  to.  He  is  so 
kind  and  generous.  It  would  ease  my  heart.  He  would  give  me  advice.’ 

‘Would  you  marry  him?’  asked  Pierre. 

‘O  my  God,  count!  there  are  moments  when  I  would  marry  any  one’ — 
to  her  own  surprise  Princess  Marya  said,  with  tears  in  her  voice.  ‘Ah! 
how  bitter  it  is  to  love  some  one  near  to  one  and  to  feel,’  she  went  on 
in  a  shaking  voice,  ‘that  you  can  do  nothing  for  him,  but  cause  him 
sorrow,  and  when  you  know  you  cannot  alter  it.  There’s  only  one  thing 
— to  go  away,  and  where  am  I  to  go?’ 

‘What  is  wrong?  what  is  the  matter  with  you,  princess?’ 

But  Princess  Marya,  without  explaining  further,  burst  into  tears. 

‘I  don’t  know  what  is  the  matter  with  me  to-day.  Don’t  take  any 
notice  of  me,  forget  what  I  said  to  you.’ 

All  Pierre’s  gaiety  had  vanished.  He  questioned  the  princess  anxiously, 
begged  her  to  speak  out,  to  confide  her  trouble  to  him.  But  she  would 
only  repeat  that  she  begged  him  to  forget  what  she  had  said,  that  she 
did  not  remember  what  she  had  said,  and  that  she  had  no  trouble  except 
the  one  he  knew — her  anxiety  lest  Prince  Andrey’s  marriage  should 
cause  a  breach  between  him  and  his  father. 

‘Have  you  heard  anything  of  the  Rostovs?’  she  asked  to  change  the 
subject.  ‘I  was  told  they  would  soon  be  here.  I  expect  Andrey,  too, 
every  day.  I  should  have  liked  them  to  see  each  other  here.’ 

‘And  how  does  he  look  at  the  matter  now?’  said  Pierre,  meaning  by  he 
the  old  prince.  Princess  Marya  shook  her  head. 

‘But  it  can’t  be  helped.  There  are  only  a  few  months  left  now  before 
the  year  is  over.  And  it  can’t  go  on  like  this.  I  should  only  have  liked 
to  spare  my  brother  the  first  minutes.  I  could  have  wished  they  were 
coming  sooner.  I  hope  to  get  to  know  her  well.  .  .  .  You  have  known 
them  a  long  while,’  said  Princess  Marya.  ‘Tell  me  the  whole  truth,  speak¬ 
ing  quite  seriously.  What  sort  of  a  girl  is  she,  and  how  do  you  like  her? 
But  the  whole  truth,  because,  you  see,  Andrey  is  risking  so  much  in  doing 
this  against  our  father’s  will,  that  I  should  like  to  know  .  .  .’ 

A  vague  instinct  told  Pierre  that  these  pleas  and  repeated  requests  to 
him  to  tell  her  the  whole  truth  betrayed  Princess  Marya ’s  ill-will  towards 
her  future  sister-in-law,  that  she  wanted  Pierre  not  to  approve  of  Prince 
Andrey’s  choice;  but  Pierre  said  what  he  felt  rather  than  what  he 
thought.  ‘I  don’t  know  how  to  answer  your  question,’  said  he,  blushing 
though  he  could  not  have  said  why  himself.  'I  really  don’t  know  what 
kind  of  girl  she  is.  I  can’t  analyse  her.  She’s  fascinating;  and  why  she  is, 
I  don’t  know;  that’s  all  that  one  can  say  about  her.’ 

Princess  Marya  sighed,  and  her  face  expressed:  ‘Yes;  that’s  what  I 
expected  and  feared.’ 


516  WAR  AND  PEACE 

.  ‘Is  she  clever?’  asked  Princess  Marya.  Pierre  thought  a  moment. 

‘I  suppose  not,’  he  said.  ‘Yes,  though.  She  does  not  think  it  worth 
while  to  be  clever.  .  .  .  Yes,  no;  she  is  fascinating,  and  nothing  more.’ 
Princess  Marya  again  shook  her  head  disapprovingly. 

‘Ah,  I  do  so  want  to  like  her!  You  tell  her  so  if  you  see  her  before  I  do.’ 
‘I  have  heard  that  they  will  be  here  in  a  few  days,’  said  Pierre. 
Princess  Marya  told  Pierre  her  plan  of  getting  to  know  her  future 
sister-in-law  as  soon  as  the  Rostovs  arrived,  and  trying  to  get  the  old 
prince  accustomed  to  her. 


V 

Boris  had  not  succeeded  in  marrying  a  wealthy  heiress  in  Petersburg, 
and  it  was  with  that  object  that  he  had  come  to  Moscow.  In  Moscow 
Boris  found  himself  hesitating  between  two  of  the  wealthiest  heiresses, — 
Julie  and  Princess  Marya.  Though  Princess  Marya,  in  spite  of  her  plain¬ 
ness,  seemed  to  him  anyway  more  attractive  than  Julie,  he  felt  vaguely 
awkward  in  paving  court  to  the  former.  In  his  last  conversation  with 
her,  on  the  old  prince’s  name-day,  she  had  met  all  his  attempts  to  talk 
of  the  emotions  with  irrelevant  replies,  and  had  obviously  not  heard 
what  he  was  saying. 

Julie,  on  the  contrary,  received  his  attentions  eagerly,  though  she 
showed  it  in  a  peculiar  fashion  of  her  own. 

Julie  was  seven-and-twenty.  By  the  death  of  her  two  brothers  she 
had  become  extremely  wealthy.  She  had  by  now  become  decidedly  plain. 
But  she  believed  herself  to  be  not  merely  as  pretty  as  ever,  but  actually 
far  more  attractive  than  she  had  ever  been.  She  was  confirmed  in  this 
delusion  by  having  become  a  very  wealthy  heiress,  and  also  by  the  fact 
that  as  she  grew  older  her  society  involved  less  risk  for  men,  and  they 
could  behave  with  more  freedom  in  their  intercourse  with  her,  and  could 
profit  by  her  suppers,  her  soirees,  and  the  lively  society  that  gathered 
about  her,  without  incurring  any  obligations  to  her.  A  man  who  would 
have  been  afraid  of  going  ten  years  before  to  a  house  where  there  was 
a  young  girl  of  seventeen,  for  fear  of  compromising  her  and  binding 
himself,  would  now  boldly  visit  her  every  day,  and  treat  her  not  as  a 
marriageable  girl,  but  as  an  acquaintance  of  no  sex. 

The  Karagins’  house  was  that  winter  one  of  the  most  agreeable  and 
hospitable  houses  in  Moscow.  In  addition  to  the  dinner-parties  and 
soirees,  to  which  guests  came  by  invitation,  there  were  every  day  large 
informal  gatherings  at  the  Karagins’,  principally  of  men,  who  had  supper 
there  at  midnight  and  stayed  on  till  three  o’clock  in  the  morning.  Julie 
did  not  miss  a  single  ball,  entertainment,  or  theatre.  Her  dresses  were 
always  of  the  most  fashionable.  But  in  spite  of  that,  Julie  appeared  to 
have  lost  all  illusions,  told  every  one  that  she  had  no  faith  in  love  or 
friendship,  or  any  of  the  joys  of  life,  and  looked  for  consolation  only  to 
the  realm  beyond.  She  had  adopted  the  tone  of  a  girl  who  has  suffered  a 


WARANDPEACE  5*7 

great  disappointment,  a  girl  who  has  lost  her  lover  or  been  cruelly  de¬ 
ceived  by  him.  Though  nothing  of  the  kind  had  ever  happened  to  her, 
she  was  looked  upon  as  having  been  disappointed  in  that  way,  and  she 
did  in  fact  believe  herself  that  she  had  suffered  a  great  deal  in  her  life. 
This  melancholy  neither  hindered  her  from  enjoying  herself  nor  hindered 
young  men  from  spending  their  time  very  agreeably  in  her  society.  Every 
guest  who  visited  at  the  house  paid  his  tribute  to  the  melancholy  temper 
of  the  hostess,  and  then  proceeded  to  enjoy  himself  in  society  gossip, 
dancing,  intellectual  games,  or  bouts  rimes  which  were  in  fashion  at  the 
Karagins’.  A  few  young  men  only,  among  them  Boris,  entered  more 
deeply  into  Julie’s  melancholy,  and  with  these  young  men  she  had  more 
prolonged  and  secluded  conversations  on  the  nothingness  of  all  things 
earthly,  and  to  them  she  opened  her  albums,  full  of  mournful  sketches, 
sentences,  and  verses. 

Julie  was  particularly  gracious  to  Boris.  She  deplored  his  early  disil¬ 
lusionment  with  life,  offered  him  those  consolations  of  friendship  she 
was  so  well  able  to  offer,  having  herself  suffered  so  cruelly  in  life,  and 
opened  her  album  to  him.  Boris  sketched  two  trees  in  her  album,  and 
wrote  under  them:  ‘Rustic  trees,  your  gloomy  branches  shed  darkness 
and  melancholy  upon  me.’ 

In  another  place  he  sketched  a  tomb  and  inscribed  below  it:  — 

‘Death  is  helpful,  and  death  is  tranquil, 

Ah,  there  is  no  other  refuge  from  sorrow!’ 

Julie  said  that  couplet  was  exquisite. 

‘There  is  something  so  ravishing  in  the  smile  of  melancholy,’  she  said 
to  Boris,  repeating  word  for  word  a  passage  copied  from  a  book.  ‘It  is  a 
ray  of  light  in  the  shadow,  a  blend  between  grief  and  despair,  which 
shows  consolation  possible.’ 

Upon  that  Boris  wrote  her  the  following  verses  in  French: — 

‘Poisonous  nourishment  of  a  soul  too  sensitive, 

Thou,  without  whom  happiness  would  be  impossible  to  me, 

Tender  melancholy,  ah,  come  and  console  me, 

Come,  calm  the  torments  of  my  gloomy  retreat, 

And  mingle  a  secret  sweetness  with  the  tears  I  feel  flowing.’ 

Julie  played  to  Boris  the  most  mournful  nocturnes  on  the  harp.  Boris 
read  aloud  to  her  the  romance  of  Poor  Liza,  and  more  than  once  broke 
down  in  reading  it  from  the  emotion  that  choked  his  utterance.  When 
they  met  in  general  society  Julie  and  Boris  gazed  at  one  another  as 
though  they  were  the  only  people  existing  in  the  world,  disillusioned  and 
comprehending  each  other. 

Anna  Mihalovna,  who  often  visited  the  Karagins,  took  a  hand  at  cards 
with  the  mother,  and  meanwhile  collected  trustworthy  information  as 
to  the  portion  that  Julie  would  receive  on  her  marriage  (her  dowry  was 
to  consist  of  two  estates  in  the  Penza  province  and  forests  in  the  Nizhni- 


51S  WARANDPEACE 

gorod  province).  With  tender  emotion  and  deep  resignation  to  the  will 
of  Providence,  Anna  Mihalovna  looked  on  at  the  refined  sadness  that 
united  her  son  to  the  wealthy  Julie. 

‘Still  as  charming  and  as  melancholy  as  ever,  my  sweet  Julie,’  she 
would  say  to  the  daughter.  ‘Boris  says  he  finds  spiritual  refreshment  in 
your  house.  He  has  suffered  such  cruel  disillusionment,  and  he  is  so 
sensitive,’  she  would  say  to  the  mother. 

‘Ah,  my  dear,  how  attached  I  have  grown  to  Julie  lately,’  she  would 
say  to  her  son,  ‘I  can’t  tell  you.  But,  indeed,  who  could  help  loving  her! 
A  creature  not  of  this  earth!  Ah,  Boris!  Boris!  ’  She  paused  for  a  moment. 
‘And  how  I  feel  for  her  mother,’  she  would  go  on.  ‘She  showed  me  to-day 
the  letters  and  accounts  from  Penza  (they  have  an  immense  estate  there), 
and  she,  poor  thing,  with  no  one  to  help  her.  They  do  take  such  advan¬ 
tage  of  her! ’ 

Boris  heard  his  mother  with  a  faintly  perceptible  smile.  He  laughed 
blandly  at  her  simple-hearted  wiles,  but  he  listened  to  her  and  some¬ 
times  questioned  her  carefully  about  the  Penza  and  Nizhnigorod  estates. 

Julie  had  long  been  expecting  an  offer  from  her  melancholy  adorer, 
and  was  fully  prepared  to  accept  it.  But  a  sort  of  secret  feeling  of  repul¬ 
sion  for  her,  for  her  passionate  desire  to  be  married,  for  her  affectation, 
and  a  feeling  of  horror  at  renouncing  all  possibility  of  real  love  made 
Boris  still  delay.  The  term  of  his  leave  was  drawing  to  a  close.  Whole 
days  at  a  time,  and  every  day  he  spent  at  the  Karagins’;  and  each  day 
Boris  resolved,  as  he  thought  things  over,  that  he  would  make  an  offer 
on  the  morrow.  But  in  Julie’s  presence,  as  he  watched  her  red  face  and 
her  chin,  almost  always  sprinkled  with  powder,  her  moist  eyes,  and  the 
expression  of  her  countenance,  which  betokened  a  continual  readiness 
to  pass  at  once  from  melancholy  to  the  unnatural  ecstasies  of  conjugal 
love,  Boris  could  not  utter  the  decisive  word,  although  in  imagination 
he  had  long  regarded  himself  as  the  owner  of  the  Penza  and  Nizhnigorod 
estates,  and  had  disposed  of  the  expenditure  of  their  several  revenues. 
Julie  saw  the  hesitation  of  Boris,  and  the  idea  did  sometimes  occur  to  her 
that  she  was  distasteful  to  him.  But  feminine  self-flattery  promptly  af¬ 
forded  her  comfort,  and  she  assured  herself  that  it  was  love  that  made 
him  retiring.  Her  melancholy  was,  however,  beginning  to  pass  into  irri¬ 
tability,  and  not  long  before  the  end  of  Boris’s  leave  she  adopted  a  de¬ 
cisive  plan  of  action.  Just  before  the  expiration  of  Boris’s  leave  there 
appeared  in  Moscow,  and — it  need  hardly  be  said — also  in  the  drawing¬ 
room  of  the  Karagins’,  no  less  a  person  than  Anatole  Kuragin,  and  Julie, 
abruptly  abandoning  her  melancholy,  became  exceedingly  lively  and 
cordial  to  Kuragin. 

‘My  dear,’  said  Anna  Mihalovna  to  her  son,  ‘I  know  from  a  trust¬ 
worthy  source  that  Prince  Vassily  is  sending  his  son  to  Moscow  to  marry 
him  to  Julie.  I  am  so  fond  of  Julie  that  I  should  be  most  sorry  for  her. 
What  do  you  think  about  it,  my  dear?’  said  Anna  Mihalovna. 

Boris  was  mortified  at  the  idea  of  being  unsuccessful,  of  having  wasted 
all  that  month  of  tedious,  melancholy  courtship  of  Julie,  and  of  seeing  all 


WARANDPEACE  5*9 

the  revenues  of  those  Penza  estates — which  he  had  mentally  assigned 
to  the  various  purposes  for  which  he  needed  them — pass  into  other  hands, 
especially  into  the  hands  of  that  fool  Anatole.  He  drove  off  to  the  Kara- 
gins’  with  the  firm  determination  to  make  an  offer.  Julie  met  him  with  a 
gay  and  careless  face,  casually  mentioned  how  much  she  had  enjoyed 
the  ball  of  the  evening,  and  asked  him  when  he  was  leaving.  Although 
Boris  had  come  with  the  intention  of  speaking  of  his  love,  and  was  there¬ 
fore  resolved  to  take  a  tender  tone,  he  began  to  speak  irritably  of  the 
fickleness  of  woman;  saying  that  women  could  so  easily  pass  from  sad¬ 
ness  to  joy,  and  their  state  of  mind  depended  entirely  on  what  sort  of 
man  happened  to  be  paying  them  attention.  Julie  was  offended,  and  said 
that  that  was  quite  true,  indeed,  that  a  woman  wanted  variety,  and  that 
always  the  same  thing  would  bore  any  one. 

‘Then  I  would  advise  you  .  .  Boris  was  beginning,  meaning  to  say 
something  cutting;  but  at  that  instant  the  mortifying  reflection  occurred 
to  him  that  he  might  leave  Moscow  without  having  attained  his  object, 
and  having  wasted  his  efforts  in  vain  (an  experience  he  had  never  had 
yet).  He  stopped  short  in  the  middle  of  a  sentence,  dropped  his  eyes,  to 
avoid  seeing  her  disagreeably  exasperated  and  irresolute  face,  and  said, 
‘But  it  was  not  to  quarrel  with  you  that  I  have  come  here.  On  the  con¬ 
trary  .  .  He  glanced  at  her  to  make  sure  whether  he  could  go  on.  All 
irritation  had  instantly  vanished  from  her  face,  and  her  uneasy  and 
imploring  eyes  were  fastened  upon  him  in  greedy  expectation. 

‘I  can  always  manage  so  as  to  see  very  little  of  her,’  thought  Boris. 
‘And  the  thing’s  been  begun  and  must  be  finished!’  He  flushed  crimson, 
raised  his  eyes  to  her  face,  and  said  to  her,  ‘You  know  my  feeling  for 
you!’  There  was  no  need  to  say  more.  Julie’s  countenance  beamed  with 
triumph  and  self-satisfaction;  but  she  forced  Boris  to  say  everything  that 
is  usually  said  on  such  occasions,  to  say  that  he  loved  her,  and  had  never 
loved  any  woman  more  than  her.  She  knew  that  for  her  Penza  estates  and 
her  Nizhnigorod  forests  she  could  demand  that,  and  she  got  all  she  de¬ 
manded. 

The  young  engaged  couple,  with  no  further  allusions  to  trees  that 
enfolded  them  in  gloom  and  melancholy,  made  plans  for  a  brilliant  estab¬ 
lishment  in  Petersburg,  paid  visits,  and  made  every  preparation  for  a 
splendid  wedding. 

VI 

Count  Ilya  Andreitch  Rostov  arrived  in  Moscow  towards  the  end  of 
January  with  Natasha  and  Sonya.  The  countess  was  still  unwell,  and 
unable  to  travel,  but  they  could  not  put  off  coming  till  she  recovered, 
for  Prince  Andrey  was  expected  in  Moscow  every  day.  They  had,  besides, 
to  order  the  trousseau,  to  sell  the  estate  in  the  suburbs  of  Moscow,  and 
to  take  advantage  of  old  Prince  Bolkonsky’s  presence  in  Moscow  to 
present  his  future  daughter-in-law  to  him.  The  Rostovs’  house  in  Moscow 
had  not  been  heated  all  the  winter;  and  as  they  were  coming  only  for 


520  WARANDPEACE 

a  short  time,  and  the  countess  was  not  with  them,  Count  Ilya  Andreitch 
made  up  his  mind  to  stay  with  Marya  Dmitryevna  Ahrostimov,  who  had 
long  been  pressing  her  hospitality  upon  the  count. 

Late  in  the  evening  the  four  loaded  sledges  of  the  Rostovs  drove  into 
the  courtyard  of  Marya  Dmitryevna  in  Old  Equerrys’  Place.  Marya 
Dmitryevna  lived  alone.  She  had  by  now  married  off  her  daughter.  Her 
sons  were  all  in  the  service. 

She  still  held  herself  as  erect;  still  gave  every  one  her  opinions  in  the 
same  loud,  outspoken,  decided  fashion;  and  her  whole  bearing  seemed 
a  reproof  to  other  people  for  every  sort  of  weakness,  passion,  and  tempta¬ 
tion,  of  which  she  would  not  admit  the  bare  possibility.  In  the  early 
morning,  in  a  house-jacket,  she  looked  after  the  management  of  her 
household.  Then  she  drove  on  saints’  days  to  Mass,  and  from  Mass  to 
the  gaols  and  prisons;  and  of  what  she  did  there,  she  never  spoke  to  any 
one. 

On  ordinary  days  she  dressed  and  received  petitioners  of  various 
classes,  of  whom  some  sought  her  aid  every  day.  Then  she  had  dinner, 
an  abundant  and  appetising  meal,  at  which  some  three  or  four  guests 
were  always  present.  After  dinner  she  played  a  game  of  boston;  and  at 
night  had  the  newspapers  and  new  books  read  aloud  to  her  while  she 
knitted.  It  was  only  as  a  rare  exception  that  she  went  out  in  the  evening; 
if  she  did  so,  it  was  only  to  visit  the  most  important  people  in  the  town. 

She  had  not  gone  to  bed  when  the  Rostovs  arrived,  and  the  door  in  the 
vestibule  squeaked  on  the  block,  as  the  Rostovs  and  their  servants  came 
in  from  the  cold  outside.  Marya  Dmitryevna  stood  in  the  doorway  of 
the  hall,  with  her  spectacles  slipping  down  on  her  nose,  and  her  head  flung 
back,  looking  with  a  stern  and  irate  face  at  the  new-comers.  It  might  have 
been  supposed  that  she  was  irritated  at  their  arrival,  and  would  pack 
them  off  again  at  once,  had  she  not  at  the  very  time  been  giving  careful 
instructions  to  her  servants  where  to  install  her  guests  and  their  be¬ 
longings. 

‘The  count’s  things?  Bring  them  here,’  she  said,  pointing  to  the  trunks, 
and  not  bestowing  a  greeting  on  any  one.  ‘The  young  ladies,  this  way  to 
the  left.  Well,  what  are  we  pottering  about  for?’  she  called  to  her  maids. 
‘Warm  the  samovar!  She’s  plumper,  prettier,’  she  pronounced  of  Natasha, 
flushed  from  the  frosty  air,  as  she  drew  her  closer  by  her  hood.  ‘Foo!  she 
is  cold!  You  make  haste  and  get  your  wraps  off,’  she  shouted  to  the  count, 
who  would  have  kissed  her  hand.  ‘You’re  frozen,  I  warrant.  Rum  for  the 
tea!  Sonyushka,  bonjour,’  she  said  to  Sonya,  indicating  by  this  French 
phrase  the  slightly  contemptuous  affectionateness  of  her  attitude  to 
Sonya. 

When  they  had  all  taken  off  their  outdoor  things,  set  themselves  straight 
after  the  journey,  and  come  in  to  tea,  Marya  Dmitryevna  kissed  them 
all  in  due  course. 

‘Heartily  glad  you  have  come,  and  are  staying  with  me,’  she  said.  ‘It’s 
long  been  time  you  were  here,’  she  said,  with  a  significant  glance  at 
Natasha.  .  .  .  ‘The  old  fellow’s  here,  and  his  son’s  expected  from  day  to 


WAR  AND  PEACE  521 

day.  You  must,  you  must  make  their  acquaintance.  Oh,  well,  we  shall 
talk  of  that  later  on,’  she  added,  with  a  glance  at  Sonya,  showing  that 
she  did  not  care  to  talk  of  it  before  her.  ‘Now,  listen,’  she  turned  to  the 
count,  ‘what  do  you  want  to  do  to-morrow?  Whom  will  you  send  for? 
Shinshin?’ — she  crooked  one  finger.  ‘The  tearful  Anna  Mihalovna — two. 
She’s  here  with  her  son.  The  son’s  to  be  married  too!  Then  Bezuhov. 
He’s  here,  too,  with  his  wife.  He  ran  away  from  her,  and  she  has  come 
trotting  after  him.  He  dined  with  me  last  Wednesday.  Well,  and  I’ll  take 
them’ — she  indicated  the  young  ladies — ‘to-morrow  to  Iversky  chapel, 
and  then  we  shall  go  to  Aubert-Chalmey.  You’ll  be  getting  everything 
now,  I  expect!  Don’t  judge  by  me — the  sleeves  nowadays  are  like  this! 
The  other  day  the  young  princess,  Irina  Vassilyevna,  came  to  see  me, 
just  as  though  she  had  put  two  barrels  on  her  arms,  a  dreadful  fright. 
Every  day  there’s  a  new  fashion.  And  what  sort  of  business  is  it  you 
have  come  for  yourself?’  she  said  severely,  addressing  the  count. 

‘Everything  has  come  together,’  answered  the  count.  ‘There’s  the  girl’s 
rags  to  buy;  and  now  there’s  a  purchaser  turned  up  for  the  Moscow 
estate  and  the  house.  If  you’ll  graciously  permit  it,  I’ll  choose  an  oppor¬ 
tunity  and  drive  over  to  Maryinskoe  for  a  day,  leaving  my  girls  on  your 
hands.’ 

‘Very  good,  very  good,  they’ll  be  safe  enough  with  me.  I’m  as  safe 
as  the  Mortgage  Bank.  I’ll  take  them  where  they  must  go,  and  scold  them 
and  pet  them  too,’  said  Marya  Dmitryevna,  putting  her  big  hand  on 
the  cheek  of  her  favourite  and  god-daughter  Natasha. 

Next  morning  Marya  Dmitryevna  bore  the  young  ladies  off  to  Iversky 
chapel  and  to  Madame  Aubert-Chalmey,  who  was  so  frightened  of  Marya 
Dmitryevna  that  she  always  sold  her  dresses  at  a  loss  simply  to  get  rid 
of  her  as  soon  as  possible.  Marya  Dmitryevna  ordered  almost  the  whole 
trousseau.  On  their  return,  she  sent  every  one  out  of  the  room  but 
Natasha,  and  called  her  favourite  to  sit  beside  her  arm-chair. 

‘Well,  now  we  can  have  a  chat.  I  congratulate  you  on  your  betrothed. 
A  fine  fellow  you  have  hooked!  I’m  glad  of  it  for  your  sake,  and  I  have 
known  him  since  he  was  that  high’ — she  held  her  hand  a  yard  from  the 
floor.  Natasha  flushed  joyfully.  ‘I  like  him  and  all  his  family.  Now,  listen! 

IYou  know,  of  course,  that  old  Prince  Nikolay  was  very  much  against  his 
son’s  marrying.  He’s  a  whimsical  old  fellow!  Of  course,  Prince  Andrey 
is  not  a  child,  he  can  get  on  without  him,  but  to  enter  a  family  against  the 
father’s  will  is  not  a  nice  thing  to  do.  One  wants  peace  and  love  in  a 
family.  You’re  a  clever  girl,  you’ll  know  how  to  manage  things.  You 
must  use  your  wits  and  your  kind  heart.  And  every  thing  will  come  right.’ 

Natasha  was  silent,  not  as  Marya  Dmitryevna  supposed  ^rom  shyness. 
In  reality  Natasha  disliked  any  one’s  interfering  in  what  touched  her 
love  for  Prince  Andrey,  which  seemed  to  her  something  so  apart  from 
all  human  affairs,  that  no  one,  as  she  imagined,  could  understand  it.  She 
loved  Prince  Andrey,  and  only  him,  and  knew  only  him;  he  loved  her, 
and  was  to  arrive  in  a  day~  or  two  and  carry  her  off.  She  did  not  care 
about  anything  else. 


522  WAR  AND  PEACE. 

I  have  known  him  a  long  while,  do  you  see;  and  Masha,  your  sister- 
in-law,  I  love.  Sisters-in-law  are  said  to  be  mischief-makers,  but  she — 
well,  she  wouldn’t  hurt  a  fly.  She  has  begged  me  to  bring  you  two  together. 
1  ou  must  go  to  see  her  to-morrow  with  your  father,  and  be  as  nice  as 
possible;  you  are  younger  than  she  is.  By  the  time  your  young  man  comes 
back,  you  11  be  friends  with  his  sister  and  his  father,  and  they  will  have 
learned  to  love  you.  Yes  or  no?  It  will  be  better  so,  eh?’ 

‘Oh  yes!’  Natasha  responded  reluctantly. 


VII 

Next  day,  by  the  advice  of  Marya  Dmitryevna,  Count  Ilya  Andreitch 
went  with  Natasha  to  call  on  Prince  Nikolay  Andreitch.  The  count  pre¬ 
pared  for  the  visit  by  no  means  in  a  cheerful  spirit:  in  his  heart  he  was 
afraid.  Count  Ilya  Andreitch  had  a  vivid  recollection  of  his  last  inter¬ 
view  with  the  old  prince  at  the  time  of  the  levying  of  the  militia,  when, 
in  reply  to  his  invitation  to  dinner,  he  had  had  to  listen  to  a  heated  repri¬ 
mand  for  furnishing  less  than  the  required  number  of  men.  Natasha  in 
her  best  dress  was,  on  the  contrary,  in  the  most  cheerful  frame  of  mind. 
‘They  can’t  help  liking  me,’  she  thought;  ‘every  one  always  does  like 
me.  And  I’m  so  ready  to  do  anything  they  please  for  them,  so  readily  to 
love  them — him  for  being  his  father,  and  her  for  being  his  sister— they 
can  have  no  reason  for  not  loving  me!’ 

They  drove  to  the  gloomy  old  house  in  Vosdvizhenka,  and  went  into 
the  vestibule. 

‘Well  now,  with  God’s  blessing,’  said  the  count,  half  in  jest,  half  in 
earnest.  But  Natasha  noticed  that  her  father  was  in  a  nervous  fidget  as 
he  went  into  the  entry,  and  asked  timidly  and  softly  whether  the  prince 
and  the  princess  were  at  home.  After  their  arrival  had  been  announced, 
there  was  some  perturbation  visible  among  the  prince’s  servants.  The 
footman,  who  was  running  to  announce  them,  was  stopped  by  another 
footman  in  the  big  hall,  and  they  whispered  together.  A  maid-servant 
ran  into  the  hall,  and  hurriedly  said  something,  mentioning  the  princess. 
At  last  one  old  footman  came  out  with  a  wrathful  air,  and  announced  to 
the  Rostovs  that  the  prince  was  not  receiving,  but  the  princess  begged 
them  to  walk  up.  The  first  person  to  meet  the  visitors  was  Mademoiselle 
Bourienne.  She  greeted  the  father  and  daughter  with  marked  courtesy, 
and  conducted  them  to  the  princess’s  apartment.  The  princess,  with  a 
frightened  and  agitated  face,  flushed  in  patches,  ran  in,  treading  heavily, 
to  meet  her  visitors,  doing  her  best  to  seem  cordial  and  at  ease.  From  the 
first  glance  Princess  Marya  disliked  Natasha.  She  thought  her  too  fash¬ 
ionably  dressed,  too  frivolously  gay  and  vain.  Princess  Marya  had  no 
idea  that  before  she  had  seen  her  future  sister-in-law  she  had  been  un¬ 
favourably  disposed  to  her,  through  unconscious  envy  of  her  beauty,  her 
youth,  and  her  happiness,  and  through  jealousy  of  her  brother’s  love  for 
her.  Apart  from  this  insuperable  feeling  of  antipathy  to  her,  Princess 


WARANDPEACE  523 

Marya  was  at  that  moment  agitated  by  the  fact  that  on  the  Rostovs 
having  been  announced  the  old  prince  had  shouted  that  he  didn’t  want 
to  see  them,  that  Princess  Marya  could  see  them  if  she  chose,  but  they 
were  not  to  be  allowed  in  to  see  him.  Princess  Marya  resolved  to  see  the 
Rostovs,  but  she  was  every  instant  in  dread  of  some  freak  on  the  part  of 
the  old  prince,  as  he  had  appeared  greatly  excited  by  the  arrival  of  the 
Rostovs. 

‘Well,  here  I  have  brought  you  my  songstress,  princess,’  said  the  count, 
bowing  and  scraping,  while  he  looked  round  uneasily  as  though  he  were 
afraid  the  old  prince  might  come  in.  ‘How  glad  I  am  that  you  should 
make  friends.  .  .  .  Sorry,  very  sorry,  the  prince  is  still  unwell’;  and 
uttering  a  few  more  stock  phrases,  he  got  up.  ‘If  you’ll  allow  me,  princess, 
to  leave  you  my  Natasha  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  I  will  drive  round- 
only  a  few  steps  from  here — to  Dogs’  Square  to  see  Anna  Semyonovna, 
and  then  come  back  for  her.’ 

Count  Ilya  Andreitch  bethought  himself  of  this  diplomatic  stratagem 
to  give  the  future  sisters-in-law  greater  freedom  to  express  their  feelings 
to  one  another  (so  he  told  his  daughter  afterwards),  but  also  to  avoid 
the  possibility  of  meeting  the  prince,  of  whom  he  was  afraid.  He  did  not 
tell  his  daughter  this;  but  Natasha  perceived  this  dread  and  uneasiness 
of  her  father’s,  and  felt  mortified  by  it.  She  blushed  for  her  father,  felt 
still  angrier  at  having  blushed,  and  glanced  at  the  princess  with  a  bold, 
challenging  air,  meant  to  express  that  she  was  not  afraid  of  any  one.  The 
princess  told  the  count  that  she  would  be  delighted,  and  only  begged 
him  to  stay  a  little  longer  at  Anna  Semyonovna’s,  and  Ilya  Andreitch 
departed. 

In  spite  of  the  uneasy  glances  flung  at  her  by  Princess  Marya,  who 
wanted  to  talk  to  Natasha  by  herself,  Mademoiselle  Bourienne  would 
not  leave  the  room,  and  persisted  in  keeping  up  a  conversation  about 
Moscow  entertainments  and  theatres.  Natasha  felt  offended  by  the  delay 
in  the  entry,  by  her  father’s  nervousness,  and  by  the  constrained  manner  of 
the  princess,  who  seemed  to  her  to  be  making  a  favour  of  receiving  her. 
And  then  everything  displeased  her.  She  did  not  like  Princess  Marya.  She 
seemed  to  her  very  ugly,  affected,  and  frigid.  Natasha  suddenly,  as  it 
were,  shrank  into  herself,  and  unconsciously  assumed  a  nonchalant  air, 
vhich  repelled  Princess  Marya  more  and  more.  After  five  minutes  of 
rksome  and  constrained  conversation,  they  heard  the  sound  of  slippered 
eet  approaching  rapidly.  Princess  Marya’s  face  expressed  terror:  the 
loor  of  the  room  opened,  and  the  prince  came  in,  in  a  white  night-cap 
!tnd  dressing-gown. 

‘Ah,  madam,’  he  began,  ‘madam,  countess.  .  .  .  Countess  Rostov  .  .  . 
f  I’m  not  mistaken  ...  I  beg  you  to  excuse  me,  to  excuse  me  ...  I 
lidn’t  know,  madam.  As  God’s  above,  I  didn’t  know  that  you  were  deign- 
ng  to  visit  us,  and  came  in  to  my  daughter  in  this  costume.  I  beg  you  to 
xcuse  me  ...  as  God’s  above,  I  didn’t  know,’  he  repeated  so  unnatu- 
ally,  with  emphasis  on  the  word  ‘God,’  and  so  unpleasantly,  that  Princess 
darya  rose  to  her  feet  with  her  eyes  on  the  ground,  not  daring  to  look 


524  WARANDPEACE 

either  at  her  father  or  at  Natasha.  Natasha,  getting  up  and  curtseying, 
did  not  know  either  what  she  was  to  do.  Only  Mademoiselle  Bourienne 
smiled  agreeably. 

‘I  beg  you  to  excuse  me,  I  beg  you  to  excuse  me!  As  God’s  above,  I 
didn’t  know,’  muttered  the  old  man,  and  looking  Natasha  over  from 
head  to  foot,  he  went  out. 

Mademoiselle  Bourienne  was  the  first  to  recover  herself  after  this 
apparition,  and  began  talking  about  the  prince’s  ill-health.  Natasha  and 
Princess  Marya  gazed  dumbly  at  one  another,  and  the  longer  they  gazed 
dumbly  at  one  another  without  saying  what  they  wanted  to  say,  the 
more  unfavourably  each  felt  disposed  to  the  other. 

When  the  count  returned,  Natasha  showed  a  discourteous  relief  at 
seeing  him,  and  made  haste  to  get  away.  At  that  moment  she  almost 
hated  that  stiff,  oldish  princess,  who  could  put  her  in  such  an  awkward 
position,  and  spend  half  an  hour  with  her  without  saying  a  word  about 
Prince  Andrey.  ‘I  couldn’t  be  the  first  to  speak  of  him  before  that  French¬ 
woman,’  thought  Natasha.  Princess  Marya  meanwhile  was  tortured  by 
the  very  same  feeling.  She  knew  what  she  had  to  say  to  Natasha,  but  she 
could  not  do  it,  both  because  Mademoiselle  Bourienne  prevented  her, 
and  because — she  did  not  know  herself  why — it  was  difficult  for  her  to 
begin  to  speak  of  the  marriage.  The  count  was  already  going  out  of  the 
room  when  Princess  Marya  moved  rapidly  up  to  Natasha,  took  her  hand, 
and,  with  a  heavy  sigh,  said:  ‘Wait  a  moment,  I  want  .  .  .’  Natasha’s 
expression  as  she  looked  at  Princess  Marya  was  ironical,  though  she  did 
not  know  why. 

‘Dear  Natalie,’  said  Princess  Marya,  ‘do  believe  how  glad  I  am  that 
my  brother  has  found  such  happiness  .  .  .’  She  paused,  feeling  she  was 
telling  a  lie.  Natasha  noticed  the  pause,  and  guessed  the  reason  of  it. 

‘I  imagine,  princess,  that  it  is  not  now  suitable  to  speak  of  that,’  said 
Natasha,  with  external  dignity  and  coldness,  though  she  felt  the  tears 
rising  in  her  throat. 

‘What  have  I  said,  what  have  I  done?’  she  thought  as  soon  as  she  had 
gone  out  of  the  room. 

They  had  to  wait  a  long  while  for  Natasha  to  come  to  dinner  that  day. 
She  was  sitting  in  her  room,  crying  like  a  child,  choking,  and  sobbing. 
Sonya  stood  over  her,  and  kept  kissing  her  on  the  head. 

‘Natasha,  what  is  it?’  she  kept  saying.  ‘Why  need  you  mind  about 
them?  It  will  pass,  Natasha.’ 

‘No,  if  only  you  knew  how  insulting  it  was  ...  as  though  I  .  .  .’ 

‘Don’t  talk  of  it,  Natasha;  it’s  not  your  fault,  you  see,  so  what  does 
it  matter  to  you!  Kiss  me,’  said  Sonya. 

Natasha  raised  her  head,  and  kissing  her  friend  on  the  lips,  pressed  her 
wet  face  against  her. 

‘I  can’t  say;  I  don’t  know.  It’s  no  one’s  fault,’  said  Natasha;  ‘it’s  my 
fault.  But  it’s  all  awfully  painful.  Oh,  why  doesn’t  he  come?  .  .  .’ 

She  went  down  to  dinner  with  red  eyes.  Marya  Dmitryevna,  who  had 
heard  how  the  old  prince  had  received  the  Rostovs,  pretended  not  to 


WARANDPEACE  525 

notice  Natasha's  troubled  face,  and  kept  up  a  loud,  jesting  conversa¬ 
tion  at  table  with  the  count  and  the  other  guests. 


VIII 

That  evening  the  Rostovs  went  to  the  opera,  for  which  Marya  Dmi- 
tryevna  had  obtained  them  a  box. 

Natasha  had  no  wish  to  go,  but  it  was  impossible  to  refuse  after  Marya 
Dmitryevna’s  kindness,  especially  as  it  had  been  arranged  expressly  for 
her.  When  she  was  dressed  and  waiting  for  her  father  in  the  big  hall,  she 
looked  at  herself  in  the  big  looking-glass,  and  saw  that  she  was  looking 
pretty,  very  pretty.  She  felt  even  sadder,  but  it  was  a  sweet  and  tender 
sadness. 

‘My  God,  if  he  were  only  here,  I  wouldn’t  have  any  stupid  shyness  of 
something  as  I  used  to,  but  in  quite  a  new  way,  simply,  I  would  embrace 
him,  press  close  to  him,  force  him  to  look  at  me  with  those  scrutinising, 
inquisitive  eyes,  with  which  he  used  so  often  to  look  at  me,  and  then  I 
would  make  him  laugh,  as  he  used  to  laugh  then;  and  his  eyes — how  I 
pee  those  eyes!’  thought  Natasha.  ‘And  what  does  it  matter  to  me  about 
his  father  and  sister;  I  love  no  one  but  him,  him,  him,  with  that  face 
and  those  eyes,  with  his  smile,  manly,  and  yet  childlike.  .  .  .  No,  better 
not  think  of  him,  not  think,  forget,  utterly  forget  him  for  the  time.  I 
can’t  bear  this  suspense;  I  shall  sob  in  a  minute,’  and  she  turned  away 
from  the  looking-glass,  making  an  effort  not  to  weep.  ‘And  how  can 
Sonya  love  Nikolenka  so  quietly,  so  calmly,  and  wait  so  long  and  so 
patiently!’  she  wondered,  looking  at  Sonya,  who  came  in,  dressed  for 
the  theatre  with  a  fan  in  her  hand.  ‘No,  she’s  utterly  different.  I  can’t.’ 

Natasha  at  that  moment  felt  so  softened  and  moved  that  to  love  and 
know  that  she  was  loved  was  not  enough  for  her:  she  wanted  now,  now 
at  once  to  embrace  the  man  she  loved,  and  to  speak  and  hear  from  him 
the  words  of  love,  of  which  her  heart  was  full.  When  she  was  in  the  car¬ 
riage  sitting  beside  her  father  and  pensively  watching  the  lights  of  the 
street  lamps  flitting  by  the  frozen  window,  she  felt  even  sadder  and  more 
in  love,  and  forgot  with  whom  and  where  she  was  going.  The  Rostovs’ 
carriage  fell  into  the  line  of  carriages,  and  drove  up  to  the  theatre,  its 
wheels  crunching  slowly  over  the  snow.  Natasha  and  Sonya  skipped 
hurriedly  out  holding  up  their  dresses;  the  count  stepped  out  supported 
by  the  footmen,  and  all  three  walked  to  the  corridor  for  the  boxes  in  the 
stream  of  ladies  and  gentlemen  going  in  and  people  selling  programmes. 
They  could  hear  the  music  already  through  the  closed  doors. 

‘Natasha,  your  hair  .  .  .’  whispered  Sonya.  The  box-opener  defer¬ 
entially  and  hurriedly  slipped  before  the  ladies  and  opened  the  door  of 
the  box.  The  music  became  more  distinctly  audible  at  the  door,  and  they 
saw  the  brightly  lighted  rows  of  boxes,  with  the  bare  arms  and  shoulders 
)f  the  ladies,  and  the  stalls  below,  noisy,  and  gay  with  uniforms.  A  lady 
entering  the  next  box  looked  round  at  Natasha  with  an  envious,  feminine 


526  WARANDPEACE 

glance.  The  curtain  had  not  yet  risen  and  they  were  playing  the  over¬ 
ture.  Natasha  smoothing  down  her  skirt  went  in  with  Sonya,  and  sat 
down  looking  round  at  the  brightly  lighted  tiers  of  boxes  facing  them. 
The  sensation  she  had  not  experienced  for  a  long  while — that  hundreds 
of  eyes  were  looking  at  her  bare  arms  and  neck — suddenly  came  upon  her 
both  pleasantly  and  unpleasantly,  calling  up  a  whole  swarm  of  memories, 
desires,  and  emotions  connected  with  that  sensation. 

The  two  strikingly  pretty  girls,  Natasha  and  Sonya,  with  Count  Ilya 
Andreitch,  who  had  not  been  seen  for  a  long  while  in  Moscow,  attracted 
general  attention.  Moreover,  every  one  had  heard  vaguely  of  Natasha’s 
engagement  to  Prince  Andrey,  knew  that  the  Rostovs  had  been  living 
in  the  country  ever  since,  and  looked  with  curiosity  at  the  girl  who  was 
to  make  one  of  the  best  matches  in  Russia. 

Natasha  had,  so  every  one  told  her,  grown  prettier  in  the  country;  and 
that  evening,  owing  to  her  excited  condition,  she  was  particularly  pretty. 
She  made  a  striking  impression  of  fulness  of  life  and  beauty,  together 
with  indifference  to  everything  around  her.  Her  black  eyes  gazed  at  the 
crowd,  seeking  out  no  one,  while  her  slender  arm,  bare  to  above  the  elbow, 
leaned  on  the  velvet  edge  of  the  box,  and  her  hand,  holding  the  pro¬ 
gramme,  clasped  and  unclasped  in  time  to  the  music  with  obvious  un¬ 
consciousness. 

‘Look,  there’s  Alenina,’  said  Sonya,  ‘with  her  mother,  isn’t  it?’ 

‘Heavens,  Mihail  Kirillitch  is  really  stouter  than  ever,’  said  the  old 
count. 

‘Look!  our  Anna  Mihalovna  in  such  a  cap!’ 

‘The  Karagins,  Julie,  and  Boris  with  them.  One  can  see  at  once  they 
are  engaged.’ 

‘Drubetskoy  has  made  his  offer!  To  be  sure,  I  heard  so  to-day,’  said 
Shinshin,  coming  into  the  Rostovs’  box. 

Natasha  looked  in  the  direction  her  father  was  looking  in  and  saw  Julie 
with  diamonds  on  her  thick,  red  neck  (Natasha  knew  it  was  powdered), 
sitting  with  a  blissful  face  beside  her  mother. 

Behind  them  could  be  seen  the  handsome,  well-brushed  head  of  Boris,) 
with  a  smile  inclining  his  ear  towards  Julie’s  mouth.  He  looked  from 
under  his  brows  at  the  Rostovs,  and  said  something,  smiling,  to  his 
betrothed. 

‘They  are  talking  about  us,  about  me  and  himself!’  thought  Natasha. 
‘And  he  is,  most  likely,  soothing  his  fiancee’s  jealousy  of  me;  they  needn’t  1 
worry  themselves!  If  only  they  knew  how  little  they  matter  to  me,  any 
one  of  them.’ 

Behind  the  engaged  couple  sat  Anna  Mihalovna  in  a  green  cap,  with 
a  face  happy,  in  honour  of  the  festive  occasion,  and  devoutly  resigned; 
to  the  will  of  God.  Their  box  was  full  of  that  atmosphere  of  an  engaged, 
couple — which  Natasha  knew  so  well  and  liked  so  much.  She  turned 
away;  and  suddenly  all  that  had  been  humiliating  in  her  morning  visit 
came  back  to  her  mind. 

‘What  right  has  he  not  to  want  to  receive  me  into  his  family  ?  Ah,  bet- 


WARANDPEACE  527 

ter  not  think  about  it,  not  think  till  he  comes  back!’  she  said  to  herself, 
ind  began  to  look  about  at  the  faces,  known  and  unknown,  in  the  stalls. 

In  the  front  of  the  stalls,  in  the  very  centre,  leaning  back  against  the 
•ail  stood  Dolohov,  in  a  Persian  dress,  with  his  huge  shock  of  curly  hair 
:ombed  upwards.  He  stood  in  the  most  conspicuous  place  in  the  theatre, 
veil  aware  that  he  was  attracting  the  attention  of  the  whole  audience,  and 
is  much  at  his  ease  as  though  he  had  been  alone  in  his  room.  The  most 
>rilliant  young  men  in  Moscow  were  all  thronging  about  him,  and  he 
vas  obviously  the  leading  figure  among  them. 

Count  Ilya  Andreitch,  laughing,  nudged  the  blushing  Sonya,  pointing 
)ut  her  former  admirer. 

‘Did  you  recognise  him?’  he  asked.  ‘And  where  has  he  dropped  from?’ 
;aid  he,  turning  to  Shinshin.  ‘I  thought  he  had  disappeared  somewhere?’ 

‘He  did  disappear,’  answered  Shinshin.  ‘He  was  in  the  Caucasus,  and 
le  ran  away  from  there,  and  they  say  he  has  been  acting  as  minister  to 
ome  reigning  prince  in  Persia,  and  there  killed  the  Shah’s  brother.  Well, 
ill  the  Moscow  ladies  are  wild  about  him!  “Dolohov  the  Persian,”  that’s 
vhat  does  it!  Nowadays  there’s  nothing  can  be  done  without  Dolohov; 
hey  do  homage  to  him,  invite  you  to  meet  him,  as  if  he  were  a  sturgeon,’ 
aid  Shinshin.  ‘Dolohov  and  Anatole  Kuragin  have  taken  all  the  ladies’ 
learts  by  storm.’ 

A  tall,  handsome  woman  with  a  mass  of  hair  and  very  naked,  ^jlump, 
vhite  arms  and  shoulders,  and  a  double  row  of  big  pearls  round  her 
hroat,  walked  into  the  next  box,  and  was  a  long  while  settling  into  her 
ilace  and  rustling  her  thick  silk  gown. 

Natasha  unconsciously  examined  that  neck  and  the  shoulders,  the 
iearls,  the  coiffure  of  this  lady,  and  admired  the  beauty  of  the  shoulders 
nd  the  pearls.  While  Natasha  was  scrutinising  her  a  second  time,  the 
idy  looked  round,  and  meeting  the  eyes  of  Count  Ilya  Andreitch,  she 
odded  and  smiled  to  him.  It  was  the  Countess  Bezuhov,  Pierre’s  wife, 
’he  count,  who  knew  every  one  in  society,  bent  over  and  entered  into 
onversation  with  her. 

‘Have  you  been  here  long?’  he  began.  ‘I’m  coming;  I’m  coming  to 
iss  your  hand.  I  have  come  to  town  on  business  and  brought  my  girls 
i'ith  me.  They  say  Semyonovna’s  acting  is  superb,’  the  count  went  on. 
Zount  Pyotr  Kirillovitch  never  forgot  us.  Is  he  here?’ 

.  ‘Yes,  he  meant  to  come,’  said  Ellen,  looking  intently  at  Natasha. 
County  Ilya  Andreitch  sat  down  again  in  his  place. 

‘Handsome,  isn’t  she?’  he  whispered  to  Natasha. 

‘Exquisite!  ’  said  Natasha.  ‘One  might  well  fall  in  love  with  her!  ’ 

At  that  moment  they  heard  the  last  chords  of  the  overture,  and  the 
ipping  of  the  conductor’s  stick.  Late  comers  hurried  to  their  seats  in  the 
alls,  and  the  curtain  rose. 

■  As  soon  as  the  curtain  rose,  a  hush  fell  on  the  boxes  and  stalls,  and 
1  the  men,  old  and  young,  in  their  frock  coats  or  uniforms,  all  the 
omen  with  precious  stones  on  their  bare  flesh  concentrated  all  their 
tention  with  eager  curiosity  on  the  stage.  Natasha  too  began  to  look  at  it. 


r 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


IX 

The  stage  consisted  of  a  boarded  floor  in  the  middle,  with  painted  card¬ 
board  representing  trees  at  the  sides,  and  linen  stretched  over  the  boards 
at  the  back.  In  the  middle  of  the  stage  there  were  sitting  maidens  in  red 
bodices  and  white  skirts.  An  excessively  stout  woman  in  a  white  silk 
dress  was  sitting  apart  on  a  low  bench  with  green  cardboard  fixed  on 
the  back  of  it.  They  were  all  singing  something.  When  they  had  finished 
their  song,  the  woman  in  white  moved  towards  the  prompter’s  box,  and 
a  man,  wjth  his  stout  legs  encased  in  silk  tights,  with  a  plume  and  a 
dagger,  went  up  to  her  and  began  singing  and  waving  his  arms. 

The  man  in  the  tights  sang  alone,  then  she  sang  alone.  Then  botl 
paused,  while  the  music  played,  and  the  man  fumbled  with  the  hand 
of  the  woman  in  white,  obviously'  waiting  for  the  bar  at  which  he  was  tc 
begin  singing  with  her.  They  sang  a  duet,  and  every  one  in  the  theatre 
began  clapping  and  shouting,  while  the  man  and  woman  on  the  stage 
supposed  to  represent  lovers,  began  bowing  with  smiles  and  gesticula¬ 
tions. 

After  the  country,  and  in  her  serious  mood,  Natasha  felt  it  all  gro 
tesque  and  extraordinary.  She  could  not  follow  the  opera;  she  coule 
not  even  listen  to  the  music:  she  saw  nothing  but  painted  cardboard  anc 
strangely  dressed-up  men  and  women,  talking,  singing,  and  moving 
strangely  about  in  the  bright  light.  She  knew  what  it  all  was  meant  t( 
represent;  but  it  was  all  so  grotesquely  false  and  unnatural  that  she  fel 
alternately  ashamed  and  amused  at  the  actors.  She  looked  about  heij 
at  the  faces  of  the  spectators,  seeking  in  them  signs  of  the  same  iron] 
and  bewilderment  that  she  was  feeling  herself.  But  all  the  faces  wen 
watching  what  was  passing  on  the  stage,  and  expressed  nothing  but  ai 
affected — so  Natasha  thought — rapture.  ‘I  suppose  it  is  meant  to  b< 
like  this!’  thought  Natasha.  She  looked  alternately  at  the  rows  o 
pomaded  masculine  heads  in  the  stalls,  and  at  the  naked  women  in  thi 
boxes,  especially  at  her  next  neighbour  Ellen,  who,  quite  undressed,  sa 
gazing  intently,  with  a  quiet  and  serene  smile,  at  the  stage,  and  baskinj 
in  the  bright  light  that  flooded  the  theatre,  and  the  warm  air,  heated  b] 
the  crowd.  Natasha  began  gradually  to  pass  into  a  state  of  intoxicatioi 
she  had  not  experienced  for  a  long  while.  She  lost  all  sense  of  what  sh> 
was  and  where  she  was  and  what  was  going  on  before  her  eyes.  She  gazei 
and  dreamed,  and  the  strangest  ideas  flashed  unexpectedly  and  discon 
nectedly  into  her  mind.  At  one  moment  the  idea  occurred  to  her  to  lea] 
over  the  footlights  and  sing  that  air  the  actress  was  singing;  then  she  fel  j 
inclined  to  hook  her  fan  into  an  old  gentleman  sitting  near  her,  or  tc 
bend  over  to  Ellen  and  tickle  her. 

At  a  moment  when  there  was  a  lull  on  the  stage  before  the  beginnin; 
of  a  song,  the  door  opening  to  the  stalls  creaked  on  the  side  nearest  th 
Rostovs’  box,  and  there  was  the  sound  of  a  man’s  footsteps.  ‘Here  he  if; 


WARANDPEACE  5?9 

vuragin!’  whispered  Shinshin.  Countess  Bezuhov  turned  smiling  to 
he  new-comer.  Natasha  looked  in  the  direction  of  the  Countess  Bezuhov’s 
:yes,  and  saw  an  exceedingly  handsome  adjutant  coming  towards  their 
)ox  with  a  confident,  but  yet  courteous,  bearing.  It  was  Anatole  Kuragin, 
vhom  she  had  seen  long  before,  and  noticed  at  the  Petersburg  ball.  He 
vas  now  wearing  an  adjutant’s  uniform,  with  one  epaulette  and  a  shoulder 
mot.  He  walked  with  a  jaunty  strut,  which  would  have  been  ridiculous 
f  he  had  not  been  so  handsome,  and  if  his  good-looking  face  had  not 
■xpressed  such  simple-hearted  satisfaction  and  good  spirits.  Although 
he  performance  was  going  on  he  walked  lightly,  without  haste,  along 
he  carpeted  corridor,  holding  his  scented,  handsome  head  high,  and 
xcompanied  by  a  slight  clank  of  spurs  and  sword.  Glancing  at  Natasha, 
le  went  up  to  his  sister,  laid  his  hand  in  a  close-fitting  glove  on  the  edge 
if  her  box,  nodded  his  head  at  her,  and,  bending  down,  asked  her  a 
[uestion,  with  a  motion  towards  Natasha/ 

‘Very,  very  charming!’  he  said,  obviously  speaking  of  Natasha.  She 
lid  not  exactly  hear  the  words,  but  divined  them  from  the  movement 
if  his  lips.  Then  he  went  on  to  the  front  row  and  sat  down  beside  Dolo- 
iov,  giving  a  friendly  and  careless  nudge  with  his  elbow  to  the  man 
diom  other  people  treated  with  such  punctilio.  With  a  merry  wink,  he 
miled  at  him,  and  leaned  with  his  foot  against  the  footlights. 

‘How  like  the  brother  is  to  his  sister!’  said  the  count.  ‘And  how  hand- 
ome  they  both  are! ’ 

Shinshin  began  telling  the  count  in  an  undertone  some  story  of  an 
itrigue  of  Kuragin’s  in  Moscow,  to  which  Natasha  listened,  simply 
ecause  he  had  said  of  her  ‘very  charming.’ 

The  first  act  was  over;  every  one  stood  up  in  the  stalls,  changed  places, 
nd  began  going  out  and  coming  in. 

Boris  came  to  the  Rostovs’  box,  received  their  congratulations  very 
imply,  and  lifting  his  eyebrows  with  an  absent-minded  smile,  gave 
latasha  and  Sonya  his  fiancee’s  message,  begging  them  to  come  to  her 
edding,  and  went  away.  Natasha,  with  a  gay  and  coquettish  smile, 
liked  to  him  and  congratulated  him  on  his  approaching  marriage — the 
fry  Boris  she  had  once  been  in  love  with.  In  the  condition  of  emotional 
itoxication  in  which  she  found  herself  everything  seemed  simple  and 
atural. 

Ellen  sat  in  her  nakedness  close  by  her,  and  smiled  on  all  alike,  and 
ast  such  a  smile  Natasha  bestowed  on  Boris. 

Ellen’s  box  was  filled  and  surrounded  on  the  side  of  the  stalls  by  the 
tost  distinguished  and  intellectual  men,  who  seemed  vying  with  one 
lother  in  their  desire  to  show  every  one  that  they  knew  her. 

All  throughout  that  entr'acte  Kuragin  stood  with  Dolohov  in  front  of 
lie  footlights  staring  at  the  Rostovs’  box.  Natasha  knew  he  was  talking 
)out  her,  and  that  afforded  her  satisfaction.  She  even  turned  so  that 
:  could  see  her  profile  from  what  she  believed  to  be  the  most  becoming 
lgle.  Before  the  beginning  of  the  second  act  she  observed  in  the  stalls 
e  figure  of  Pierre,  whom  the  Rostovs  had  not  seen  since  their  arrival. 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


530 

His  face  looked  sad,  and  he  had  grown  stouter  since  Natasha  had  seen 
him  last.  He  walked  up  to  the  front  rows,  not  noticing  any  one.  Anatole 
went  up  to  him,  and  began  saying  something  to  him,  with  a  look  and 
a  gesture  towards  the  Rostovs’  box.  Pierre  looked  pleased  at  seeing 
Natasha,  and  walked  hurriedly  along  the  rows  of  stalls  towards  their  box. 1 
Leaning  on  his  elbow,  he  talked  smiling  to  Natasha  for  a  long  while. 
While  she  was  talking  to  Pierre,  Natasha  heard  a  man’s  voice  speaking 
in  Countess  Bezuhov’s  box,  and  something  told  her  it  was  Kuragin.  She 
looked  round  and  met  his  eyes.  He  looked  her  straight  in  the  eyes, 
almost  smiling,  with  a  look  of  such  warmth  and  admiration  that  it  seemed 
strange  to  be  so  near  him,  to  look  at  him  like  that,  to  be  so  certain  that 
he  admired  her,  and  not  to  be  acquainted  with  him. 

In  the  second  act  there  was  scenery  representing  monuments,  and  a 
hole  in  the  drop  at  the  back  that  represented  the  moon,  and  shades  were 
put  over  the  footlights,  and  trumpets  and  bassoons  began  playing,  and 
a  number  of  people  came  in  on  the  right  and  on  the  left  wearing  black 
cloaks.  These  people  began  waving  their  arms,  and  in  their  hands  they 
had  something  of  the  nature  of  a  dagger.  Then  some  more  people  ran 
in  and  began  dragging  away  the  woman  who  had  been  in  white  but  who 
was  now  in  a  blue  dress.  They  did  not  drag  her  away  at  once;  they  spent 
a  long  while  singing  with  her;  but  finally  they  did  drag  her  away,  and 
behind  the  scenes  they  struck  something  metallic  three  times,  and  then 
all  knelt  down  and  began  singing  a  prayer.  All  these  performances  were 
interrupted  several  times  by  the  enthusiastic  shouts  of  the  spectators. 

During  that  act,  every  time  Natasha  glanced  towards  the  stalls,  shei 
saw  Anatole  Kuragin,  with  one  arm  flung  across  the  back  of  his  chair, 
staring  at  her.  It  pleased  her  to  see  that  he  was  so  captivated  by  her, 
and  it  never  entered  her  head  that  there  could  be  anything  amiss  in  it. 

When  the  second  act  was  over,  Countess  Bezuhov  got  up,  turned  to¬ 
wards  the  Rostovs’  box  (the  whole  of  her  bosom  was  completely  exposed), 
with  her  gloved  little  finger  beckoned  the  old  count  to  her,  and  taking 
no  notice  of  the  men  who  were  thronging  about  her  box,  began  with  an 
amiable  smile  talking  to  him. 

‘Oh,  do  make  me  acquainted  with  your  charming  daughters,’  she  said. 
‘All  the  town  is  singing  their  praises,  and  I  don’t  know  them.’ 

Natasha  got  up  and  curtseyed  to  the  magnificent  countess.  Natasha 
was  so  delighted  at  the  praise  from  this  brilliant  beauty  that  she  blushed 
with  pleasure. 

‘I  quite  want  to  become  a  Moscow  resident  myself,’  said  Ellen.  ‘What 
a  shame  of  you  to  bury  such  pearls  in  the  country!’ 

Countess  Bezuhov  had  some  right  to  her  reputation  of  being  a  fasci¬ 
nating  woman.  She  could  say  what  she  did  not  think,  especially  what  was 
flattering,  with  perfect  simplicity  and  naturalness. 

'No,  dear  count,  you  must  let  me  help  to  entertain  your  daughters, 
though  I’m  not  here  now  for  very  long,  nor  you  either.  But  I’ll  do  my 
best  to  amuse  them.  I  have  heard  a  great  deal  about  you  in  Petersburg 
and  wanted  to  know  you,’  she  said  to  Natasha,  with  her  unvarying 


WARANDPEACE  531 

beautiful  smile.  ‘I  have  heard  of  you,  too,  from  my  page,  Drubetskoy— 
you  have  heard  he  is  to  be  married — and  from  my  husband’s  friend,  Bol¬ 
konsky,  Prince  Andrey  Bolkonsky,’  she  said,  with  peculiar  emphasis,  by 
which  she  meant  to  signify  that  she  knew  in  what  relation  he  stood  to 
Natasha.  She  asked  that  one  of  the  young  ladies  might  be  allowed  to 
sit  through  the  rest  of  the  performance  in  her  box  that  they  might  become 
better  acquainted,  and  Natasha  moved  into  it. 

In  the  third  act  the  scene  was  a  palace  in  which  a  great  many  candles 
were  burning,  and  pictures  were  hanging  on  the  walls,  representing  knights 
with  beards.  In  the  middle  stood  a  man  and  a  woman,  probably  meant 
for  a  king  and  a  queen.  The  king  waved  his  right  hand,  and,  obviously 
nervous,  sang  something  very  badly,  and  sat  down  on  a  crimson  throne. 
The  actress,  who  had  been  in  white  at  first  and  then  in  blue,  was  now  in 
nothing  but  a  smock,  and  had  let  her  hair  down.  She  was  standing  near 
the  throne,  singing  something  very  mournful,  addressed  to  the  queen. 
But  the  king  waved  his  hand  sternly,  and  from  the  sides  there  came  in 
men  and  women  with  bare  legs  who  began  dancing  all  together.  Then 
the  violins  played  very  shrilly  and  merrily:  one  of  the  actresses,  with 
thick,  bare  legs  and  thin  arms,  leaving  the  rest,  went  to  the  side  to  set 
straight  her  bodice,  then  walked  into  the  middle  of  the  stage  and  began 
skipping  into  the  air  and  kicking  one  leg  very  rapidly  with  the  other. 
Every  one  in  the  stalls  clapped  their  hands  and  roared  ‘bravo!’  Then 
one  man  stood  alone  at  one  corner  of  the  stage.  The  cymbals  and  trumpets 
struck  up  more  loudly  in  the  orchestra,  and  this  man  began  leaping  very 
high  in  the  air  and  rapidly  waving  his  legs.  (This  was  Duport,  who  earned 
sixty  thousand  a  year  by  this  accomplishment.)  Every  one  in  the  boxes 
and  in  the  stalls  began  clapping  and  shouting  with  all  their  might,  and 
the  man  stood  still  and  began  smiling  and  bowing  in  all  directions.  Then 
other  men  and  women  with  bare  legs  danced;  then  again  the  king 
shouted  something  to  music,  and  they  all  began  singing.  But  suddenly  a 
storm  came  on,  chromatic  scales  and  chords  with  the  diminishing  sevenths 
fcould  be  heard  in  the  orchestra,  and  they  all  ran  off,  dragging  one  of 
;he  performers  again  behind  the  scenes,  and  the  curtain  dropped.  Again 
ii  fearful  uproar  of  applause  arose  among  the  spectators,  and  all  began 
(screaming  with  rapturous  faces: 

‘Duport!  Duport!  Duport!’ 

Natasha  did  not  now  feel  this  strange.  She  looked  about  her  with 
Measure,  smiling  joyfully. 

‘Isn’t  Duport  admirable?’  said  Ellen,  turning  to  her. 

‘Oh  yes,’  answered  Natasha. 


X 

n  the  entr’acte  there  was  a  current  of  chill  air  in  Ellen’s  box,  the  door 
|vas  opened,  and  Anatole  walked  in,  bending  and  trying  not  to  brush 
gainst  any  one. 


532  WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Allow  me  to  introduce  my  brother,’  said  Ellen,  her  eyes  shifting  un¬ 
easily  from  Natasha  to  Anatole.  Natasha  turned  her  pretty  little  head  n 
towards  the  handsome  adjutant  and  smiled  over  her  bare  shoulder.  Ana¬ 
tole,  who  was  as  handsome  on  a  closer  view  as  he  was  from  a  distance,  sat  jt 
down  beside  her,  and  said  he  had  long  wished  to  have  this  pleasure,  f 
ever  since  the  Narishkins’  ball,  at  which  he  had  had  the  pleasure  he  had 
not  forgotten  of  seeing  her.  Kuragin  was  far  more  sensible  and  straight- 1 
forward  with  women  than  he  was  in  men’s  society.  He  talked  boldly 
and  simply,  and  Natasha  was  strangely  and  agreeably  impressed  by 
finding  nothing  so  formidable  in  this  man,  of  whom  such  stories  were 
told,  but,  on  the  contrary,  seeing  on  his  face  the  most  innocent,  merry, 
and  simple-hearted  smile. 

Kuragin  asked  her  what  she  thought  of  the  performance,  and  told 
her  that  at  the  last  performance  Semyonovna  had  fallen  down  while  she 
was  acting. 

‘And  do  you  know,  countess,’  said  he,  suddenly  addressing  her  as 
though  she  were  an  old  friend,  ‘we  are  getting  up  a  costume  ball;  you 
ought  to  take  part  in  it ;  it  will  be  great  fun.  They  are  all  assembling  at 
the  Karagins’.  Please,  do  come,  really  now,  eh?’  he  said.  As  he  said  this 
he  never  took  his  smiling  eyes  off  the  face,  the  neck,  the  bare  arms  of 
Natasha.  Natasha  knew  beyond  all  doubt  that  he  was  fascinated  by  her. 
That  pleased  her,  yet  she  felt  for  some  reason  constrained  and  oppressed 
in  his  presence.  When  she  was  not  looking  at  him  she  felt  that  he  was 
looking  at  her  shoulders,  and  she  could  not  help  trying  to  catch  his  eyes 
that  he  might  rather  look  in  her  face.  But  as  she  looked  into  his  eyes, 
she  felt  with  horror  that,  between  him  and  her,  there  was  not  that  barrier 
of  modest  reserve  she  had  always  been  conscious  of  between  herself  and 
other  men.  In  five  minutes  she  felt — she  did  not  know  how — that  she 
had  come  fearfully  close  to  this  man.  When  she  turned  away,  she  felt 
afraid  he  might  take  her  from  behind  by  her  bare  arm  and  kiss  her  on 
the  neck.  They  talked  of  the  simplest  things,  and  she  felt  that  they  were 
close  as  she  had  never  been  with  any  man.  Natasha  looked  round  at 
Ellen  and  at  her  father,  as  though  to  ask  them  what  was  the  meaning 
of  it.  But  Ellen  was  absorbed  in  talking  to  a  general  and  did  not  respond 
to  her  glance,  and  her  father’s  eyes  said  nothing  to  her  but  what  they 
always  said:  ‘Enjoying  yourself?  Well,  I’m  glad  then.’ 

In  one  of  the  moments  of  awkward  silence,  during  which  Anatole 
gazed  calmly  and  persistently  at  her,  Natasha,  to  break  the  silence,  asked 
him  how  he  liked  Moscow.  Natasha  asked  this  question  and  blushed  as 
she  did  so ;  she  was  feeling  all  the  while  that  there  she  was  doing  some¬ 
thing  improper  in  talking  to  him.  Anatole  smiled  as  though  to  encour¬ 
age  her. 

‘At  first  I  didn’t  like  it  much,  for  what  is  it  makes  one  like  a  town? 
It’s  the  pretty  women,  isn’t  it?  Well,  but  now  I  like  it  awfully,’  he  said, 
with  a  meaning  look  at  her.  ‘You’ll  come  to  the  fancy  dress  ball,  countess? 
Do  come,’  he  said,  and  putting  his  hand  out  to  her  bouquet  he  said, 


WAR  AND  PEACE  533 

Iropping  his  voice,  ‘You  will  be  the  prettiest.  Come,  dear  countess,  and 
is  a  pledge  give  me  this  flower.’ 

Natasha  did  not  understand  what  he  was  saying,  nor  did  he  himself; 
iut  she  felt  that  in  his  uncomprehended  words  there  was  some  improper 
ntention.  She  did  not  know  what  to  say,  and  turned  away  as  though 
he  had  not  heard  what  he  said.  But  as  soon  as  she  turned  away  she 
elt  that  he  was  here  behind  her,  so  close  to  her. 

‘What  is  he  feeling  now?  Is  he  confused?  Is  he  angry?  Must  I  set  it 
ight?’  she  wondered.  She  could  not  refrain  from  looking  round.  She 
;lanced  straight  into  his  eyes,  and  his  nearness  and  confidence,  and  the 
imple-hearted  warmth  of  his  smile  vanquished  her.  She  smiled  exactly 
is  he  did,  looking  straight  into  his  eyes.  And  again,  she  felt  with  horror 
hat  no  barrier  lay  between  him  and  her. 

The  curtain  rose  again.  Anatole  walked  out  of  the  box,  serene  and 
;ood-humoured.  Natasha  went  back  to  her  father’s  box,  completely  under 
he  spell  of  the  world  in  which  she  found  herself.  All  that  passed  before 
ler  eyes  now  seemed  to  her  perfectly  natural.  But  on  the  other  hand  all 
irevious  thoughts  of  her  betrothed,  of  Princess  Marya,  of  her  life  in  the 
ountry,  did  not  once  recur  to  her  mind,  as  though  all  that  belonged 
|p  the  remote  past. 

In  the  fourth  act  there  was  some  sort  of  devil  who  sang,  waving  his 
rms  till  the  boards  were  moved  away  under  him  and  he  sank  into  the 
pening.  That  was  all  Natasha  saw  of  the  fourth  act;  she  felt  harassed 
nd  excited;  and  the  cause  of  that  excitement  was  Kuragin,  whom  she 
ould  not  help  watching.  As  they  came  out  of  the  theatre  Anatole  came 
lip  to  them,  called  their  carriage  and  helped  them  into  it.  As  he  assisted 
•latasha  he  pressed  her  arm  above  the  elbow.  Natasha,  flushed  and 
xcited,  looked  round  at  him.  He  gazed  at  her  with  flashing  eyes  and  a 
ender  smile. 

It  was  only  on  getting  home  that  Natasha  could  form  any  clear  idea 
f  what  had  happened.  All  at  once,  remembering  Prince  Andrey,  she  was 
iorrified,  and  at  tea,  to  which  they  all  sat  down  after  the  theatre,  she 
roaned  aloud,  and  flushing  crimson  ran  out  of  the  room.  ‘My  God!  I 
m  ruined!’  she  said  to  herself.  ‘How  could  I  sink  to  such  a  depth?’  she 
hought.  For  a  long  while  she  sat,  with  her  flushed  face  hidden  in  her 
lands,  trying  to  get  a  clear  idea  of  what  had  happened  and  unable  to 
rasp  either  what  had  happened  or  what  she  was  feeling.  Everything 
eemed  to  her  dark,  obscure,  and  dreadful.  In  that  immense,  lighted  hall, 
vhere  Duport  had  jumped  about  to  music  with  his  bare  legs  on  the  damp 
ioards  in  his  short  jacket  with  tinsel,  and  young  girls  and  old  men,  and 
hat  Ellen,  proudly  and  serenely  smiling  in  her  nakedness,  had  enthusi- 
stically  roared  ‘bravo’;  there,  in  the  wake  of  that  Ellen,  all  had  been 
lear  and  simple.  But  now,  alone  by  herself,  it  was  past  comprehending. 
What  does  it  mean?  What  is  that  terror  I  felt  with  him?  What  is  the 
neaning  of  those  gnawings  of  conscience  I  am  feeling  now?’  she  thought. 

To  no  one  but  to  her  mother  at  night  in  bed  Natasha  could  have  talked 

I  I 


534  WARANDPEACE 

of  what  she  was  feeling.  Sonya  she  knew,  with  her  strict  and  single- 1 
minded  view  of  things,  would  either  have  failed  to  understand  at  all ! 
or  would  have  been  horrified  at  the  avowal.  Natasha  all  by  herself  had 
to  try  and  solve  the  riddle  that  tormented  her. 

‘Am  I  spoilt  for  Prince  Audrey’s  love  or  not?’  she  asked  herself,  and 
with  reassuring  mockery  she  answered  herself:  ‘What  a  fool  I  am  to 
ask  such  a  thing!  What  has  happened  to  me?  Nothing.  I  have  done  noth¬ 
ing;  I  did  nothing  to  lead  him  on.  No  one  will  ever  know,  and  I  shall 
never-  see  him  again,’  she  told  herself.  ‘So  it’s  plain  that  nothing  has « 
happened,  that  there’s  nothing  to  regret,  that  Prince  Andrey  can  love 
me  still.  But  why  still?  O  my  God,  my  God,  why  isn’t  he  here!  ’  Natasha 
felt  comforted  for  a  moment ;  but  again  some  instinct  told  her  that 
though  that  was  all  true,  and  though  nothing  had  happened,  yet  some 
instinct  told  her  that  all  the  old  purity  of  her  love  for  Prince  Andrey 
was  lost.  And  again,  in  her  imagination,  she  went  over  all  her  conversa¬ 
tion  with  Kuragin,  and  saw  again  the  face,  the  gestures,  and  the  tender 
smile  of  that  handsome,  daring  man  at  the  moment  when  he  had  pressed 
her  arm. 

XI 

Anatole  Kuragin  was  staying  in  Moscow  because  his  father  had  sent 
him  away  from  Petersburg,  where  he  had  been  spending  twenty  thousand 
a  year  in  hard  cash  and  running  up  bills  for  as  much  more,  and  his 
creditors  had  been  dunning  his  father.  The  father  informed  his  son  that 
for  the  last  time  he  would  pay  half  his  debts;  but  only  on  condition  that 
he  would  go  away  to  Moscow,  where  his  father  had,  by  much  exertion, 
secured  a  post  for  him  as  adjutant  to  the  commander-in-chief,  and  would 
try  finally  to  make  a  good  match  there.  He  suggested  to  him  either  Prin¬ 
cess  Marya  or  Julie  Karagin. 

Anatole  consented,  and  went  away  to  Moscow,  where  he  stayed  with 
Pierre.  Pierre  at  first  was  by  no  means  pleased  to  receive  Anatole,  but 
after  a  while  he  got  used  to  his  presence;  sometimes  accompanied  him  on 
his  carousals,  and  by  way  of  loans  gave  him  money. 

As  Shinshin  had  with  truth  said  of  him,  Anatole  had  won  the  hearts 
of  all  the  Moscow  ladies,  especially  by  the  nonchalance  with  which  he 
treated  them  and  the  preference  he  openly  showed  for  gypsy  girls  and 
actresses,  with  the  most  prominent  of  whom,  Mademoiselle  George,  he 
was  said  to  have  an  intrigue.  He  never  missed  a  single  drinking  party 
at  Danilov’s,  or  any  other  Moscow  festivity,  spent  whole  nights  drinking, 
outdoing  all  the  rest,  and  was  at  every  soiree  and  ball  in  the  best  society. 
There  were  rumours  of  several  intrigues  of  his  with  Moscow  ladies,  and 
at  balls  he  flirted  with  a  few  of  them.  But  he  fought  shy  of  unmarried 
ladies,  especially  the  wealthy  heiresses,  who  were  most  of  them  plain. 
He  had  a  good  reason  for  this,  of  which  no  one  knew  but  his  most  inti¬ 
mate  friends:  he  had  been  for  the  last  two  years  married.  Two  years 
previously,  while  his  regiment  had  been  stationed  in  Poland,  a  Polish 


(VAR  AND  PEACE  535 

landowner,  by  no  means  well-to-do,  had  forced  Anatole  to  marry  his 
daughter. 

Anatole  had  very  shortly  afterwards  abandoned  his  wife,  and  in  con¬ 
sideration  of  a  sum  of  money,  which  he  agreed  to  send  his  father-in-law, 
he  was  allowed  by  the  latter  to  pass  as  a  bachelor  unmolested. 

Anatole  was  very  well  satisfied  with  his  position,  with  himself,  and 
with  other  people.  He  was  instinctively  and  thoroughly  convinced  that 
he  could  not  possibly  live  except  just  in  the  way  he  did  live,  and  that 
he  had  never  in  his  life  done  anything  base.  He  was  incapable  of  con¬ 
sidering  either  how  his  actions  might  be  judged  by  others,  or  what  might 
be  the  result  of  this  or  that  action  on  his  part.  He  was  convinced  that 
just  as  the  duck  is  created  so  that  it  must  always  live  in  the  water,  so 
he  was  created  by  God  such  that  he  must  spend  thirty  thousand  a  year, 
and  always  take  a  good  position  in  society.  He  had  such  perfect  faith 
in  this  that,  looking  at  him,  others  too  were  persuaded  of  it,  and  refused 
him  neither  the  exalted  position  in  society  nor  the  money,  which  he 
borrowed  right  and  left,  obviously  with  no  notion  of  repaying  it. 

He  was  not  a  gambler,  at  least  he  never  greatly  cared  about  winning 
money  at  cards.  He  was  not  vain.  He  did  not  care  a  straw  what  people 
thought  of  him.  Still  less  could  he  have  been  reproached  with  ambition. 
Several  times  he  had,  to  his  father’s  irritation,  spoiled  his  best  chances 
of  a  career,  and  he  laughed  at  distinctions  of  all  kinds.  He  was  not  stingy, 
and  never  refused  any  one  who  asked  him  for  anything.  What  he  loved 
was  dissipation  and  women;  and  as,  according  to  his  ideas,  there  was 
nothing  dishonourable  in  these  tastes,  and  as  he  was  incapable  of  con¬ 
sidering  the  effect  on  others  of  the  gratification  of  his  tastes,  he  believed 
himself  in  his  heart  to  be  an  irreproachable  man,  felt  a  genuine  contempt 
.for  scoundrels  and  mean  persons,  and  with  an  untroubled  conscience  held 
his  head  high.  Rakes,  those  masculine  Magdalens,  have  a  secret  feeling 
of  their  own  guiltlessness,  just  as  have  women  Magdalens,  founded  on  the 
same  hope  of  forgiveness.  ‘All  will  be  forgiven  her,  because  she  loved 
much;  and  all  will  be  forgiven  him,  because  he  has  enjoyed  himself  much.’ 

Dolohov  had  that  year  reappeared  in  Moscow  after  his  exile  and  his 
Persian  adventures.  He  spent  his  time  in  luxury,  gambling,  and  dissipa¬ 
tion;  renewed  his  friendship  with  his  old  Petersburg  comrade  Kuragin, 
and  made  use  of  him  for  his  own  objects. 

Anatole  sincerely  liked  Dolohov  for  his  cleverness  and  daring.  Dolo- 
shov,  for  whom  Anatole’s  name  and  rank  and  connections  were  of  use  in 
ensnaring  wealthy  young  men  into  his  society  for  gambling  purposes, 
aiade  use  of  Kuragin  without  letting  him  feel  it,  and  was  amused  by  him 
:oo.  Apart  from  interested  motives,  for  which  he  needed  Anatole,  the 
arocess  itself  of  controlling  another  man’s  will  was  an  enjoyment,  a  habit, 
and  a  necessity  for  Dolohov. 

Natasha  had  made  a  great  impression  on  Kuragin.  At  supper,  after 
he  theatre,  he  analysed  to  Dolohov,  with  the  manner  of  a  connoisseur, 
he  points  of  her  arms,  her  shoulders,  her  foot,  and  her  hair,  and  an¬ 
nounced  his  intention  of  getting  up  a  flirtation  with  her.  What  might 


536  ,  WAR  AND  PEACE 

come  of  such  a  flirtation — Anatole  was  incapable  of  considering,  and  had 

no  notion,  as  he  never  had  a  notion  of  what  would  come  of  any  of  his 

actions. 

‘She’s  pretty,  my  lad,  but  she’s  not  for  us,’  Dolohov  said  to  him. 

‘I’ll  tell  my  sister  to  ask  her  to  dinner,’  said  Anatole.  ‘Eh?’ 

‘You’d  better  wait  till  she’s  married.  .  .  .’ 

‘You  know  I  adore  little  girls,’  said  Anatole;  ‘they’re  all  confusion  in  a 
minute.’ 

‘You’ve  come  to  grief  once  already  over  a  “little  girl,”  ’  said  Dolohov, 
who  knew  of  Anatole’s  marriage.  ‘Beware !  ’ 

‘Well,  one  can’t  do  it  twice!  Eh?’  said  Anatole,  laughing  good- 
humouredly. 


XII 

The  next  day  the  Rostovs  did  not  go  anywhere,  and  no  one  came  to  see 
them.  Marya  Dmitryevna  had  a  discussion  with  Natasha’s  father,  which 
she  kept  secret  from  her.  Natasha  guessed  they  were  talking  of  the  old 
prince  and  making  some  plan,  and  she  felt  worried  and  humiliated  by  it. 
Every  minute  she  expected  Prince  Audrey,  and  twice  that  day  she  sent 
a  man  to  Vosdvizhenka  to  inquire  whether  he  had  not  arrived.  He  had 
not  arrived.  She  felt  more  dreary  now  than  during  the  first  days  in 
Moscow.  To  her  impatience  and  pining  for  him  there  were  now  added 
the  unpleasant  recollections  of  her  interview  with  Princess  Marya  and 
the  old  prince,  and  a  vague  dread  and  restlessness,  of  which  she  did  not 
know  the  cause.  She  was  continually  fancying  either  that  he  would  never 
come  or  that  something  would  happen  to  her  before  he  came.  She  could 
not  brood  calmly  for  long  hours  over  his  image  by  herself  as  she  had 
done  before.  As  soon  as  she  began  to  think  of  him,  her  memory  of  him 
was  mingled  with  the  recollection  of  the  old  prince  and  Princess  Marya, 
and  of  the  theatre  and  of  Kuragin.  Again  the  question  presented  itself 
whether  she  had  not  been  to  blame,  whether  she  had  not  broken  her  faith 
to  Prince  Andrey,  and  again  she  found  herself  going  over  in  the  minutest 
detail  every  word,  every  gesture,  every  shade  in  the  play  of  expression 
on  the  face  of  that  man,  who  had  known  how  to  awaken  in  her  a  terrible 
feeling  that  was  beyond  her  comprehension.  In  the  eyes  of  those  about 
her,  Natasha  seemed  livelier  than  usual,  but  she  was  far  from  being  as 
serene  and  happy  as  before. 

On  Sunday  morning  Marya  Dmitryevna  invited  her  guests  to  go  to 
Mass  to  her  parish  church  of  Uspenya  on  Mogiltse. 

‘I  don’t  like  those  fashionable  churches,’  she  said,  obviously  priding 
herself  on  her  independence  of  thought.  ‘God  is  the  same  everywhere.  Our 
parish  priest  is  an  excellent  man,  and  conducts  the  service  in  a  suitable 
way,  so  that  is  all  as  it  should  be,  and  his  deacon  too.  Is  there  something 
holier  about  it  when  there  are  concerts  in  the  choir?  I  don’t  like  it;  it’s 
simply  self-indulgence!  ’ 

Marya  Dmitryevna  liked  Sundays,  and  knew  how  to  keep  them  as 


WARANDPEACE  537 

holidays.  Her  house  was  always  all  scrubbed  out  and  cleaned  on  Saturday ; 
neither  she  nor  her  servants  did  any  work,  and  every  one  wore  holiday- 
dress  and  went  to  service.  There  were  additional  dishes  at  the  mistress’s 
dinner,  and  the  servants  had  vodka  and  roast  goose  or  a  sucking-pig  at 
theirs.  But  in  nothing  in  the  whole  house  was  the  holiday  so  marked  as 
in  the  broad,  severe  face  of  Marya  Dmitryevna,  which  on  that  day  wore 
a  never-varying  expression  of  solemnity. 

When  after  service  they  were  drinking  coffee  in  the  drawing-room, 
where  the  covers  had  been  removed  from  the  furniture,  the  servant  an¬ 
nounced  that  the  carriage  was  ready,  and  Marya  Dmitryevna,  dressed 
in  her  best  shawl  in  which  she  paid  calls,  rose  with  a  stern  air,  and  an¬ 
nounced  that  she  was  going  to  call  on  Prince  Nikolay  Andreitch  Bolkonsky 
to  ask  for  an  explanation  of  his  conduct  about  Natasha.  After  Marya 
Dmitryevna  had  gone,  a  dressmaker  waited  upon  the  Rostovs  from 
Madame  Chalmey,  and  Natasha,  very  glad  of  a  diversion,  went  into  a 
room  adjoining  the  drawing-room,  and  shutting  the  door  between,  began 
trying  on  her  new  dresses.  Just  as  she  had  put  on  a  bodice  basted  to¬ 
gether,  with  the  sleeves  not  yet  tacked  in,  and  was  turning  her  head  to 
look  at  the  fit  of  the  back  in  the  looking-glass,  she  caught  the  sound  of 
her  father’s  voice  in  the  drawing-room  in  eager  conversation  with  another 
voice,  a  woman’s  voice,  which  made  her  tlush  red.  It  was  the  voice  of 
Ellen.  Before  Natasha  had  time  to  take  off  the  bodice  she  was  trying  on, 
the  door  opened,  and  Countess  Bezuhov  walked  into  the  room,  wearing 
a  dark  heliotrope  velvet  gown  with  a  high  collar,  and  beaming  with  a 
good-natured  and  friendly  smile. 

‘O  my  enchantress!  ’  she  said  to  the  blushing  Natasha.  ‘Charming!  No, 
this  is  really  beyond  anything,  count,’  she  said  to  Count  Ilya  Andreitch, 
who  had  followed  her  in.  lHow  can  you  be  in  Moscow,  and  go  nowhere? 
No,  I  won’t  let  you  off!  This  evening  we  have  Mademoiselle  George  giving 
a  recitation,  and  a  few  people  are  coming;  and  if  you  don't  bring  your 
lovely  girls,  who  are  much  prettier  than  Mademoiselle  George,  I  give  up 
knowing  you!  My  husband’s  not  here,  he  has  gone  away  to  Tver,  or  I 
should  have  sent  him  for  you.  You  must  come,  you  positively  must,  before 
nine  o’clock.’ 

She  nodded  to  the  dressmaker,  who  knew  her,  and  was  curtseying 
-espectfully,  and  seated  herself  in  a  low  chair  beside  the  looking-glass, 
draping  the  folds  of  her  velvet  gown  picturesquely  about  her.  She  kept 
jp  a  flow  of  good-humoured  and  light-hearted  chatter,  and  repeatedly 
expressed  her  enthusiastic  admiration  of  Natasha’s  beauty.  She  looked 
Trough  her  dresses  and  admired  them,  spoke  with  admiration,  too,  of 
t  new  dress  of  her  own  ‘of  metallic  gas,’  which  she  had  received  from 
Paris,  and  advised  Natasha  to  have  one  like  it. 

,  ‘But  anything  suits  you,  my  charmer!’  she  declared.  The  smile  of 
fleasure  never  left  Natasha’s  face.  She  felt  happy,  and  as  it  were  blossom- 
ng  out  under  the  praises  of  this  charming  Countess  Bezuhov,  who  had 
;eemed  to  her  before  a  lady  so  unapproachable  and  dignified,  and  was 
low  being  so  kind  to  her.  Natasha’s  spirits  rose,  and  she  felt  almost  in 


538  WARANDPEACE 

love  with  this  handsome  and  good-natured  woman.  Ellen,  for  her  part, 
was  genuine  in  her  admiration  of  Natasha,  and  in  her  desire  to  make 
her  enjoy  herself.  Anatole  had  begged  her  to  throw  him  with  Natasha, 
and  it  was  with  that  object  she  had  come  to  the  Rostovs’.  The  idea  of 
throwing  her  brother  and  Natasha  together  amused  her. 

Although  Ellen  had  once  owed  Natasha  a  grudge  for  carrying  ofi 
Boris  from  her  in  Petersburg,  she  thought  no  more  of  that  now,  and 
with  all  her  heart  wished  Natasha  nothing  but  good.  As  she  was  leaving 
the  Rostovs’,  she  drew  her  protegee  aside. 

‘My  brother  was  dining  with  me  yesterday — we  half  died  with  laughing 
at  him— he  won’t  eat,  and  does  nothing  but  sigh  for  you,  my  charmer! 
He  is  madly,  madly  in  love  with  you,  my  dear.’ 

Natasha  flushed  crimson  on  hearing  those  words. 

‘How  she  blushes,  how  she  blushes,  my  pretty!’  Ellen  went  on.  ‘You 
must  be  sure  to  come.  If  you  do  love  some  one,  it  is  not  a  reason  to 
cloister  yourself.  Even  if  you  are  betrothed,  I  am  sure  your  betrothed 
would  have  preferred  you  to  go  into  society  rather  than  to  languish  in 
ennui.’ 

‘So  then  she  knows  I  am  engaged.  So  then  they  with  her  husband,  with 
Pierre,  with  that  good  Pierre,  talked  and  laughed  about  it.  So  that  it 
means  nothing.’ 

And  again  under  Ellen’s  influence  what  had  struck  her  before  as 
terrible  seemed  to  her  simple  and  natural.  ‘And  she,  such  a  grande  dame , 
is  so  kind,  and  obviously  she  likes  me  with  all  her  heart,’  thought  Natasha, 
‘And  why  not  enjoy  myself,’  thought  Natasha,  gazing  at  Ellen  with  wide- 
open,  wondering  eyes. 

Marya  Dmitryevna  came  back  to  dinner  silent  and  serious,  having 
evidently  been  defeated  by  the  old  prince.  She  was  too  much  agitated 
by  the  conflict  she  had  been  through  to  be  able  to  describe  the  interview. 
To  the  count’s  inquiries,  she  replied  that  everything  had  been  all  right 
and  she  would  tell  him  about  it  next  day.  On  hearing  of  the  visit  of 
Countess  Bezuhov  and  the  invitation  for  the  evening,  Marya  Dmitryevna 
said: 

‘I  don’t  care  to  associate  with  Countess  Bezuhov  and  I  don’t  advise 
you  to,  but  still,  since  you  have  promised,  better  go.  It  will  divert  your 
mind,’  she  added,  addressing  Natasha. 


XIII 

Count  Ilya  Andreitch  took  his  two  girls  to  the  Countess  Bezuhov’s. 
There  were  a  good  many  people  assembled  there.  But  Natasha  hardly 
knew  any  of  the  persons  present.  Count  Ilya  Andreitch  observed  with 
dissatisfaction  that  almost  all  the  company  consisted  of  men  or  of  ladies 
notorious  for  the  freedom  of  their  behaviour.  Mademoiselle  George  was 
standing  in  one  corner  of  the  room,  surrounded  by  young  men.  There 
were  several  Frenchmen  present,  and  among  them  Metivier,  who  had 


WARANDPEACE  539 

been  a  constant  visitor  at  Countess  Bezuhov’s  ever  since  her  arrival  in 
Moscow.  Count  Ilya  Andreitch  made  up  his  mind  not  to  take  a  hand  at 
cards,  not  to  leave  his  daughter’s  side,  and  to  get  away  as  soon  as  Made¬ 
moiselle  George’s  performance  was  over. 

Anatole  was  at  the  door,  unmistakably  on  the  look-out  for  the  Rostovs. 
At  once  greeting  the  count,  he  went  up  to  Natasha  and  followed  her  in. 
As  soon  as  Natasha  saw  him,  the  same  feeling  came  upon  her  as  at  the 
theatre — the  feeling  of  gratified  vanity  at  his  admiration  of  her,  and  terror 
at  the  absence  of  any  moral  barrier  between  them. 

Ellen  gave  Natasha  a  delighted  welcome,  and  was  loud  in  her  admira¬ 
tion  of  her  loveliness  and  her  dress.  Soon  after  their  arrival,  Mademoiselle 
George  went  out  of  the  room  to  change  her  dress.  In  the  drawing-room 
chairs  were  being  set  in  rows  and  people  began  to  sit  down.  Anatole 
moved  a  chair  for  Natasha,  and  would  have  sat  down  by  her,  but  the 
count,  who  was  keeping  his  eye  on  Natasha,  took  the  seat  beside  her. 
Anatole  sat  down  behind. 

i  Mademoiselle  George,  with  bare,  fat,  dimpled  arms,  and  a  red  scarf 
flung  over  one  shoulder,  came  into  the  empty  space  left  for  her  between 
the  chairs  and  threw  herself  into  an  unnatural  pose.  An  enthusiastic 
whisper  was  audible. 

Mademoiselle  George  scanned  her  audience  with  stern  and  gloomy 
3yes,  and  began  reciting  French  verses,  describing  her  guilty  love  for  her 
;on.  In  places  she  raised  her  voice,  in  places  she  dropped  to  a  whisper 
solemnly  lifting  her  head;  in  places  she  broke  off  and  hissed  with  rolling 
jyes. 

‘Exquisite,  divine,  marvellous!’  was  heard  on  all  sides.  Natasha  gazed 
■it  the  fat  actress;  but  she  heard  nothing,  saw  nothing  and  understood 
nothing  of  what  was  passing  before  her.  She  felt  nothing,  but  that  she 
was  borne  away  again  irrevocably  into  that  strange  and  senseless  world  so 
emote  from  her  old  world,  a  world  in  which  there  was  no  knowing  what 
vas  good  and  what  was  bad,  what  was  sensible  and  what  was  senseless. 
3ehind  her  was  sitting  Anatole;  and  conscious  of  his  nearness,  she  was  in 
Tightened  expectation  of  something. 

i  After  the  first  monologue  all  the  company  rose  and  surrounded  Made-_ 
noiselle  George,  expressing  their  admiration. 

‘How  handsome  she  is!’  said  Natasha  to  her  father,  as  he  got  up  with 
he  rest  and  moved  through  the  crowd  to  the  actress. 

‘I  don’t  think  so,  looking  at  you,’  said  Anatole,  following  Natasha.  He 
aid  this  at  a  moment  when  no  one  but  she  could  hear  him.  ‘You  are 
harming  .  .  .  from  the  moment  I  first  saw  you,  I  have  not  ceased  .  . 

‘Come  along,  come  along,  Natasha!’  said  the  count,  turning  back  for 
is  daughter.  ‘Flow  pretty  she  is!’ 

Natasha  saying  nothing  went  up  to  her  father,  and  gazed  at  him  with 
yes  of  inquiring  wonder. 

After  several  recitations  in  different  styles,  Mademoiselle  George  went 
way,  and  Countess  Bezuhov  invited  all  the  company  to  the  great  hall. 

The  count  would  have  taken  leave,  but  Ellen  besought  him  not  to 


54°  WARANDPEACE 

spoil  her  improvised  ball.  The  Rostovs  stayed  on.  Anatole  asked  Natasha 
for  a  waltz,  and  during  the  waltz,  squeezing  her  waist  and  her  hand,  he 
told  her  she  was  bewitching  and  that  he  loved  her.  During  the  ecossaise. 
which  she  danced  again  with  Kuragin,  when  they  were  left  alone  Anatole 
said  nothing  to  her,  he  simply  looked  at  her.  Natasha  was  in  doubt 
whether  she  had  not  dreamed  what  he  said  to  her  during  the  waltz.  At 
the  end  of  the  first  figure  he  pressed  her  hand  again.  Natasha  lifted  hei 
frightened  eyes  to  his  face,  but  there  was  an  expression  of  such  assurance 
and  warmth  in  his  fond  look  and  smile  that  she  could  not  as  she  lookec 
at  him  say  what  she  had  to  say  to  him.  She  dropped  her  eyes. 

‘Don’t  say  such  things  to  me.  I  am  betrothed,  and  I  love  anothei 
man  .  .  .’  she  articulated  rapidly.  She  glanced  at  him.  Anatole  was 
neither  disconcerted  nor  mortified  at  what  she  had  said. 

‘Don’t  talk  to  me  of  that.  What  is  that  to  me,’  he  said;  ‘I  tell  you  I  an 
mad,  mad  with  love  of  you.  Is  it  my  fault  that  you  are  fascinating?  .  . 
It’s  for  us  to  begin.’ 

Natasha,  eager  and  agitated,  looked  about  her  with  wide-open,  fright 
ened  eyes,  and  seemed  to  be  enjoying  herself  more  than  usual.  Shi 
scarcely  grasped  anything  that  happened  that  evening.  They  dancea  thi 
ecossaise  and  ‘Grandfather.’  Her  father  suggested  their  going,  and  shi 
begged  to  stay  longer.  Wherever  she  was,  and  with  whomsoever  she  wa 
speaking,  she  felt  his  eyes  upon  her.  Then  she  remembered  that  she  ha< 
asked  her  father’s  permission  to  go  into  a  dressing-room  to  rearrang. 
her  dress,  that  Ellen  had  followed  her,  had  talked  to  her,  laughing,  of  he 
brother’s  passion,  and  that  in  the  little  divan-room  she  had  been  met  agaii 
by  Anatole;  that  Ellen  had  somehow  vanished,  they  were  left  alone,  am 
Anatole  taking  her  by  the  hand,  had  said  in  a  tender  voice: 

‘I  can’t  come  to  see  you,  but  is  it  possible  that  I  shall  never  see  you 
I  love  you  madly.  Can  I  never  .  .  .  ?’  and  barring  her  way  he  brough 
his  face  close  to  hers. 

His  large,  shining,  masculine  eyes  were  so  close  to  her  eyes,  that  sh 
could  see  nothing  but  those  eyes. 

‘Natalie?’  his  voice  whispered  interrogatively,  and  her  hands  wer 
squeezed  till  it  hurt.  ‘Natalie?’ 

‘I  don’t  understand;  I  have  nothing  to  say,’  was  the  answer  in  her  eye: 

Burning  lips  were  pressed  to  her  lips,  and  at  the  same  instant  she  fe 
herself  set  free  again,  and  caught  the  sound  of  Ellen’s  steps  and  rustlin 
gown  in  the  room  again.  Natasha  looked  round  towards  Ellen;  then,  re 
and  trembling,  she  glanced  at  him  with  alarmed  inquiry,  and  move 
towards  the  door. 

‘One  word,  just  one  word,  for  God’s  sake,’  Anatole  was  saying.  St 
stopped.  She  so  wanted  him  to  say  that  word,  that  would  have  explaine 
to  her  what  had  happened  and  to  which  she  could  have  found  an  answe 

‘Natalie,  one  word  .  .  .  one  .  .  .’  he  kept  repeating,  plainly  n< 
knowing  what  to  say,  and  he  repeated  it  till  Ellen  reached  them. 

Ellen  went  back  with  Natasha  to  the  drawing-room.  The  Rostovs  wei 
away  without  staying  to  supper. 


WARANDPEACE  541 

When  she  got  home,  Natasha  did  not  sleep  all  night.  She  was  tortured 
by  the  insoluble  question,  Which  did  she  love,  Anatole  or  Prince  Andrey? 
Prince  Andrey,  she  did  love- — she  remembered  clearly  how  great  her 
love  was  for  him.  But  she  loved  Anatole  too,  of  that  there  was  no  doubt. 
i‘Else  could  all  that  have  happened?’  she  thought.  ‘If  after  that  I  could 
answer  with  a  smile  to  his  smile  at  parting,  if  I  could  sink  to  that,  it 
means  that  I  fell  in  love  with  him  from  the  first  minute.  So  he  must  be 
kind,  noble,  and  good,  and  I  could  not  help  loving  him.  What  am  I  to  do, 
iif  I  love  him  and  the  other  too?’  she  said  to  herself,  and  was  unable  to  find 
an  answer  to  those  terrible  questions. 


XIV 

The  morning  came  with  daily  cares  and' bustle.  Every  one  got  up  and 
began  to  move  about  and  to  talk;  dressmakers  came  again;  again  Marya 
Dmitryevna  went  out  and  they  were  summoned  to  tea.  Natasha  kept 
uneasily  looking  round  at  every  one  with  wide-open  eyes,  as  though  she 
wanted  to  intercept  every  glance  turned  upon  her.  She  did  her  utmost 
to  seem  exactly  as  usual. 

After  luncheon — it  was  always  her  best  time — Marya  Dmitryevna 
seated  herself  in  her  own  arm-chair  and  drew  Natasha  and  the  old  count 
to  her. 

‘Well,  my  friends,  I  have  thought  the  whole  matter  over  now,  and  I’ll 
tell  you  my  advice,’  she  began.  ‘Yesterday,  as  you  know,  I  was  at  Prince 
Bolkonsky’s;  well,  I  had  a  talk  with  him  ...  He  thought  fit  to  scream 
at  me.  But  there’s  no  screaming  me  down!  I  had  it  all  out  with  him.’ 

‘Well,  but  what  does  he  mean?’  asked  the  count. 

|  ‘He’s  crazy  ...  he  won’t  hear  of  it,  and  there’s  no  more  to  be  said.  As 
it  is  we  have  given  this  poor  girl  worry  enough,’  said  Marya  Dmitryevna. 
‘And  my  advice  to  you  is,  to  make  an  end  of  it  and  go  home  to  Otrad- 
noe  .  .  .  and  there  to  wait.’ 

‘Oh  no!’  cried  Natasha. 

‘Yes,  to  go  home,’  said  Marya  Dmitryevna,  ‘and  to  wait  there.  If  your 
betrothed  comes  here  now,  there'll  be  no  escaping  a  quarrel;  but  alone 
here  he’ll  have  it  all  out  with  the  old  man,  and  then  come  on  to  you.’ 

Count  Ilya  Andreitch  approved  of  this  suggestion,  and  at  once  saw 
ill  the  sound  sense  of  it.  If  the  old  man  were  to  come  round,  then  it  would 
be  better  to  visit  him  at  Moscow  or  Bleak  Hills,  later  on;  if  not,  then  the 
wedding,  against  his  will,  could  only  take  place  at  Otradnoe. 

:  ‘And  that’s  perfectly  true,’  said  he.  ‘I  regret  indeed  that  I  ever  went 
0  see  him  and  took  her  too,’  said  the  count. 

‘No,  why  regret  it?  Being  here,  you  could  do  no  less  than  show  him 
espect.  If  he  wouldn’t  receive  it,  that’s  his  affair,’  said  Marya  Dmitryevna, 
;earching  for  something  in  her  reticule.  ‘And  now  the  trousseau’s  ready, 
what  have  you  to  wait  for?  What  is  not  ready,  I’ll  send  after  you.  Though 
!  I’m  sorry  to  lose  you,  still  the  best  thing  is  for  you  to  go,  and  God  be  with 


542  WARANDPEACE 

you.’  Finding  what  she  was  looking  for  in  her  reticule,  she  handed  it  to 
Natasha.  It  was  a  letter  from  Princess  Marya.  ‘She  writes  to  you.  How  wor¬ 
ried  she  is,  poor  thing!  She  is  afraid  you  might  think  she  does  not  like  you.’ 

‘Well,  she  doesn’t  like  me,’  said  Natasha. 

‘Nonsense,  don’t  say  so,’  cried  Marya  Dmitryevna. 

‘I  won’t  take  any  one’s  word  for  that,  I  know  she  doesn’t  like  me,’  said 
Natasha  boldly  as  she  took  the  letter,  and  there  was  a  look  of  cold  and 
angry  resolution  in  her  face,  that  made  Marya  Dmitryevna  look  at  her 
more  closely  and  frown. 

‘Don’t  you  answer  me  like  that,  my  good  girl/  she  said.  ‘If  I  say  so, 
it’s  the  truth.  Write  an  answer  to  her.’ 

Natasha  made  no  reply,  and  went  to  her  own  room  to  read  Princess 
Marya’s  letter. 

Princess  Marya  wrote  that  she  was  in  despair  at  the  misunderstanding 
that  had  arisen  between  them.  Whatever  her  father’s  feelings  might  be, 
wrote  Princess  Marya,  she  begged  Natasha  to  believe  that  she  could  not 
fail  to  love  her,  as  the  girl  chosen  by  her  brother,  for  whose  happiness  she 
was  ready  to  make  any  sacrifice.  ,1 

‘Do  not  believe,  though/  she  wrote,  ‘that  my  father  is  ill-disposed  to 
you.  He  is  an  old  man  and  an  invalid,  for  whom  one  must  make  excuses. 
But  he  is  good-hearted  and  generous,  and  will  come  to  love  the  woman 
who  makes  his  son  happy.’  Princess  Marya  begged  Natasha,  too,  to  fix  a 
time  when  she  might  see  her  again. 

After  reading  the  letter,  Natasha  sat  down  to  the  writing-table  to 
answer  it.  ‘Dear  princess,’  she  began,  writing  rapidly  and  mechanically 
in  French,  and  there  she  stopped.  What  more  could  she  write  after  what 
had  happened  the  day  before?  ‘Yes,  yes,  all  that  had  happened,  and 
now  everything  was  different,’  she  thought,  sitting  before  the  letter  she 
had  begun.  ‘Must  I  refuse  him?  Must  I  really?  That’s  awful!  .  .  .’  And 
to  avoid  these  horrible  thoughts,  she  went  in  to  Sonya,  and  began  looking 
through  embroidery  designs  with  her. 

After  dinner  Natasha  went  to  her  own  room  and  took  up  Princess 
Marya’s  letter  again.  ‘Can  everything  be  over?’  she  thought.  ‘Can  all  this 
have  happened  so  quickly  and  have  destroyed  all  that  went  before?’  She 
recalled  in  all  its  past  strength  her  love  for  Prince  Andrey,  and  at  the 
same  time  she  felt  that  she  loved  Kuragin.  She  vividly  pictured  herself 
the  wife  of  Prince  Andrey,  of  her  happiness  with  him,  called  up  the 
picture  she  had  so  often  dwelt  on  in  her  imagination,  and  at  the  same  1 
time,  all  aglow  with  emotion,  she  recalled  every  detail  of  her  interview 
the  previous  evening  with  Anatole. 

‘Why  could  not  that  be  as  well?’  she  wondered  sometimes  in  complete 
bewilderment.  ‘It’s  only  so  that  I  could  be  perfectly  happy:  as  it  is,  I  have 
to  choose,  and  without  either  of  them  I  can’t  be  happy.  There’s  one  thing/ 
she  thought,  ‘to  tell  Prince  Andrey  what  has  happened;  to  hide  it  from 
him— are  equally  impossible.  But  with  him  nothing  is  spoilt.  But  can  ; 
I  part  for  ever  from  the  happiness  of  Prince  Andrey’s  love,  which  I  have 
been  living  on  for  so  long?’ 


WAR  AND  PEACE  S43 

‘Madame,’  whispered  a  maid,  coming  into  the  room  with  a  mysterious 
air,  ‘a  man  told  me  to  give  you  this.’  The  girl  gave  her  a  letter.  ‘Only  for 
Christ’s  sake  .  .  .’  said  the  girl,  as  Natasha,  without  thinking,  me¬ 
chanically  broke  the  seal  and  began  reading  a  love-letter  from  Anatole, 
of  which  she  did  not  understand  a  word,  but  understood  only  that  it  was 
a  letter  from  him,  from  the  man  whom  she  loved.  ‘Yes,  she  loved  him; 
otherwise,  how  could  what  had  happened  have  happened?  How  could 
a  love-letter  from  him  be  in  her  hand?’ 

With  trembling  hands  Natasha  held  that  passionate  love-letter,  com¬ 
posed  for  Anatole  by  Dolohov,  and  as  she  read  it,  she  found  in  it  echoes 
of  all  that  it  seemed  to  her  she  was  feeling  herself. 

‘Since  yesterday  evening  my  fate  is  sealed:  to  be  loved  by  you  or  to  die. 
There  is  nothing  else  left  for  me,’  the  letter  began.  Then  he  wrote  that 
he  knew  her  relations  would  never  give  her  to  him,  to  Anatole;  that  there 
were  secret  reasons  for  that  which  he  could  only  reveal  to  her  alone;  but 
that  if  she  loved  him,  she  had  but  to  utter  the  word  Yes,  and  no  human 
force  could  hinder  their  happiness.  Love  would  conquer  all.  He  could 
capture  her  and  bear  her  away  to  the  ends  of  the  earth. 

‘Yes,  yes,  I  love  him!’  thought  Natasha,  reading  the  letter  over  for  the 
twentieth  time,  and  finding  some  special  deep  meaning  in  every  word. 

That  evening  Marya  Dmitryevna  was  going  to  the  Arharovs’,  and  pro¬ 
posed  taking  the  young  ladies  with  her.  Natasha  pleaded  a  headache  and 
stayed  at  home. 

XV 

On  returning  late  in  the  evening,  Sonya  went  into  Natasha’s  room,  and 
to  her  surprise  found  her  not  undressed  asleep  on  the  sofa.  On  the  table 
near  her  Anatole’s  letter  lay  open.  Sonya  picked  up  the  letter  and  began 
to  read  it. 

She  read  it,  and  looked  at  Natasha  asleep,  seeking  in  her  face  some 
explanation  of  what  she  had  read  and  not  finding  it.  Her  face  was  quiet, 
gentle,  and  happy.  Clutching  at  her  own  chest  to  keep  herself  from  chok¬ 
ing,  Sonya,  pale  and  shaking  with  horror  and  emotion,  sat  down  in  a  low 
chair  and  burst  into  tears. 

‘How  was  it  I  saw  nothing?  How  can  it  have  gone  so  far?  Can  she  have 
|  ceased  loving  Prince  Andrey?  And  how  could  she  have  let  this  Kuragin 
go  as  far  as  this?  He’s  a  deceiver  and  a  villain,  that’s  clear.  What  will 
Nikolenka— dear,  noble  Nikolenka — do  when  he  hears  of  it?  So  that  was 
the  meaning  of  her  excited,  determined,  unnatural  face  the  day  before 
;  yesterday,  and  yesterday  and  to-day,’  thought  Sonya.  ‘But  it’s  impossible 
that  she  can  care  for  him!  Most  likely  she  opened  the  letter  not  knowing 
from  whom  it  was.  Most  likely  she  feels  insulted  by  it.  She’s  not  capable 
of  doing  such  a  thing!’ 

Sonya  dried  her  tears  and  went  up  to  Natasha,  carefully  scrutinising 
her  face  again. 

‘Natasha!’  she  said,  hardly  audibly. 


544  WAR  AND  PEACE 

Natasha  waked  up  and  saw  Sonya. 

‘Ah,  jmu  have  come  back?’ 

And  with  the  decision  and  tenderness  common  at  the  moment  of 
awakening  she  embraced  her  friend.  But  noticing  embarrassment  in 
Sonya’s  face,  her  face  too  expressed  embarrassment  and  suspicion. 

‘Sonya,  you  have  read  the  letter?’  she  said. 

‘Yes,’  said  Sonya  softly. 

Natasha  smiled  ecstatically. 

‘No,  Sonya,  I  can't  help  it!’  she  said.  ‘I  can’t  keep  it  secret  from  you 
any  longer.  You  know  we  love  each  other!  .  .  .  Sonya,  darling,  he 
writes  .  .  .  Sonya  .  . 

Sonya  gazed  with  wide-open  eyes  at  Natasha,  as  though  unable  to 
believe  her  ears. 

‘But  Bolkonsky?’  she  said. 

‘O  Sonya,  oh,  if  you  could  only  know  how  happy  I  am!’  said  Natasha. 
‘You  don’t  know  what  love  .  .  .’ 

‘But,  Natasha,  you  can’t  mean  that  all  that  is  over?’ 

Natasha  looked  with  her  big,  wide  eyes  at  Sonya  as  though  not  under¬ 
standing  her  question. 

‘Are  you  breaking  it  off  with  Prince  Andrey  then?’  said  Sonya. 

‘Oh,  you  don’t  understand;  don’t  talk  nonsense;  listen,’  said  Natasha, 
with  momentary  annoyance. 

‘No,  I  can’t  believe  it,’  repeated  Sonya.  ‘I  don’t  understand  it.  What, 
for  a  whole  year  you  have  been  loving  one  man,  and  all  at  once  .  .  . 
Why,  you  have  only  seen  him  three  times.  Natasha,  I  can’t  believe  you, 
you’re  joking.  In  three  days  to  forget  everything,  and  like  this  .  .  .’ 

‘Three  days,’  Natasha.  ‘It  seems  to  me  as  though  I  had  loved  him  for 
a  hundred  years.  It  seems  to  me  that  I  have  never  loved  any  one  before 
him.  You  can’t  understand  that.  Sonya,  stay,  sit  here.’  Natasha  hugged 
and  kissed  her.  ‘I  have  been  told  of  its  happening,  and  no  doubt  you  have 
heard  of  it  too,  but  it’s  only  now  that  I  have  felt  such  love.  It’s  not  what 
I  have  felt  before.  As  soon  as  I  saw  him,  I  felt  that  he  was  my  sovereign 
and  I  was  his  slave,  and  that  I  could  not  help  loving  him.  Yes,  his  slave! 
Whatever  he  bids  me,  I  shall  do.  You  don’t  understand  that.  What  am 
I  to  do?  What  am  I  to  do,  Sonya?’  said  Natasha,  with  a  blissful  and 
frightened  face. 

‘But  only  think  what  you  are  doing,’  said  Sonya.  ‘I  can’t  leave  it  like 
this.  These  secret  letters  .  .  .  How  could  you  let  him  go  so  far  as  that?’ 
she  said,  with  a  horror  and  aversion  she  could  with  difficulty  conceal. 

‘I  have  told  you,’  answered  Natasha,  ‘that  I  have  no  will.  How  is  it 
you  don’t  understand  that?  I  love  him!’ 

‘Then  I  can’t  let  it  go  on  like  this.  I  shall,  tell  about  it,’  cried  Sonya, 
with  a  burst  of  tears. 

‘What  ...  for  God’s  sake  ...  If  you  tell,  you  are  my  enemy,’  said 
Natasha.  ‘You  want  to  make  me  miserable,  and  you  want  us  to  be  sepa¬ 
rated  .  .  .’ 


WAR  AND  PEACE  545 

On  seeing  Natasha’s  alarm,  Sonya  wept  tears  of  shame  and  pity  for  her 
friend. 

‘But  what  has  passed  between  you?’  she  asked.  ‘What  has  he  said  to 
you?  Why  doesn’t  he  come  to  the  house?’ 

NStasha  made  no  answer  to  her  question. 

‘For  God’s  sake,  Sonya,  don’t  tell  any  one;  don’t  torture  me,’  Natasha 
implored  her.  ‘Remember  that  it  doesn't  do  to  meddle  in  such  matters.  I 
have  told  you  .  .  .’ 

‘But  why  this  secrecy?  Why  doesn’t  he  come  to  the  house?’  Sonya 
persisted.  ‘Why  doesn’t  he  ask  for  your  hand  straight  out?  Prince  Andrey, 
you  know,  gave  you  complete  liberty,  if  it  really  is  so;  but  I  can’t  be¬ 
lieve  in  it.  Natasha,  have  you  thought  what  the  secret  reasons  can  be?’ 

Natasha  looked  with  wondering  eyes  at  Sonya.  Evidently  it  was  the 
first  time  that  question  had  presented  itself  to  her,  and  she  did  not  know 
how  to  answer  it. 

‘What  the  reasons  are,  I  don’t  know.  But  there  must  be  reasons!  ’ 

Sonya  sighed  and  shook  her  head  distrustfully. 

‘If  there  were  reasons  .  .  .’  she  was  beginning.  But  Natasha,  divining 
her  doubts,  interrupted  her  in  dismay. 

‘Sonya,  you  mustn’t  doubt  of  him;  you  mustn’t,  you  mustn't!  Do  you 
understand?’  she  cried. 

‘Does  he  love  you?’ 

‘Does  he  love  me?’  repeated  Natasha,  with  a  smile  of  compassion  for 
her  friend’s  dulness  of  comprehension.  ‘Why,  you  have  read  his  letter, 
haven’t  you?  You’ve  seen  him.’ 

‘But  if  he  is  a  dishonourable  man?’ 

‘He!  ...  a  dishonourable  man?  If  only  you  knew!’  said  Natasha. 

‘If  he  is  an  honourable  man,  he  ought  either  to  explain  his  intentions, 
or  to  give  up  seeing  you;  and  if  you  won’t  do  that,  I  will  do  it.  I’ll  write 
to  him.  I’ll  tell  papa,’  said  Sonya  resolutely. 

‘But  I  can’t  live  without  him!’  cried  Natasha. 

‘Natasha,  I  don’t  understand  you.  And  what  are  you  saying?  Think 
of  your  father,  of  Nikolenka.’ 

‘I  don’t  care  for  any  one,  I  don't  love  any  one  but  him.  How  dare  you 
say  he’s  dishonourable!  Don't  you  know  that  I  love  him?’  cried  Natasha. 
‘Sonya,  go  away;  I  don’t  want  to  quarrel  with  you;  go  away,  for  God's 
sake,  go  away;  you  see  how  wretched  I  am,’  cried  Natasha  angrily,  in  a 
voice  of  repressed  irritation  and  despair.  Sonya  burst  into  sobs  and  ran  out 
of  the  room. 

Natasha  went  to  the  table,  and  without  a  moment’s  reflection  wrote 
that  answer  to  Princess  Marya,  which  she  had  been  unable  to  wTrite  all  the 
morning.  In  her  letter  she  told  Princess  Marya  briefly  that  all  misunder¬ 
standings  between  them  were  at  an  end,  as  taking  advantage  of  the 
generosity  of  Prince  Andrey,  who  had  at  parting  given  her  full  liberty, 
she  begged  her  to  forget  everything  and  forgive  her  if  she  had  been  in 
fault  in  any  way,  but  she  could  not  be  his  wife.  It  all  seemed  to  her  so 
easy,  so  simple,  and  so  clear  at  that  moment. 


546  WARANDPEACE 

The  Rostovs  were  to  return  to  the  country  on  Friday,  but  on  Wednes¬ 
day  the  count  went  with  the  intending  purchaser  to  his  estate  near 
Moscow. 

On  the  day  the  count  left,  Sonya  and  Natasha  were  invited  to  a  big 
dinner-party  at  Julie  Karagin’s,  and  Marya  Dmitryevna  took  them.  At 
that  dinner  Natasha  met  Anatole  again,  and  Sonya  noticed  that  Natasha 
said  something  to  him,  trying  not  to  be  overheard,  and  was  all  through 
the  dinner  more  excited  than  before.  When  they  got  home,  Natasha  was 
the  first  to  enter  upon  the  conversation  with  Sonya  that  her  friend  was 
expecting. 

‘Well,  Sonya,  you  said  all  sorts  of  silly  things  about  him,’  Natasha 
began  in  a  meek  voice,  the  voice  in  which  children  speak  when  they  want 
to  be  praised  for  being  good.  ‘I  have  had  it  all  out  with  him  to-day.’ 

‘Well,  what  did  he  say?  Well?  Come,  what  did  he  say?  Natasha,  I’m 
so  glad  you’re  not  angry  with  me.  Tell  me  everything,  all  the  truth.  What 
did  he  say?’ 

Natasha  sank  into  thought. 

‘O  Sonya,  if  you  knew  him  as  I  do!  He  said  ...  He  asked  me  what 
promise  I  had  given  Bolkonsky.  He  was  so  glad  that  I  was  free  to  refuse 
him.’ 

Sonya  sighed  dejectedly. 

‘But  you  haven’t  refused  Bolkonsky,  have  you?’  she  said. 

‘Oh,  perhaps  I  have  refused  him!  Perhaps  it’s  all  at  an  end  with 
Bolkonsky.  Why  do  you  think  so  ill  of  me?’ 

‘I  don’t  think  anything,  only  I  don’t  understand  this.  .  .  .’ 

‘Wait  a  little,  Sonya,  you  will  understand  it  all.  You  will  see  the  sort 
of  man  he  is.  Don’t  think  ill  of  me,  or  of  him.’ 

‘I  don’t  think  ill  of  any  one;  I  like  every  one  and  am  sorry  for  every 
one.  But  what  am  I  to  do?’ 

Sonya  would  not  let  herself  be  won  over  by  the  affectionate  tone 
Natasha  took  with  her.  The  softer  and  the  more  ingratiating  Natasha’s 
face  became,  the  more  serious  and  stern  became  the  face  of  Sonya. 

‘Natasha,’  she  said,  ‘you  asked  me  not  to  speak  to  you,  and  I  haven’t 
spoken;  now  you  have  begun  yourself.  Natasha,  I  don’t  trust  him.  Why 
this  secrecy?’ 

‘Again,  again!’  interrupted  Natasha. 

‘Natasha,  I  am  afraid  for  you.’ 

‘What  is  there  to  be  afraid  of?’ 

‘I  am  afraid  you  will  be  ruined,’  said  Sonya  resolutely,  herself  horrified 
at  what  she  was  saying. 

Natasha’s  face  expressed  anger  again. 

‘Then  I  will  be  ruined,  I  will;  I’ll  hasten  to  my  ruin.  It’s  not  your 
business.  It’s  not  you,  but  I,  will  suffer  for  it.  Leave  me  alone,  leave  me 
alone.  I  hate  you! ’ 

‘Natasha!  ’  Sonya  appealed  to  her  in  dismay. 

‘I  hate  you,  I  hate  you !  And  you’re  my  enemy  for  ever !  ’ 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


S47 


Natasha  ran  out  of  the  room. 

Natasha  avoided  Sonya  and  did  not  speak  to  her  again.  With  the  same 
expression  of  agitated  wonder  and  guilt  she  wandered  about  the  rooms, 
taking  up  first  one  occupation  and  then  another,  and  throwing  them  aside 
again  at  once. 

Hard  as  it  was  for  Sonya,  she  kept  watch  over  her  friend  and  never  let 
her  out  of  her  sight. 

On  the  day  before  that  fixed  for  the  count’s  return,  Sonya  noticed  that 
Natasha  sat  all  the  morning  at  the  drawing-room  window,  as  though 
expecting  something,  and  that  she  made  a  sign  to  an  officer  who  passed 
by,  whom  Sonya  took  to  be  Anatole. 

Sonya  began  watching  her  friend  even  more  attentively,  and  she  noticed 
that  all  dinner-time  and  in  the  evening  Natasha  was  in  a  strange  and 
unnatural  state,  unlike  herself.  She  made  irrelevant  replies  to  questions 
asked  her,  began  sentences  and  did  not  finish  them,  and  laughed  at  every¬ 
thing. 

After  tea  Sonya  saw  the  maid  timidly  waiting  for  her  to  pass  at 
Natasha’s  door.  She  let  her  go  in,  and  listening  at  the  door,  found  out 
that  another  letter  had  been  given  her.  And  all  at  once  it  was  clear  to 
Sonya  that  Natasha  had  some  dreadful  plan  for  that  evening.  Sonya 
knocked  at  her  door.  Natasha  would  not  let  her  in. 

‘She  is  going  to  run  away  with  him!’  thought  Sonya.  ‘She  is  capable 
of  anything.  There  was  something  particularly  piteous  and  determined 
in  her  face  to-day.  She  cried  as  she  said  good-bye  to  uncle,’  Sonya  remem¬ 
bered.  ‘Yes,  it’s  certain,  she’s  going  to  run  away  with  him;  but  what  am 
I  to  do?’  wondered  Sonya,  recalling  now  all  the  signs  that  so  clearly 
betokened  some  dreadful  resolution  on  Natasha’s  part.  ‘The  count  is  not 
here.  What  am  I  to  do?  Write  to  Kuragin,  demanding  an  explanation 
from  him?  But  who  is  to  make  him  answer?  Write  to  Pierre,  as  Prince 
Andrey  asked  me  to  do  in  case  of  trouble?  .  .  .  But  perhaps  she  really 
has  refused  Bolkonsky  (she  sent  off  a  letter  to  Princess  Marya  yester¬ 
day).  Uncle  is  not  here.’ 

To  tell  Marya  Dmitryevna,  who  had  such  faith  in  Natasha,  seemed 
to  Sonya  a  fearful  step  to  take. 

‘But  one  way  or  another,’  thought  Sonya,  standing  in  the  dark  corridor, 
‘now  or  never  the  time  has  come  for  me  to  show  that  I  am  mindful  of  all 
the  benefits  I  have  received  from  their  family  and  that  I  love  Nikolay.  No, 
if  I  have  to  go  three  nights  together  without  sleep;  I  won’t  leave  this 
corridor,  and  I  will  prevent  her  passing  by  force,  and  not  let  disgrace 
come  upon  their  family,’  she  thought. 


XVI 

Anatole  had  lately  moved  into  Dolohov’s  quarters.  The  plan  for  the 
abduction  of  Natasha  Rostov  had  been  all  planned  out  and  prepared 


543  WAR  AND  PEACE 

several  days  before  by  Dolohov,  and  on  the  day  when  Sonya  had  listened 
at  Natasha’s  door  and  resolved  to  protect  her,  that  plan  was  to  be  put  into 
execution.  Natasha  had  promised  to  come  out  to  Kuragin  at  the  back 
entrance  at  ten  o’clock  in  the  evening.  Kuragin  was  to  get  her  into  a 
sledge  that  was  to  be  all  ready  with  three  horses  in  it,  and  to  drive  her 
off  sixty  versts  from  Moscow  to  the  village  of  Kamenka,  where  an  un¬ 
frocked  priest  was  in  readiness  to  perform  a  marriage  ceremony  over 
them.  At  Kamenka  a  relay  of  horses  was  to  be  in  readiness,  which  was  to 
take  them  as  far  as  the  Warsaw  road,  and  thence  they  were  to  hasten 
abroad  by  means  of  post-horses. 

Anatole  had  a  passport  and  an  order  for  post-horses  and  ten  thousand 
roubles  borrowed  from  his  sister,  and  ten  thousand  more  raised  by  the 
assistance  of  Dolohov. 

The  two  witnesses  of  the  mock  marriage  ceremony — Hvostikov,  once 
a  petty  official,  a  man  of  whom  Dolohov  made  use  at  cards,  and  Makarin, 
a  retired  hussar,  a  weak  and  good-natured  man,  whose  devotion  to  Kura¬ 
gin  was  unbounded — were  sitting  over  their  tea  in  the  outer  room. 

In  Dolohov’s  big  study,  decorated  from  the  walls  to  the  ceiling  with 
Persian  rugs,  bearskins,  and  weapons,  Dolohov  was  sitting  in  a  travelling 
tunic  and  high  boots  in  front  of  an  open  bureau  on  which  lay  accounts 
and  bundles  of  bank  notes.  Anatole,  in  an  unbuttoned  uniform,  was 
walking  to  and  fro  from  the  room  where  the  witnesses  were  sitting 
through  the  study  into  a  room  behind,  where  his  French  valet  with 
some  other  servants  was  packing  up  the  last  of  his  belongings.  Dolohov 
was  reckoning  up  money  and  noting  down  sums. 

‘Well,’  he  said,  ‘you  will  have  to  give  Hvostikov  two  thousand.’ 

‘Well,  give  it  him  then,”  said  Anatole. 

‘Makarka  now’  (their  name  for  Makarin),  ‘he  would  go  through  fire 
and  water  for  you  with  nothing  to  gain  by  it.  Well,  here  then,  our  ac¬ 
counts  are  finished,’  said  Dolohov,  showing  him  the  paper.  ‘That’s 
all  right?’ 

‘Yes,  of  course,  it’s  all  right,’  said  Anatole,  evidently  not  attending 
to  Dolohov,  and  looking  straight  before  him  with  a  smile  that  never 
left  his  face. 

Dolohov  shut  the  bureau  with  a  slam,  and  turned  to  Anatole  with  an 
ironical  smile. 

‘But  I  say,  you  drop  it  all;  there’s  still  time!  ’  he  said. 

‘Idiot!’  said  Anatole.  ‘Leave  off  talking  rubbish.  If  only  you  knew. 
.  .  .  Devil  only  knows  what  this  means  to  me!  ’ 

‘You’d  really  better  drop  it,’  said  Dolohov.  ‘I’m  speaking  in  earnest. 
It’s  no  joking  matter  this  scheme  of  yours.’ 

‘Why,  teasing  again,  again?  Go  to  the  devil!  Eh.  .  .  .’  said  Ana¬ 
tole,  frowning.  ‘Really,  I’m  in  no  humour  for  your  stupid  jokes.’  And 
he  went  out  of  the  room. 

Dolohov  smiled  a  contemptuous  and  supercilious  smile  when  Anatole 
had  gone. 


W  A  R  A  N  D  P  E  A  C  E  549 

‘Wait  a  bit,’  he  called  after  Anatole.  ‘I’m  not  joking.  I’m  in  earnest. 
Come  here,  come  here!  ’ 

Anatole  came  back  into  the  room,  and  trying  to  concentrate  his  atten¬ 
tion,  looked  at  Dolohov,  obviously  obeying  him  unwillingly. 

‘Listen  to  me.  I’m  speaking  to  you  for  the  last  time.  What  should 
I  want  to  joke  with  you  for?  Have  I  ever  thwarted  you?  Who  was 
it  arranged  it  all  for  you?  Who  found  your  priest?  Who  took  your  pass¬ 
port?  Who  got  you  your  money?  It  has  all  been  my  doing.’ 

‘Well,  and  thank  you  for  it.  Do  you  suppose  I’m  not  grateful?’  Ana¬ 
tole  sighed  and  embraced  Dolohov. 

‘I  have  helped  you;  but  still  I  ought  to  tell  you  the  truth:  it’s  a  dan¬ 
gerous  business,  and  if  you  come  to  think  of  it,  it’s  stupid.  Come,  you 
;  carry  her  off,  well  and  good.  Do  you  suppose  they’ll  let  it  rest?  It  will 
!  come  out  that  you  are  married.  Why,  they  will  have  you  up  on  a  criminal 
charge,  you  know  .  .  .’ 

‘Oh,  nonsense,  nonsense!’  said  Anatole,  frowning  again.  ‘Why,  didn’t 
I  explain  to  you?  Eh?’  And  Anatole,  with  that  peculiar  partiality 
(common  in  persons  of  dull  brain),  for  any  conclusion  to  which  they 
have  been  led  by  their  own  mental  processes,  repeated  the  argument  he 
had  repeated  a  hundred  times  over  to  Dolohov  already.  ‘Why,  I  explained 
it;  I  settled  that.  If  this  marriage  is  invalid,’  he  said,  crooking  his  fin¬ 
ger,  ‘then  it  follows  I’m  not  answerable  for  it.  Well,  and  if  it  is  valid,  it 
won’t  matter.  No  one  will  ever  know  of  it  abroad,  so,  you  see,  it’s  all 
right,  isn’t  it?  And  don’t  talk  to  me;  don’t  talk  to  me;  don’t  talk 
to  me!’ 

‘Really,  you  drop  it.  You’ll  get  yourself  into  a  mess  .  .  .’ 

‘You  go  to  the  devil!’  said  Anatole,  and  clutching  at  his  hair  he  went 
off  into  the  next  room,  but  at  once  returning  he  sat  with  his  legs  up 
on  an  arm-chair  close  to  Dolohov  and  facing  him.  ‘Devil  only  knows 
what’s  the  matter  with  me!  Eh?  See  how  it  beats.’  He  took  Dolohov’s 
hand  and  put  it  on  his  heart.  ‘Ah,  what  a  foot,  my  dear  boy,  what  a 
glance!  A  goddess!’  he  said  in  French.  ‘Eh?’ 

Dolohov,  with  a  cold  smile  and  a  gleam  in  his  handsome  impudent 
eyes,  looked  at  him,  obviously  disposed  to  get  a  little  more  amusement 
out  of  him. 

‘Well,  your  money  will  be  gone,  what  then?’ 

‘What  then?  Eh?’  repeated  Anatole,  with  genuine  perplexity  at  the 
thought  of  the  future.  ‘What  then?  I  don’t  know  what  then  .  .  .  Come, 
why  talk  nonsense?’  He  looked  at  his  watch.  ‘It’s  time!’ 

Anatole  went  into  the  back  room. 

‘Well,  will  you  soon  have  done?  You’re  dawdling  there,’  he  shouted 
at  the  servants. 

Dolohov  put  away  the  money;  and  calling  a  servant  to  give  him  orders 
about  getting  something  to  eat  and  drink  before  the  journey,  he  went  into 
the  room  where  Hvostikov  and  Makarin  were  sitting. 

Anatole  lay  down  on  the  sofa  in  the  study,  and,  propped  on  his  elbows, 
smiled  pensively  and  murmured  something  fervently  to  himself. 


550  W  A  R  A  N  D  P  E  A  C  E 

‘Come  and  have  something  to  eat.  Here,  have  a  drink!’  Dolohov 
shouted  to  him  from  the  other  room. 

‘I  don’t  want  to,’  answered  Anatole,  still  smiling. 

‘Come,  Balaga  is  here.’ 

Anatole  got  up,  and  went  into  the  dining-room.  Balaga  was  a  well- 
known  driver,  who  had  known  Dolohov  and  Anatole  for  the  last  six 
years,  and  driven  them  in  his  three-horse  sledges.  More  than  once,  when 
Anatole’s  regiment  had  been  stationed  at  Tver,  he  had  driven  him  out 
of  Tver  in  the  evening,  reached  Moscow  by  dawn,  and  driven  him  back 
the  next  night.  More  than  once  he  had  driven  Dolohov  safe  away  when 
he  was  being  pursued.  Many  a  time  he  had  driven  them  about  the  town 
with  gypsies  and  ‘gay  ladies,’  as  he  called  them.  More  than  one  horse 
had  he  ruined  in  driving  them.  More  than  once  he  had  driven  over 
people  and  upset  vehicles  in  Moscow,  and  always  his  ‘gentlemen,’  as 
he  called  them,  had  got  him  out  of  trouble.  Many  a  time  had  they  beaten 
him,  many  a  time  made  him  drunk  with  champagne  and  madeira,  a  wine 
he  loved,  and  more  than  one  exploit  he  knew  of  each  of  them,  which 
would  long  ago  have  sent  any  ordinary  man  to  Siberia.  They  often  called 
Balaga  in  to  their  carousals,  made  him  drink  and  dance  with  the  gypsies, 
and  many  a  thousand  roubles  of  their  money  had  passed  through  his 
hands.  In  their  service,  twenty  times  a  year,  he  risked  his  life  and  his 
skin,  and  wore  out  more  horses  than  they  repaid  him  for  in  money.  But 
he  liked  them,  liked  their  furious  driving,  eighteen  versts  an  hour,  liked 
upsetting  coachmen,  and  running  down  people  on  foot  in  Moscow,  and 
always  flew  full  gallop  along  the  Moscow  streets.  He  liked  to  hear 
behind  him  the  wild  shout  of  drunken  voices,  ‘Get  on;  get  on!’  when  it 
was  impossible  to  drive  faster ;  liked  to  give  a  lash  on  the  neck  to  a  pass¬ 
ing  peasant  who  was  already  hastening  out  of  his  way  more  dead  than 
alive.  ‘Real  gentlemen!’  he  thought. 

Anatole  and  Dolohov  liked  Balaga,  too,  for  his  spirited  driving,  and 
because  he  liked  the  same  things  that  they  liked.  With  other  people 
Balaga  drove  hard  bargains ;  he  would  take  as  much  as  twenty-five  rou¬ 
bles  for  a  two  hours’  drive,  and  rarely  drove  himself,  generally  sending 
one  of  his  young  men.  But  with  his  own  gentlemen,  as  he  called  them, 
he  always  drove  himself,  and  never  asked  for  anything  for  the  job. 

Only  after  learning  through  their  valets  when  money  was  plentiful,  he 
would  turn  up  once  every  few  months  in  the  morning;  and  sober,  and 
bowing  low,  would  ask  them  to  help  him  out  of  his  difficulties.  The  gen¬ 
tlemen  always  made  him  sit  down. 

‘Please,  help  me  out  of  a  scrape,  Fyodor  Ivanovitch,  or  your  excel¬ 
lency,’  he  would  say.  ‘I’m  quite  run  out  of  horses;  lend  me  what  you 
can  to  go  to  the  fair.’ 

And  whenever  they  were  flush  of  money  Anatole  and  Dolohov  would 
give  him  a  thousand  or  two. 

Balaga  was  a  flaxen-headed,  squat,  snub-nosed  peasant  of  seven  and 
twenty,  with  a  red  face  and  a  particularly  red,  thick  neck,  little  sparkling 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


SSI 

eyes,  and  a  little  beard.  He  wore  a  fine  blue  silk-lined  full  coat,  put  on 
over  a  fur  pelisse. 

He  crossed  himself,  facing  the  opposite  corner,  and  went  up  to  Dolohov, 
holding  out  his  black,  little  hand. 

‘Respects  to  Fyodor  Ivanovitch!  ’  said  he,  bowing. 

‘Good-day  to  you,  brother.  Well,  here  he  comes!’ 

‘Good-morning,  your  excellency!’  he  said  to  Anatole  as  he  came  in, 
and  to  him,  too,  he  held  out  his  hand. 

‘I  say,  Balaga,’  said  Anatole,  laying  his  hands  on  his  shoulders,  ‘do 
you  care  for  me  or  not?  Eh?  Now’s  the  time  to  do  me  good  service.  .  .  . 
What  sort  of  horses  have  you  come  with?  Eh?’ 

‘As  the  messenger  bade  me;  your  favourite  beasts,’  said  Balaga. 

‘Come,  Balaga,  do  you  hear?  You  may  kill  all  three  of  them;  only 
get  there  in  three  hours.  Eh?’ 

‘If  I  kill  them,  how  are  we  to  get  there?’  said  Balaga,  winking. 

‘None  of  your  jokes  now.  I’ll  smash  your  face  in!’  cried  Anatole 
suddenly,  rolling  his  eyes. 

‘Jokes!’  said  the  driver,  laughing.  ‘Do  I  grudge  anything  for  my 
gentlemen?  As  fast  as  ever  the  horses  can  gallop  we  shall  get  there.’ 

‘Ah!’  said  Anatole.  ‘Well,  sit  down.’ 

‘Come,  sit  down,’  said  Dolohov. 

‘Oh,  I’ll  stand,  Fyodor  Ivanovitch.1 

‘Sit  down;  nonsense!  have  a  drink,’  said  Anatole,  and  he  poured  him 
out  a  big  glass  of  madeira.  The  driver’s  eyes  sparkled  at  the  sight  of 
the  wine.  Refusing  it  at  first  for  manners’  sake,  he  tossed  it  off,  and 
wiped  his  mouth  with  a  red  silk  handkerchief  that  lay  in  his  cap. 

‘Well,  and  when  are  we  to  start,  your  excellency?’ 

‘Oh!  .  .  .’  Anatole  looked  at  his  watch.  ‘We  must  set  off  at  once. 
Now  mind,  Balaga.  Eh?  You’ll  get  there  in  time?’ 

‘To  be  sure,  if  we’ve  luck  in  getting  off.  Why  shouldn’t  we  do  it  in  the 
time?’  said  Balaga.  ‘We  got  you  to  Tver,  and  got  there  in  seven  hours. 
You  remember,  I  bet,  your  excellency!  ’ 

‘Do  you  know,  I  once  drove  from  Tver  at  Christmas  time,’  said  Anatole, 
with  a  smile  at  the  recollection,  addressing  Makarin,  who  was  gazing  ad¬ 
miringly  at  him.  ‘Would  you  believe  it,  Makarka,  one  could  hardly 
breathe  we  flew  so  fast.  We  drove  into  a  train  of  wagons  and  rode  right 
over  two  of  them!  Eh?’ 

‘They  were  horses,  too,’  Balaga  went  on.  ‘I’d  put  two  young  horses 
in  the  traces  with  the  bay  in  the  shafts’ — die  turned  to  Dolohov — ‘and, 
would  you  believe  me,  Fyodor  Ivanovitch,  sixty  versts  those  beasts  gal¬ 
loped.  There  was  no  holding  them,  for  my  hands  were  numb;  it  was  a 
frost.  I  flung  down  the  reins.  “You  hold  them  yourself,  your  excel¬ 
lency,”  said  I,  and  I  rolled  up  inside  the  sledge.  No  need  of  driving  them. 
Why,  we  couldn’t  hold  them  in  when  we  got  there.  In  three  hours  the 
devils  brought  us.  Only  the  left  one  died  of  it.’ 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


552 


XVII 

Anatole  went  out  of  the  room,  and  a  few  minutes  later  he  came  back 
wearing  a  fur  pelisse,  girt  with  a  silver  belt,  and  a  sable  cap,  jauntily- 
stuck  on  one  side,  and  very  becoming  to  his  handsome  face.  Looking 
at  himself  in  the  looking-glass,  and  then  standing  before  Dolohov  in  ' 
the  same  attitude  he  had  taken  before  the  looking-glass,  he  took  a  glass  ! 
of  wine. 

‘Well,  Fedya,  farewell;  thanks  for  everything,  and  farewell,’  said  : 
Anatole.  ‘Come,  comrades,  friends  .  .  .’ — he  grew  pensive — ‘of  my 
youth  .  .  .  farewell,’  he  turned  to  Makarin  and  the  others. 

Although  they  were  all  going  with  him,  Anatole  evidently  wanted  to 
make  a  touching  and  solemn  ceremony  of  this  address  to  his  comrades. 
He  spoke  in  a  loud,  deliberate  voice,  squaring  his  chest  and  swinging 
one  leg. 

‘All  take  glasses;  you  too,  Balaga.  Well,  lads,  friends  of  my  youth, 
we  have  had  jolly  sprees  together.  Eh?  Now,  when  shall  we  meet  again? 
I’m  going  abroad!  We’ve  had  a  good  time,  and  farewell,  lads.  Here’s 
to  our  health!  Hurrah!  .  .  .’ he  said,  tossing  off  his  glass,  and  flinging  it 
on  the  floor. 

‘To  your  health!’  said  Balaga.  He,  too,  emptied  his  glass  and  wiped 
his  lips  with  his  handkerchief. 

Makarin  embraced  Anatole  with  tears  in  his  eyes. 

‘Ah,  prince,  how  it  grieves  my  heart  to  part  from  you,’  he  said. 

‘Start!  start!  ’  shouted  Anatole. 

Balaga  was  going  out  of  the  room. 

‘No;  stay,’  said  Anatole.  ‘Shut  the  door;  we  must  sit  down.  Like 
this.’  They  shut  the  door  and  all  sat  down. 

‘Well,  now,  quick  march,  lads!’  said  Anatole,  getting  up. 

The  valet,  Joseph,  gave  Anatole  his  knapsack  and  sword,  and  they  all 
went  out  into  the  vestibule. 

‘But  where’s  a  fur  cloak?’  said  Dolohov.  ‘Hey,  Ignatka!  Run  in  to 
Matryona  Matveyevna,  and  ask  her  for  the  sable  cloak.  I’ve  heard  what 
elopements  are  like,’  said  Dolohov,  winking.  ‘She’ll  come  skipping  out 
more  dead  than  alive  just  in  the  things  she  had  on  indoors;  the  slightest 
delay  and  then  there  are  tears,  and  dear  papa  and  dear  mamma,  and 
she’s  frozen  in  a  minute  and  for  going  back  again — you  wrap  her  up  in 
a  cloak  at  once  and  carry  her  to  the  sledge.’ 

The  valet  brought  a  woman’s  fox-lined  pelisse. 

‘Fool,  I  told  you  the  sable.  Hey,  Matryoshka,  the  sable,’  he  shouted, 
so  that  his  voice  rang  out  through  the  rooms. 

A  handsome,  thin,  and  pale  gypsy  woman,  with  shining  black  eyes  and 
curly  black  hair,  with  a  bluish  shade  in  it,  ran  out,  wearing  a  red  shawl 
and  holding  a  sable  cloak  on  her  arm. 


WAR  AND  PEACE  553 

‘Here,  I  don’t  grudge  it;  take  it,’  she  said,  in  visible  fear  of  her  lord, 
and  regretful  at  losing  the  cloak. 

Dolohov,  making  her  no  answer,  took  the  cloak,  flung  it  about  Matry- 
osha,  and  wrapped  her  up  in  it. 

‘That’s  the  way,’  said  Dolohov.  ‘And  then  this  is  the  way,’  he  said,  and 
he  turned  the  collar  up  round  her  head,  leaving  it  only  a  little  open  before 
the  face.  ‘And  then  this  is  the  way,  do  you  see?’  and  he  moved  Anatole’s 
head  forward  to  meet  the  open  space  left  by  the  collar,  from  which 
Matryosha’s  flashing  smile  peeped  out. 

‘Well,  good-bye,  Matryosha,’  said  Anatole,  kissing  her.  ‘Ah,  all  my 
fun  here  is  over!  Give  my  love  to  Styoshka.  There,  good-bye!  Good¬ 
bye,  Matryosha;  wish  me  happiness.’ 

‘God  grant  you  great  happiness,  prince,’  said  Matryosha,  with  her 
gypsy  accent. 

At  the  steps  stood  two  three-horse  sledges;  two  stalwart  young  drivers 
were  holding  them.  Balaga  took  his  seat  in  the  foremost,  and  holding 
his  elbows  high,  began  deliberately  arranging  the  reins  in  his  hands. 
Anatole  and  Dolohov  got  in  with  him.  Makarin,  Hvostikov,  and  the  valet 
got  into  the  other  sledge. 

‘Ready,  eh?’  queried  Balaga.  ‘Off!’  he  shouted,  twisting  the  reins 
round  his  hands,  and  the  sledge  flew  at  break-neck  pace  along  the  Nikitsky 
Boulevard. 

‘Tprroo!  Hi!  ...  Tproo! !’  Balaga  and  the  young  driver  on  the  box 
were  continually  shouting. 

In  Arbatsky  Square  the  sledge  came  into  collision  with  a  carriage; 
there  was  a  crash  and  shouts,  and  the  sledge  flew  off  along  Arbaty.  Turn¬ 
ing  twice  along  Podnovinsky,  Balaga  began  to  pull  up,  and  turning  back, 
stopped  the  horses  at  the  Old  Equerrys’  crossing. 

A  smart  young  driver  jumped  down  to  hold  the  horses  by  the  bridle; 
Anatole  and  Dolohov  walked  along  the  pavement.  On  reaching  the 
gates,  Dolohov  whistled.  The  whistle  was  answered,  and  a  maid-servant 
ran  out. 

‘Come  into  the  courtyard,  or  you’ll  be  seen;  she  is  coming  in  a  min¬ 
ute,’  she  said. 

Dolohov  stayed  at  the  gate.  Anatole  followed  the  maid  into  the 
courtyard,  turned  a  corner,  and  ran  up  the  steps. 

He  was  met  by  Gavrilo,  Marya  Dmitryevna’s  huge  groom. 

‘Walk  this  way  to  the  mistress,’  said  the  groom  in  his  bass,  blocking 
up  the  doorway. 

‘What  mistress?  And  who  are  you?’  Anatole  asked  in  a  breathless 
whisper. 

‘Walk  in;  my  orders  are  to  show  you  in.’ 

‘Kuragin!  back! ’  shouted  Dolohov.  ‘Treachery,  back!’ 

Dolohov,  at  the  little  back  gate  where  he  had  stopped,  was  struggling 
with  the  porter,  who  was  trying  to  shut  the  gate  after  Anatole  as  he  ran 
in.  With  a  desperate  effort  Dolohov  shoved  away  the  porter,  and  clutch- 


554  WAR  AND  PEACE 

ing  at  Anatole,  pulled  him  through  the  gate,  and  ran  back  with  him  to  | 

the  sledge. 

XVIII 

Marya  Dmitryevna  coming  upon  Sonya  weeping  in  the  corridor  had 
forced  her  to  confess  everything.  Snatching  up  Natasha’s  letter  and 
reading  it,  Marya  Dmitryevna  went  in  to  Natasha,  with  the  letter  in  her 
hand. 

‘Vile  girl,  shameless  hussy!’  she  said  to  her.  ‘I  won’t  hear  a  word!’ 
Pushing  aside  Natasha,  who  gazed  at  her  with  amazed  but  tearless  eyes,  : 
she  locked  her  into  the  room,  and  giving  orders  to  her  gate  porter  to  admit  j 
the  persons  who  would  be  coming  that  evening,  but  not  to  allow  them 
to  pass  out  again,  and  giving  her  grooms  orders  to  show  those  persons 
up  to  her,  she  seated  herself  in  the  drawing-room  awaiting  the  abductors.  1 

When  Gavrilo  came  to  announce  to  Marya  Dmitryevna  that  the  per¬ 
sons  who  had  come  had  run  away,  she  got  up  frowning,  and  clasping  her 
hands  behind  her,  walked  a  long  while  up  and  down  through  her  rooms,  ‘ 
pondering  what  she  was  to  do.  At  midnight  she  walked  towards  Natasha’s  , 
room,  feeling  the  key  in  her  pocket.  Sonya  was  sitting  sobbing  in  the  1 
corridor.  ‘Marya  Dmitryevna,  do,  for  God’s  sake,  let  me  go  in  to  her!’ 
she  said. 

Marya  Dmitryevna,  making  her  no  reply,  opened  the  door  and  went 
in.  ‘Hateful,  disgusting,  in  my  house,  the  nasty  hussy,  only  I’m  sorry  for 
her  father!’  Marya  Dmitryevna  was  thinking,  trying  to  allay  her  wrath. 
‘Hard  as  it  may  be,  I  will  forbid  any  one  to  speak  of  it,  and  will  conceal 
it  from  the  count.’  Marya  Dmitryevna  walked  with  resolute  steps  into  i 
the  room. 

Natasha  was  lying  on  the  sofa;  she  had  her  head  hidden  in  her  hands 
and  did  not  stir.  She  was  lying  in  exactly  the  same  position  in  which 
Marya  Dmitryevna  had  left  her. 

‘You’re  a  nice  girl,  a  very  nice  girl!’  said  Marya  Dmitryevna.  ‘En¬ 
couraging  meetings  with  lovers  in  my  house!  There’s  no  use  in  hum¬ 
bugging.  You  listen  when  I  speak  to  you.’  Marya  Dmitryevna  touched 
her  on  the  arm.  ‘You  listen  when  I  speak.  You’ve  disgraced  yourself 
like  the  lowest  wench.  I  don’t  know  what  I  couldn’t  do  to  you,  but  I  feel 
for  your  father.  I  will  hide  it  from  him.’ 

Natasha  did  not  change  her  position,  only  her  whole  body  began  to 
writhe  with  noiseless,  convulsive  sobs,  which  choked  her.  Marya  Dmitry¬ 
evna  looked  round  at  Sonya,  and  sat  down  on  the  edge  of  the  sofa  beside 
Natasha. 

‘It’s  lucky  for  him  that  he  escaped  me;  but  I’ll  get  hold  of  him,’  she 
said  in  her  coarse  voice.  ‘Do  you  hear  what  I  say,  eh?’  She  put  her  big 
hand  under  Natasha’s  face,  and  turned  it  towards  her.  Both  Marya 
Dmitryevna  and  Sonya  were  surprised  when  they  saw  Natasha’s  face. 
Her  eyes  were  glittering  and  dry ;  her  lips  tightly  compressed ;  her  cheeks 
looked  sunken. 


WARANDPEACE  555 

‘Let  me  be  .  .  .  what  do  I  ...  I  shall  die.  .  .  .’  she  articulated,  with 
angry  effort,  tore  herself  away  from  Marya  Dmitryevna,  and  fell  back 
into  the  same  attitude  again. 

‘Natalya!  .  .  .’  said  Marya  Dmitryevna.  ‘I  wish  for  your  good. 
Lie  still;  come,  lie  still  like  that  then,  I  won’t  touch  you,  and  listen.  .  .  . 
I’m  not  going  to  tell  you  how  wrongly  you  have  acted.  You  know  that 
yourself.  But  now  your  father’s  coming  back  to-morrow.  What  am  I 
to  tell  him?  Eh?’ 

Again  Natasha’s  body  heaved  with  sobs. 

‘Well,  he  will  hear  of  it,  your  brother,  your  betrothed!  ’ 

‘I  have  no  betrothed;  I  have  refused  him,’  cried  Natasha. 

‘That  makes  no  difference,’  pursued  Marya  Dmitryevna.  ‘Well,  they 
hear  of  it.  Do  you  suppose  they  will  let  the  matter  rest?  Suppose  he — 
your  father,  I  know  him — if  he  challenges  him  to  a  duel,  will  that  be  all 
right?  Eh?’ 

‘Oh,  let  me  be;  why  did  you  hinder  everything!  Why?  why?  who 
asked  you  to?’  cried  Natasha,  getting  up  from  the  sofa,  and  looking  vin¬ 
dictively  at  Marya  Dmitryevna. 

‘But  what  was  it  you  wanted?'  screamed  Marya  Dmitryevna,  getting 
hot  again.  ‘Why,  you  weren’t  shut  up,  were  you?  Who  hindered  his 
coming  to  the  house?  Why  carry  you  off,  like  some  gypsy  wench?  .  .  . 
If  he  had  carried  you  off,  do  you  suppose  they  wouldn’t  have  caught  him? 
Your  father,  or  brother,  or  betrothed?  He’s  a  wretch,  a  scoundrel,  that’s 
what  he  is!’ 

‘He’s  better  than  any  of  you,’  cried  Natasha,  getting  up.  ‘If  you  hadn’t 
meddled  .  .  .  O  my  God,  what  does  it  mean?  Sonya,  why  did  you? 
Go  away!  .  .  .’  And  she  sobbed  with  a  despair  with  which  people  only 
bewail  a  trouble  they  feel  that  they  have  brought  on  themselves. 

Marya  Dmitryevna  was  beginning  to  speak  again ;  but  Natasha  cried. 
‘Go  away,  go  away,  you  all  hate  me  and  despise  me!’  And  she  flung 
herself  again  on  the  sofa. 

Marya  Dmitryevna  went  on  for  some  time  longer  lecturing  Natasha, 
and  urging  on  her  that  it  must  all  be  kept  from  the  count,  that  no  one 
would  know  anything  of  it  if  Natasha  would  only  undertake  to  forget 
it  all,  and  not  to  show  a  sign  to  any  one  of  anything  having  happened. 
Natasha  made  no  answer.  She  did  not  sob  any  more,  but  she  was  taken 
with  shivering  fits  and  trembling.  Marya  Dmitryevna  put  a  pillow  under 
her  head,  laid  two  quilts  over  her,  and  brought  her  some  lime-flower  water 
with  her  own  hands;  but  Natasha  made  no  response  when  she  spoke  to  her. 

‘Well,  let  her  sleep,’  said  Marya  Dmitryevna,  as  she  went  out  of  the 
room,  supposing  her  to  be  asleep.  But  Natasha  was  not  asleep,  her  wide- 
open  eyes  gazed  straight  before  her  out  of  her  pale  face.  All  that  night 
Natasha  did  not  sleep,  and  did  not  weep,  and  said  not  a  word  to  Sonya, 
who  got  up  several  times  and  went  in  to  her. 

Next  day,  at  lunch  time,  as  he  had  promised,  Count  Ilya  Andreitch 
arrived  from  his  estate  in  the  environs.  He  was  in  very  good  spirits:  he 
had  come  to  terms  with  the  purchaser,  and  there  was  nothing  now  to  de- 


556  WARANDPEACE 

tain  him  in  Moscow  away  from  his  countess,  for  whom  he  was  pining. 
Marya  Dmitryevna  met  him,  and  told  him  that  Natasha  had  been  very 
unwell  on  the  previous  day,  that  they  had  sent  for  a  doctor,  and  that  now 
she  was  better.  Natasha  did  not  leave  her  room  that  morning.  With 
tightly  shut,  parched  lips,  and  dry,  staring  eyes,  she  sat  at  the  window, 
uneasily  watching  the  passers-by  along  the  street,  and  hurriedly  looking 
round  at  any  one  who  entered  her  room.  She  was  obviously  expecting 
news  of  him,  expecting  that  he  would  come  himself  or  would  write  to  her. 

When  the  count  went  in  to  her,  she  turned  uneasily  at  the  sound  of 
his  manly  tread,  and  her  face  resumed  its  previous  cold  and  even  vindic¬ 
tive  expression.  She  did  not  even  get  up  to  meet  him. 

‘What  is  it,  my  angel;  are  you  ill?’  asked  the  count. 

Natasha  was  silent  a  moment. 

‘Yes,  I  am  ill,’  she  answered. 

In  answer  to  the  count’s  inquiries  why  she  was  depressed  and  whether 
anything  had  happened  with  her  betrothed,  she  assured  him  that  nothing 
had,  and  begged  him  not  to  be  uneasy.  Marya  Dmitryevna  confirmed 
Natasha’s  assurances  that  nothing  had  happened.  From  the  pretence 
of  illness,  from  his  daughter’s  agitated  state,  and  the  troubled  faces  of 
Sonya  and  Marya  Dmitryevna,  the  count  saw  clearly  that  something  ; 
had  happened  in  his  absence.  But  it  was  so  terrible  to  him  to  believe  that 
anything  disgraceful  had  happened  to  his  beloved  daughter,  and  he  so  ; 
prized  his  own  cheerful  serenity,  that  he  avoided  inquiries  and  tried  to  : 
assure  himself  that  it  was  nothing  very  out  of  the  way,  and  only  grieved 
that  her  indisposition  would  delay  their  return  to  the  country. 


XIX 

From  the  day  of  his  wife’s  arrival  in  Moscow,  Pierre  had  been  intending 
to  go  away  somewhere  else,  simply  not  to  be  with  her.  Soon  after  the 
Rostovs’  arrival  in  Moscow,  the  impression  made  upon  him  by  Natasha 
had  impelled  him  to  hasten  in  carrying  out  his  intention.  He  went  to 
Tver  to  see  the  widow  of  Osip  Alexyevitch,  who  had  long  before  promised 
to  give  him  papers  of  the  deceased’s. 

When  Pierre  came  back  to  Moscow,  he  was  handed  a  letter  from  Marya 
Dmitryevna,  who  summoned  him  to  her  on  a  matter  of  great  importance, 
concerning  Andrey  Bolkonsky  and  his  betrothed.  Pierre  had  been  avoid¬ 
ing  Natasha.  It  seemed  to  him  that  he  had  for  her  a  feeling  stronger 
than  a  married  man  should  have  for  a  girl  betrothed  to  his  friend.  And 
some  fate  was  continually  throwing  him  into  her  company. 

‘What  has  happened?  And  what  do  they  want  with  me?’  he  thought 
as  he  dressed  to  go  to  Marya  Dmitryevna’s.  ‘If  only  Prince  Andrey 
would  make  haste  home  and  marry  her,’  thought  Pierre  on  the  way  to  the 
house. 

In  the  Tverskoy  Boulevard  some  one  shouted  his  name. 

‘Pierre!  Been  back  long?’  a  familiar  voice  called  to  him.  Pierre 


WARANDPEACE  5S7 

raised  his  head.  Anatole,  with  his  everlasting  companion  Makarin,  dashed 
by  in  a  sledge  with  a  pair  of  grey  trotting-horses,  who  were  kicking  up  the 
snow  on  to  the  forepart  of  the  sledge.  Anatole  was  sitting  in  the  classic 
pose  of  military  dandies,  the  lower  part  of  his  face  muffled  in  his  beaver 
collar,  and  his  head  bent  a  little  forward.  His  face  was  fresh  and  rosy; 
his  hat,  with  its  white  plume,  was  stuck  on  one  side,  showing  his  curled, 
pomaded  hair,  sprinkled  with  fine  snow. 

‘Indeed,  he  is  the  real  philosopher!’  thought  Pierre.  ‘He  sees  nothing 
beyond  the  present  moment  of  pleasure;  nothing  worries  him,  and  so  he 
is  always  cheerful,  satisfied,  and  serene.  What  would  I  not  give  to  be 
just  like  him!’  Pierre  mused  with  envy. 

In  Marya  Dmitryevna’s  entrance-hall  the  footman,  as  he  took  off 
Pierre’s  fur  coat,  told  him  that  his  mistress  begged  him  to  come  to  her 
in  her  bedroom. 

As  he  opened  the  door  into  the  reception-room,  Pierre  caught  sight 
of  Natasha,  sitting  at  the  window  with  a  thin,  pale,  and  ill-tempered  face. 
She  looked  round  at  him,  frowned,  and  with  an  expression  of  frigid  dignity 
walked  out  of  the  room. 

‘What  has  happened?’  asked  Pierre,  going  in  to  Marya  Dmitryevna. 

‘Fine  doings,’  answered  Marya  Dmitryevna.  ‘Fifty-eight  years  I  have 
lived  in  the  world — never  have  I  seen  anything  so  disgraceful.’  And 
exacting  from  Pierre  his  word  of  honour  not  to  say  a  word  about  all  he 
was  to  hear,  Marya  Dmitryevna  informed  him  that  Natasha  had  broken 
off  her  engagement  without  the  knowledge  of  her  parents;  that  the  cause 
of  her  doing  so  was  Anatole  Kuragin,  with  whom  Pierre’s  wife  had 
thrown  her,  and  with  whom  Natasha  had  attempted  to  elope  in  her 
father’s  absence  in  order  to  be  secretly  married  to  him. 

Pierre,  with  hunched  shoulders  and  open  mouth,  listened  to  what  Marya 
Dmitryevna  was  saying,  hardly  able  to  believe  his  ears.  That  Prince  An- 
drey’s  fiancee,  so  passionately  loved  by  him,  Natasha  Rostov,  hitherto 
so  charming,  should  give  up  Bolkonsky  for  that  fool  Anatole,  who  was 
married  already  (Pierre  knew  the  secret  of  his  marriage),  and  be  so  much 
in  love  with  him  as  to  consent  to  elope  with  him — that  Pierre  could  not 
conceive  and  could  not  comprehend.  Fie  could  not  reconcile  the  sweet 
impression  he  had  in  his  soul  of  Natasha,  whom  he  had  known  from 
childhood,  with  this  new  conception  of  her  baseness,  folly,  and  cruelty. 
He  thought  of  his  wife.  ‘They  are  all  alike,’  he  said  to  himself,  reflecting 
he  was  not  the  only  man  whose  unhappy  fate  it  was  to  be  bound  to  a 
low  woman.  But  still  he  felt  ready  to  weep  with  sorrow  for  Prince  An- 
drey,  with  sorrow  for  his  pride.  And  the  more  he  felt  for  his  friend,  the 
greater  was  the  contempt  and  even  aversion  with  which  he  thought  of 
Natasha,  who  had  just  passed  him  with  such  an  expression  of  rigid  dig¬ 
nity.  He  could  not  know  that  Natasha’s  heart  was  filled  with  despair, 
shame,  and  humiliation,  and  that  it  was  not  her  fault  that  her  face  acci¬ 
dentally  expressed  dignity  and  severity. 

‘What!  get  married?’  cried  Pierre  at  Marya  Dmitryevna’s  words. 
‘He  can’t  get  married;  he  is  married.’ 


55S  WARANDPEACE 

‘Worse  and  wotse,’  said  Marya  Dmitryevna.  ‘He’s  a  nice  youth.  A 
perfect  scoundrel.  And  she’s  expecting  him;  she’s  been  expecting  him 
these  two  days.  We  must  tell  her;  at  least  she  will  leave  off  expecting 
him.’ 

After  learning  from  Pierre  the  details  of  Anatole’s  marriage,  and  pour¬ 
ing  out  her  wrath  against  him  in  abusive  epithets,  Marya  Dmitryevna 
informed  Pierre  of  her  object  in  sending  for  him.  Marya  Dmitryevna 
was  afraid  that  the  count  or  Bolkonsky,  who  might  arrive  any  moment, 
might  hear  of  the  affair,  though  she  intended  to  conceal  it  from  them,  and 
might  challenge  Kuragin,  and  she  therefore  begged  Pierre  to  bid  his 
brother-in-law  from  her  to  leave  Moscow  and  not  to  dare  to  show  himself 
in  her  presence.  Pierre  promised  to  do  as  she  desired  him,  only  then 
grasping  the  danger  menacing  the  old  count,  and  Nikolay,  and  Prince 
Andrey.  After  briefly  and  precisely  explaining  to  him  her  wishes,  she  let 
him  go  to  the  drawing-room. 

‘Mind,  the  count  knows  nothing  of  it.  You  behave  as  though  you 
know  nothing,’  she  said  to  him.  ‘And  I’ll  go  and  tell  her  it’s  no  use  for 
her  to  expect  him!  And  stay  to  dinner,  if  you  care  to,’  Marya  Dmitry¬ 
evna  called  after  Pierre. 

Pierre  met  the  old  count.  He  seemed  upset  and  anxious.  That  morn¬ 
ing  Natasha  had  told  him  that  she  had  broken  off  her  engagement  to 
Bolkonsky. 

‘I’m  in  trouble,  in  trouble,  my  dear  fellow,’  he  said  to  Pierre,  ‘with  those 
girls  without  the  mother.  I  do  regret  now  that  I  came.  I  will  be  open 
with  you.  Have  you  heard  she  has  broken  off  her  engagement  without 
a  word  to  any  one?  I  never  did,  I’ll  admit,  feel  very  much  pleased  at  the 
marriage.  He’s  an  excellent  man,  of  course,  but  still  there  could  be  no 
happiness  against  a  father’s  will,  and  Natasha  will  never  want  for  suitors. 
Still  it  had  been  going  on  so  long,  and  then  such  a  step,  without  her 
father’s  or  her  mother’s  knowledge!  And  now  she’s  ill,  and  God  knows 
what  it  is.  It’s  a  bad  thing,  count,  a  bad  thing  to  have  a  daughter  away 
from  her  mother.  .  .  .’  Pierre  saw  the  count  was  greatly  troubled,  and 
tried  to  change  the  conversation  to  some  other  subject,  but  the  count 
went  back  again  to  his  troubles. 

Sonya  came  into  the  drawing-room  with  an  agitated  face. 

‘Natasha  is  not  very  well;  she  is  in  her  room  and  would  like  to  see 
you.  Marya  Dmitryevna  is  with  her  and  she  asks  you  to  come  too.’ 

‘Why,  yes,  you’re  such  a  great  friend  of  Bolkonsky’s;  no  doubt  she 
wants  to  send  him  some  message,’  said  the  count.  ‘Ah,  my  God,  my  God! 
How  happy  it  all  was!  ’  And  clutching  at  his  sparse  locks,  the  count  went 
out  of  the  room. 

Marya  Dmitryevna  had  told  Natasha  that  Anatole  was  married. 
Natasha  would  not  believe  her,  and  insisted  on  the  statement  being  con¬ 
firmed  by  Pierre  himself.  Sonya  told  Pierre  this  as  she  led  him  across 
the  corridor  to  Natasha’s  room. 

Natasha,  pale  and  stern,  was  sitting  beside  Marya  Dmitryevna,  and 
she  met  Pierre  at  the  door  with  eyes  of  feverish  brilliance  and  inquiry. 


WARANDPEACE  559 

She  did  not  smile  nor  nod  to  him.  She  simply  looked  hard  at  him,  and 
that  look  asked  him  simply:  was  he  a  friend  or  an  enemy  like  the  rest,  as 
regards  Anatole?  Pierre  in  himself  had  evidently  no  existence  for  her. 

‘He  knows  everything,’  said  Marya  Dmitryevna,  addressing  Natasha. 
‘Let  him  tell  you  whether  I  have  spoken  the  truth.’ 

As  a  hunted,  wounded  beast  looks  at  the  approaching  dogs  and  hunters, 
Natasha  looked  from  one  to  the  other. 

‘Natalya  Ilyinitchna,’  Pierre  began,  dropping  his  eyes  and  conscious 
of  a  feeling  of  pity  for  her  and  loathing  for  the  operation  he  had  to  per¬ 
form,  ‘whether  it  is  true  or  not  cannot  affect  you  since  .  . 

‘Then  it  is  not  true  that  he  is  married?’ 

‘No;  it  is  true.’ 

‘Has  he  been  married  long?’  she  asked.  ‘On  your  word  of  honour?’ 
Pierre  told  her  so  on  his  word  of  honour. 

‘Is  he  still  here?’  she  asked  rapidly. 

‘Yes,  I  have  just  seen  him.’ 

She  was  obviously  incapable  of  speaking;  she  made  a  sign  with  her 
hands  for  them  to  leave  her  alone. 


XX 

Pierre  did  not  stay  to  dinner  but  went  away  at  once  on  leaving  Natasha’s 
room.  He  drove  about  the  town  looking  for  Anatole  Kuragin,  at  the 
very  thought  of  whom  the  blood  rushed  to  his  heart,  and  he  felt  a  diffi¬ 
culty  in  breathing.  On  the  ice-hills,  at  the  gypsies’,  at  Somoneno  he  was 
not  to  be  found.  Pierre  drove  to  the  club.  In  the  club  everything  was 
going  on  just  as  usual:  the  members  who  had  come  in  to  dinner  were 
sitting  in  groups;  they  greeted  Pierre,  and  talked  of  the  news  of  the  town. 
The  footman,  after  greeting  him,  told  him,  as  he  knew  his  friends  and 
his  habits,  that  there  was  a  place  left  for  him  in  the  little  dining-room,  that 
Prince  Mihail  Zaharitch  was  in  the  library,  and  that  Pavel  Timofeitch 
had  not  come  in  yet.  One  of  Pierre’s  acquaintances  asked  him  in  the 
middle  of  a  conversation  about  the  weather,  whether  he  had  heard  of 
Kuragin’s  elopement  with  Natalie  Rostov,  of  which  every  one  was  talk¬ 
ing  in  the  town;  was  it  true?  Pierre  said,  laughing,  that  it  was  all  non¬ 
sense,  for  he  had  just  come  from  the  Rostovs’.  He  asked  every  one  about 
Anatole;  one  man  told  him  he  had  not  come  in  yet;  another  said  he  was 
to  dine  there  that  day.  It  was  strange  to  Pierre  to  look  at  that  calm, 
indifferent  crowd  of  people,  who  knew  nothing  of  what  was  passing  in  his 
soul.  He  walked  about  the  hall,  waited  till  every  one  had  come  in,  and 
still  seeing  nothing  of  Anatole,  he  did  not  dine,  but  drove  home. 

Anatole  was  dining  that  day  with  Dolohov,  and  consulting  with  him 
how  to  achieve  the  exploit  that  had  miscarried.  It  seemed  to  him  essen¬ 
tial  to  see  Natasha.  In  the  evening  he  went  to  his  sister’s,  to  discuss  with 
her  means  for  arranging  their  meeting.  When  Pierre,  after  vainly  driv¬ 
ing  about  all  Moscow,  returned  home,  his  valet  told  him  that  Prince 


560  WARANDPEACE 

Anatole  Vassilyevitch  was  with  the  countess.  The  drawing-room  of  the 
countess  was  full  of  guests. 

Fierre  did  not  bestow  a  greeting  on  his  wife,  whom  he  had  not  seen  since 
his  return  (she  was  more  hateful  to  him  than  ever  at  that  moment) ;  he 
walked  into  the  drawing-room,  and  seeing  Anatole,  went  straight  up  to 
him. 

‘Ah,  Pierre,’  said  the  countess,  going  up  to  her  husband,  ‘you  don’t  know  r 
what  a  plight  our  poor  Anatole  is  in  .  .  .’  She  stopped  short,  seeing 
in  her  husband’s  bowed  head,  in  his  glittering  eyes,  in  his  resolute  tread,  jj 
that  terrible  look  of  rage  and  power,  which  she  knew  and  had  experienced 
in  her  own  case  after  the  duel  with  Dolohov. 

‘Wherever  you  are,  there  is  vice  and  wickedness,’  said  Pierre  to  his 
wife.  ‘Anatole,  come  along,  I  want  a  word  with  you,’  he  said  in  French. 
Anatole  looked  round  at  his  sister,  and  got  up  obediently;  prepared  to 
follow  Pierre. 

Pierre  took  him  by  the  arm,  drew  him  to  him,  and  walked  out  of  the 
room. 

‘If  you  allow  yourself  in  my  drawing-room  .  .  .’ Ellen  whispered;  but 
Peirre  walked  out  of  the  room,  without  answering  her. 

Anatole  followed  him,  with  his  usual  jaunty  swagger.  But  his  face 
betrayed  uneasiness.  Going  into  his  own  room,  Pierre  shut  the  door,  and 
addressed  Anatole  without  looking  at  him.  ‘Did  you  promise  Countess 
Rostov  to  marry  her?  Did  you  try  to  elope  with  her?’ 

‘My  dear  fellow,’  answered  Anatole,  in  French  (as  was  the  whole  con¬ 
versation),  ‘I  don’t  consider  myself  bound  to  answer  questions  put  to  me 
in  that  tone.’ 

Pierre’s  face,  which  had  been  pale  before,  was  distorted  by  fury.  With 
his  big  hand  he  clutched  Anatole  by  the  collar  of  his  uniform,  and  pro- 1 
ceeded  to  shake  him  from  side  to  side,  till  Anatole’s  face  showed  a  suffi-  j 
cient  degree  of  terror. 

‘When  I  say  I  want  a  word  with  you  .  .  .’  Pierre  repeated. 

‘Well,  what?  this  is  stupid.  Eh?’  said  Anatole,  feeling  a  button  of  his  ! 
collar  that  had  been  torn  off  with  the  cloth. 

‘You’re  a  scoundrel  and  a  blackguard;  and  I  don’t  know  what  prevents  i 
me  from  permitting  myself  the  pleasure  of  braining  you  with  this,  see,’ 
said  Pierre,  expressing  himself  so  artificially,  because  he  was  speaking  ■ 
French.  He  took  up  a  heavy  paper-weight,  and  lifted  it  in  a  menacing 
way,  but  at  once  hurriedly  put  it  down  in  its  place. 

‘Did  you  promise  to  marry  her?’ 

‘I,  I,  .  .  .  I  .  .  .  didn’t  think  ...  I  never  promised,  though,  be¬ 
cause  .  .  .’ 

Pierre  interrupted  him. 

‘Have  you  any  of  her  letters?  Have  you  any  letters?’  Pierre  repeated, 
advancing  upon  Anatole.  Anatole  glanced  at  him,  and  at  once  thrust 
his  hand  in  his  pocket,  and  took  out  a  pocket-book. 

Pierre  took  the  letter  he  gave  him,  and  pushing  away  a  table  that  stood 
in  the  way,  he  plumped  down  on  the  sofa. 


WARANDPEACE  561 

‘I  won’t  be  violent,  don’t  be  afraid,’  said  Pierre,  in  response  to  a  gesture 
of  alarm  from  Anatole.  ‘Letters — one,’  said  Pierre,  as  though  repeating  a 
lesson  to  himself.  ‘Two’ — after  a  moment’s  silence  he  went  on,  getting 
up  again  and  beginning  to  walk  about — ‘to-morrow  you  are  to  leave  Mos¬ 
cow.’ 

‘But  how  can  I  .  .  .  ?’ 

‘Three’ — Pierre  went  on,  not  heeding  him — ‘you  are  never  to  say  a  word 
of  what  has  passed  between  you  and  the  young  countess.  That  I  know 
I  can’t  prevent  your  doing;  but  if  you  have  a  spark  of  conscience  .  .  .’ 
Pierre  walked  several  times  up  and  down  the  room.  Anatole  sat  at  the 
table,  scowling  and  biting  his  lips. 

‘You  surely  must  understand  that,  apart  from  your  own  pleasure, 
there’s  the  happiness,  the  peace  of  other  people;  that  you  are  ruining  a 
whole  life,  simply  because  you  want  to  amuse  yourself.  Amuse  yourself 
with  women  like  my  wife — with  them  you’re  within  your  rights,  they 
know  what  it  is  you  want  of  them.  They  are  armed  against  you  by  the 
same  experience  of  vice;  but  to  promise  a  girl  to  marry  her  ...  to  de¬ 
ceive,  to  steal  .  .  .  Surely  you  must  see  that  it’s  as  base  as  attacking  an 
old  man  or  a  child!  .  .  .’ 

Pierre  paused  and  glanced  at  Anatole,  more  with  inquiry  now  than  with 
wrath. 

‘I  don’t  know  about  that.  Eh?’  said  Anatole,  growing  bolder  as  Pierre 
gained  control  over  his  rage.  ‘I  don’t  know  about  that,  and  I  don’t  want 
to,’  he  said,  looking  away  from  Pierre,  and  speaking  with  a  slight  quiver 
of  his  lower  jaw,  ‘but  you  have  said  words  to  me,  base  and  all  that  sort 
of  thing,  which  as  a  man  of  honour  I  can’t  allow  any  one  to  do.’ 

Pierre  looked  at  him  in  amazement,  not  able  to  understand  what  it  was 
he  wanted. 

‘Though  it  has  been  only  tete-a-tete,’  Anatole  went  on,  ‘still  I 
can’t  .  .  .’ 

‘What,  do  you  want  satisfaction?’  said  Pierre  sarcastically. 

‘At  any  rate  you  might  take  back  your  words.  Eh?  If  you  want  me  to 
do  as  you  wish.  Eh!’ 

‘I’ll  take  them  back,  I’ll  take  them  back,’  said  Pierre,  ‘and  beg  you  to 
forgive  me.’  Pierre  could  not  help  glancing  at  the  loose  button.  ‘And 
here’s  money  too,  if  you  want  some  for  your  journey.’ 

Anatole  smiled. 

The  expression  of  that  base  and  cringing  smile,  that  he  knew  so  well 
in  his  wife,  infuriated  Pierre.  ‘Oh,  you  vile,  heartless  tribe!’  he  cried, 
and  walked  out  of  the  room. 

Next  day  Anatole  left  for  Petersburg. 


XXI 

Pierre  drove  to  Marya  Dmitryevna’s  to  report  to  her  the  execution  ofc 
her  commands,  as  to  Kuragin’s  banishment  from  Moscow.  The  whole 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


562 

house  was  in  excitement  and  alarm.  Natasha  was  very  ill ;  and  as  Marya 
Dmitryevna  told  him  in  secret,  she  had  on  the  night  after  she  had  been 
told  Anatole  was  married,  taken  arsenic,  which  she  had  procured  by 
stealth.  After  swallowing  a  little,  she  had  been  so  frightened  that  she 
waked  Sonya,  and  told  her  what  she  had  gone.  Antidotes  had  been  given 
in  time,  and  now  she  was  out  of  danger;  but  she  was  still  so  weak,  that 
they  could  not  dream  of  moving  her  to  the  country,  and  the  countess 
had  been  sent  for.  Pierre  saw  the  count  in  great  trouble,  and  Sonya  in 
tears,  but  he  could  not  see  Natasha. 

That  day  Pierre  dined  at  the  club,  and  heard  on  every  side  gossip 
about  the  attempted  abduction  of  the  young  Countess  Rostov,  and  per¬ 
sistently  denied  the  story,  assuring  every  one  that  the  only  foundation  for 
it  was  that  his  brother-in-law  had  made  the  young  lady  an  offer  and  had 
been  refused.  It  seemed  to  Pierre  that  it  was  part  of  his  duty  to  conceal 
the  whole  affair,  and  to  save  the  young  countess’s  reputation. 

He  was  looking  forward  with  terror  to  Prince  Andrey’s  return,  and 
drove  round  every  day  to  ask  for  news  of  him  from  the  old  prince. 

Prince  Nikolay  Andreitch  heard  all  the  rumours  current  in  the  town 
through  Mademoiselle  Bourienne;  and  he  had  read  the  note  to  Princess 
Marya,  in  which  Natasha  had  broken  off  her  engagement.  He  seemed 
in  better  spirits  than  usual,  and  looked  forward  with  impatience  to  seeing 
his  son. 

A  few  days  after  Anatole’s  departure,  Pierre  received  a  note  from  Prince 
Andrey  to  inform  him  that  he  had  arrived,  and  to  beg  him  to  go  and 
see  him. 

The  first  minute  of  Prince  Andrey’s  arrival  in  Moscow,  he  was  handed 
by  his  father  Natasha’s  note  to  Princess  Marya,  in  which  she  broke  off  her 
engagement  (the  note  had  been  stolen  from  Princess  Marya,  and  given  to 
the  old  prince  by  Mademoiselle  Bourienne).  He  heard  from  his  father’s 
lips  the  story  of  Natasha’s  elopement,  with  additions. 

Prince  Andrey  had  arrived  in  the  evening;  Pierre  came  to  see  him  the 
following  morning.  Pierre  had  expected  to  find  Prince  Andrey  almost 
in  the  same  state  as  Natasha,  and  he  was  therefore  surprised  when  as  he 
entered  the  drawing-room  he  heard  the  sound  of  Prince  Andrey’s  voice  in 
the  study,  loudly  and  eagerly  discussing  some  Petersburg  intrigue.  The 
old  prince  and  some  other  voice  interrupted  him  from  time  to  time.  Prin¬ 
cess  Marya  came  out  to  meet  Pierre.  She  sighed,  turning  her  eyes 
towards  the  door  of  the  room,  where  Prince  Andrey  was,  plainly  intending 
to  express  her  sympathy  with  his  sorrow;  but  Pierre  saw  by  Princess 
Marya’s  face  that  she  was  glad  both  at  what  had  happened  and  at  the 
way  her  brother  had  taken  the  news  of  his  fiancee’s  treachery. 

‘He  said  he  had  expected  it,’  she  said.  ‘I  know  his  pride  will  not  allow 
him  to  express  his  feelings;  but  anyway,  he  has  borne  it  better,  far  better, 
than  I  had  expected.  It  seems  it  was  to  be  so  .  .  .’ 

‘But  is  it  all  really  at  an  end?’  said  Pierre. 

Princess  Marya  looked  at  him  with  surprise.  She  could  not  understand 
how  one  could  ask  such  a  question.  Pierre  went  into  the  study.  Prince 


WARANDPEACE  563 

Andrey  was  very  much  changed,  and  visibly  much  more  robust,  but 
there  was  a  new  horizontal  line  between  his  brows.  He  was  in  civilian 
dress,  and  standing  facing  his  father  and  Prince  Meshtchersky,  he  was 
hotly  arguing,  making  vigorous  gesticulations. 

The  subject  was  Speransky,  of  whose  sudden  dismissal  and  supposed 
treason  news  had  just  reached  Moscow. 

‘Now  he’  (Speransky)  ‘will  be  criticised  and  condemned  by  all  who 
were  enthusiastic  about  him  a  month  ago,’  Prince  Andrey  was  saying,  “and 
were  incapable  of  understanding  his  aims.  It’s  very  easy  to  condemn  a 
man  when  he’s  out  of  favour,  and  to  throw  upon  him  the  blame  of  all  the 
mistakes  of  other  people.  But  I  maintain  that  if  anything  of  value  has 
been  done  in  the  present  reign,  it  has  been  done  by  him — by  him  alone 
.  .  .’  He  stopped,  seeing  Pierre.  His  face  quivered,  and  at  once  assumed 
a  vindictive  expression.  ‘And  posterity  will  do  him  justice,’  he  finished, 
and  at  once  turned  to  Pierre.  ‘Well,  how  .are  you,  still  getting  stouter?’ 
he  said  eagerly,  but  the  new  line  was  still  more  deeply  furrowed  on  his 
forehead.  ‘Yes,  I’m  very  wrell,”  he  answered  to  Pierre’s  question,  and  he 
smiled.  It  was  clear  to  Pierre  that  his  smile  meant,  ‘I  am  well,  but  my 
health  is  of  no  use  to  any  one  now.’ 

After  saying  a  few  words  to  Pierre  of  the  awful  road  from  the  frontiers 
of  Poland,  of  people  he  had  met  in  Switzerland  who  knew  Pierre,  and  of 
M.  Dessalle,  whom  he  had  brought  back  from  Switzerland  as  a  tutor  for 
his  son,  Prince  Andrey  warmly  took  part  again  in  the  conversation  about 
Speransky,  which  had  been  kept  up  between  the  two  old  gentlemen. 

‘If  there  had  been  treason,  and  there  were  proofs  of  his  secret  relations 
with  Napoleon,  they  would  have  made  them  public,’  he  said,  with  heat 
and  haste.  ‘I  don’t  and  I  didn’t  like  Speransky  personally,  but  I  do  like 
justice.’ 

Pierre  recognized  now  in  his  friend  that  desire  he  knew  only  too  well, 
for  excitement  and  discussion  of  something  apart  from  himself,  simply 
in  order  to  stifle  thoughts  that  were  too  painful  and  too  near  his  heart. 

When  Prince  Meshtchersky  had  gone,  Prince  Andrey  took  Pierre’s  arm, 
and  asked  him  to  come  to  the  room  that  had  been  assigned  him.  In  that 
room  there  was  a  folding  bedstead  and  open  trunks  and  boxes.  Prince 
Andrey  went  up  to  one  of  them  and  took  out  a  case.  Out  of  the  case  he 
took  a  packet  of  letters.  He  did  all  this  in  silence,  and  very  rapidly.  He 
stood  up  again  and  cleared  his  throat.  His  face  was  frowning,  and  his 
lips  set. 

‘Forgive  me,  if  I’m  troubling  you  .  .  .’  Pierre  saw  that  Prince  Andrey 
was  going  to  speak  of  Natasha,  and  his  broad  face  showed  sympathy  and 
pity.  That  expression  in  Pierre’s  face  exasperated  Prince  Andrey.  He 
went  on  resolutely,  clearly,  and  disagreeably:  ‘I  have  received  a  refusal 
from  Countess  Rostov,  and  rumours  have  reached  me  of  your  brother-im- 
law’s  seeking  her  hand,  or  something  of  the  kind.  Is  that  true?’ 

‘Both  true  and  untrue,’  began  Pierre;  but  Prince  Andrey  cut  him 
short. 


S64  WARANDPEACE 

‘Here  are  her  letters  and  her  portrait/  he  said.  He  took  the  packet 
from  the  table  and  gave  it  to  Pierre. 

‘Give  that  to  the  countess  ...  if  you  will  see  herd 

‘She  is  very  ill/  said  Pierre. 

‘So  she’s  still  here?’  said  Prince  Andrey.  ‘And  Prince  Kuragin?’  he 
asked  quickly. 

‘He  has  been  gone  a  long  while.  She  has  been  at  death’s  door.’ 

‘I  am  very  sorry  to  hear  of  her  illness/  said  Prince  Andrey.  He  laughed 
a  cold,  malignant,  unpleasant  laugh  like  his  father’s. 

‘But  M.  Kuragin,  then,  did  not  deign  to  bestow  his  hand  on  Countess 
Rostov?’  said  Prince  Andrey.  He  snorted  several  times. 

‘He  could  not  have  married  her,  because  he  is  married/  said  Pierre. 

Prince  Andrey  laughed  unpleasantly,  again  recalling  his  father. 

‘And  where  is  he  now,  your  brother-in-law,  may  I  ask?’  he  said. 

‘He  went  to  Peter  .  .  .  but,  really,  I  don’t  know,’  said  Pierre. 

‘Well,  that’s  no  matter/  said  Prince  Andrey.  ‘Tell  Countess  Rostov 
from  me  that  she  was  and  is  perfectly  free,  and  that  I  wish  her  all  pros¬ 
perity.’ 

Pierre  took  the  packet.  Prince  Andrey,  as  though  reflecting  whether 
he  had  not  something  more  to  say,  or  waiting  for  Pierre  to  say  some¬ 
thing,  looked  at  him  with  a  fixed  gaze. 

‘Listen.  Do  you  remember  our  discussion  in  Petersburg?’  said  Pierre. 
‘Do  you  remember  about - ?’ 

‘I  remember/  Prince  Andrey  answered  hurriedly.  ‘I  said  that  a  fallen 
woman  should  be  forgiven,  but  I  did  not  say  I  could  forgive  one.  I 
can’t.’ 

‘How  can  you  compare  it?  .  .  .’ said  Pierre. 

Prince  Andrey  cut  him  short.  He  cried  harshly:  ‘Yes,  ask  her  hand 
again,  be  magnanimous,  and  all  that  sort  of  thing?  .  .  .  Oh,  that’s  all 
very  noble,  but  I’m  not  equal  to  following  in  that  gentleman’s  tracks.  If 
you  care  to  remain  my  friend,  never  speak  to  me  of  that  ...  of  all  this 
business.  Well,  good-bye.  So  you’ll  give  that?  .  .  .’ 

Pierre  left  him,  and  went  in  to  the  old  prince  and  Princess  Marya. 

The  old  man  seemed  livelier  than  usual.  Princess  Marya  was  the  same 
as  usual,  but  behind  her  sympathy  for  her  brother,  Pierre  detected  her 
relief  that  her  brother’s  marriage  was  broken  off.  Looking  at  them,  Pierre 
felt  what  a  contempt  and  dislike  they  all  had  for  the  Rostovs;  felt  that  it 
would  be  impossible  in  their  presence  even  to  mention  the  name  of  the 
girl  who  could  give  up  Prince  Andrey  for  any  one  in  the  world. 

At  dinner  they  talked  of  the  coming  war,  of  which  there  could  now  be 
no  doubt  in  the  near  future.  Prince  Andrey  talked  incessantly,  and 
argued  first  with  his  father,  and  then  with  Dessalle,  the  Swiss  tutor. 
He  seemed  more  eager  than  usual,  with  that  eagerness  of  which  Pierre 
knew  so  well  the.  inner  cause. 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


565 


XXII 

That  evening  Pierre  went  to  the  Rostovs’  to  fulfil  Prince  Andrey’s  com¬ 
mission.  Natasha  was  in  bed,  the  count  was  at  the  club,  and  Pierre, 
after  giving  the  letters  to  Sonya,  went  in  to  see  Marya  Dmitryevna,  who 
was  interested  to  know  how  Prince  Andrey  had  taken  the  news.  Ten 
minutes  later,  Sonya  came  in  to  Marya  Dmitryevna. 

‘Natasha  insists  on  seeing  Count  Pyotr  Kirillitch,’  she  said. 

‘Why,  are  we  to  take  him  up  to  her,  eh?  Why,  you  are  all  in  a  muddle 
there,’  said  Marya  Dmitryevna. 

‘No,  she  has  dressed  and  gone  into  the  drawing-room,’  said  Sonya. 

Marya  Dmitryevna  could  only  shrug  her  shoulders.  ‘When  will  the 
countess  come?  She  has  quite  worn  me  out!  You  mind  now,  don’t  tell  her 
everything,’  she  said  to  Pierre.  ‘One  hasn’t  the  heart  to  scold  her,  she's 
so  piteous,  poor  thing.’ 

Natasha  was  standing  in  the  middle  of  the  drawing-room,  looking  thin¬ 
ner,  and  with  a  pale,  set  face  (not  at  all  overcome  with  shame,  as  Pierre 
had  expected  to  see  her).  When  Pierre  appeared  in  the  doorway,  she 
made  a  hurried  movement,  evidently  in  uncertainty  whether  to  go  to 
met  him,  or  to  wait  for  him  to  come  to  her. 

Pierre  went  hurriedly  towards  her.  He  thought  she  would  give  him  her 
hand  as  usual.  But  coming  near  him  she  stopped,  breathing  hard,  and 
letting  her  hands  hang  lifelessly,  exactly  in  the  same  pose  in  which  she 
used  to  stand  in  the  middle  of  the  room  to  sing,  but  with  an  utterly  dif¬ 
ferent  expression. 

‘Pyotr  Kirillitch,’  she  began,  speaking  quickly,  ‘Prince  Bolkonsky  was 
your  friend — he  is  your  friend,’  she  corrected  herself.  (It  seemed  to  her 
that  everything  was  in  the  past,  and  now  all  was  changed.)  ‘He  told  me  to 
apply  to  you  .  .  .’ 

Pierre  choked  dumbly  as  he  looked  at  her.  Till  then  he  had  in  his 
heart  blamed  her,  and  tried  to  despise  her;  but  now  he  felt  so  sorry  for  her, 
that  there  was  no  room  in  his  heart  for  blame. 

‘He  is  here  now,  tell  him  ...  to  for  ...  to  forgive  me.’  She  stopped 
short  and  breathed  even  more  quickly,  but  she  did  not  weep. 

‘Yes  .  .  .  I  will  tell  him,’ said  Pierre; ‘but  .  .  .’ He  did  not  know  what 
to  say. 

Natasha  was  evidently  dismayed  at  the  idea  that  might  have  occurred 
to  Pierre. 

‘No,  I  know  that  everything  is  over,’  she  said  hurriedly.  ‘No,  that  can 
never  be.  I’m  only  wretched  at  the  wrong  I  have  done  him.  Only  tell  him 
that  I  beg  him  to  forgive,  to  forgive,  forgive  me  for  everything  .  .  .’  Her 
whole  body  was  heaving;  she  sat  down  on  a  chair. 

A  feeling  of  pity  he  had  never  known  before  flooded  Pierre’s  heart. 

‘I  will  tell  him,  I  will  tell  him  everything  once  more,’  said  Pierre;  ‘but 
...  I  should  like  to  know  one  thing  .  .  .’ 

‘To  know  what?’  Natasha’s  eyes  asked. 


566'  WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘I  should  like  to  know,  did  you  love  .  .  Pierre  did  not  know  what  to  1 
call  Anatole,  and  flushed  at  the  thought  of  him — ‘did  you  love  that  bad 
man?’ 

‘Don’t  call  him  bad,’  said  Natasha.  ‘But  I  don’t  .  .  .  know,  I  don’t 
know  .  .  .’  She  began  crying  again,  and  Pierre  was  more  than  ever  over¬ 
whelmed  with  pity,  tenderness,  and  love.  He  felt  the  tears  trickling  under  ! 
his  spectacles,  and  hoped  they  would  not  be  noticed. 

‘We  won’t  talk  any  more  of  it,  my  dear,’  he  said.  It  seemed  suddenly  ' 
so  strange  to  Natasha  to  hear  the  gentle,  tender,  sympathetic  voice  in 
which  he  spoke.  ‘We  won’t  talk  of  it,  my  dear,  I’ll  tell  him  everything. 
But  one  thing  I  beg  you,  look  on  me  as  your  friend ;  and  if  you  want  help, 
advice,  or  simply  want  to  open  your  heart  to  some  one — not  now,  but 
when  things  are  clearer  in  your  heart — think  of  me.’  Pie  took  her  hand 
and  kissed  it.  ‘I  shall  be  happy,  if  I  am  able  .  .  .’  Pierre  was  confused. 

‘Don’t  speak  to  me  like  that;  I’m  not  worth  it!  ’  cried  Natasha,  and  she 
would  have  left  the  room,  but  Pierre  held  her  hand.  He  knew  there  was 
something  more  he  must  say  to  her.  But  when  he  said  it,  he  was  surprised 
at  his  own  words. 

‘Hush,  hush,  your  whole  life  lies  before  you,’  he  said  to  her. 

‘Before  me!  No!  All  is  over  for  me,’  she  said,  with  shame  and  self- 
humiliation. 

‘All  over?’  he  repeated.  ‘If  I  were  not  myself,  but  the  handsomest, 
cleverest,  best  man  in  the  world,  and  if  I  were  free  I  would  be  on  my  knees  ! 
this  minute  to  beg  for  your  hand  and  your  love.’ 

For  the  first  time  for  many  days  Natasha  wept  with  tears  of  gratitude 
and  softened  feeling,  and  glancing  at  Pierre,  she  went  out  of  the  room. 

Pierre  followed  her,  almost  running  into  the  vestibule,  and  restraining 
the  tears  of  tenderness  and  happiness  that  made  a  lump  in  his  throat.  He 
flung  on  his  fur  coat,  unable  to  find  the  armholes,  and  got  into  his  sledge. 

‘Now  where,  your  excellency?’  asked  the  coachman. 

‘Where?’  Pierre  asked  himself.  ‘Where  can  I  go  now?  Not  to  the  club 
or  to  pay  calls.’  All  men  seemed  to  him  so  pitiful,  so  poor  in  comparison 
with  the  feeling  of  tenderness  and  love  in  his  heart,  in  comparison  with 
that  softened,  grateful  glance  she  had  turned  upon  him  that  last  minute 
through  her  tears. 

‘Home,’  said  Pierre,  throwing  open  the  bearskin  coat  over  his  broad, 
joyously  breathing  chest  in  spite  of  ten  degrees  of  frost. 

It  was  clear  and  frosty.  Over  the  dirty,  half-dark  streets,  over  the  black 
roofs  was  a  dark,  starlit  sky.  It  was  only  looking  at  the  sky  that  Pierre 
forgot  the  mortifying  meanness  of  all  things  earthly  in  comparison  with 
the  height  his  soul  had  risen  to.  As  he  drove  into  Arbatsky  Square,  the 
immense  expanse  of  dark,  starlit  sky  lay  open  before  Pierre’s  eyes.  Almost 
in  the  centre  of  it  above  the  Prechistensky  Boulevard,  surrounded  on  all 
sides  by  stars,  but  distinguished  from  all  by  its  nearness  to  the  earth,  its 
white  light  and  long,  upturned  tail,  shone  the  huge,  brilliant  comet  of 
1812 ;  the  comet  which  betokened,  it  was  said,  all  manner  of  horrors  and 
the  end  of  the  world.  But  in  Pierre’s  heart  that  bright  comet,  with  its  long, 


WARANDPEACE  567 

luminous  tail,  aroused  no  feeling  of  dread.  On  the  contrary,  his  eyes  wet 
with  tears,  Pierre  looked  joyously  at  this  bright  comet,  which  seemed  as 
though  after  flying  with  inconceivable  swiftness  through  infinite  space 
in  a  parabola,  it  had  suddenly,  like  an  arrow  piercing  the  earth,  stuck 
fast  at  one  chosen  spot  in  the  black  sky,  and  stayed  there,  vigorously 
tossing  up  its  tail,  shining  and  playing  with  its  white  light  among  the 
countless  other  twinkling  stars.  It  seemed  to  Pierre  that  it  was  in  full 
harmony  with  what  was  in  his  softened  and  emboldened  heart,  that  had 
gained  vigour  to  blossom  into  a  new  life. 


PART  IX 


I 

Towards  the  end  of  the  year  1811,  there  began  to  be  greater  activity  in 
levying  troops  and  in  concentrating  the  forces  of  Western  Europe,  and 
in  1812  these  forces — millions  of  men,  reckoning  those  engaged  in  the 
transport  and  feeding  of  the  army — moved  from  the  west  eastward,  to¬ 
wards  the  frontiers  of  Russia,  where,  since  1811,  the  Russian  forces  were 
being  in  like  manner  concentrated. 

On  the  1 2th  of  June  the  forces  of  Western  Europe  crossed  the  frontier, 
and  the  war  began,  that  is,  an  event  took  place  opposed  to  human  reason 
and  all  human  nature.  Millions  of  men  perpetrated  against  one  another 
so  great  a  mass  of  crime — fraud,  swindling,  robbery,  forgery,  issue  of 
counterfeit  money,  plunder,  incendiarism,  and  murder — that  the  annals 
of  all  the  criminal  courts  of  the  world  could  not  muster  such  a  sum  of 
wickedness  in  whole  centuries,  though  the  men  who  committed  those 
deeds  did  not  at  that  time  look  on  them  as  crimes. 

What  led  to  this  extraordinary  event?  What  were  its  causes?  Historians, 
with  simple-hearted  conviction,  tell  us  that  the  causes  of  this  event  were 
the  insult  offered  to  the  Duke  of  Oldenburg,  the  failure  to  maintain  the 
continental  system,  the  ambition  of  Napoleon,  the  firmness  of  Alexander, 
the  mistakes  of  the  diplomatists,  and  so  on. 

According  to  them,  if  only  Metternich,  Rumyantsev,  or  Talleyrand  had, 
in  the  interval  between  a  levee  and  a  court  ball,  really  taken  pains  and 
written  a  more  judicious  diplomatic  note,  or  if  only  Napoleon  had  written 
to  Alexander,  T  consent  to  restore  the  duchy  to  the  Duke  of  Oldenburg,’ 
there  would  have  been  no  war. 

We  can  readily  understand  that  being  the  conception  of  the  war  that 
presented  itself  to  contemporaries.  We  can  understand  Napoleon’s  sup¬ 
posing  the  cause  of  the  war  to  be  the  intrigues  of  England  (as  he  said, 
indeed,  in  St.  Helena) ;  we  can  understand  how  to  the  members  of  the 
English  House  of  Commons  the  cause  of  the  war  seemed  to  be  Napoleon’s 
ambition;  how  to  the  Duke  of  Oldenburg  the  war  seemed  due  to  the  out¬ 
rage  done  him;  how  to  the  trading  class  the  war  seemed  due  to  the  conti¬ 
nental  system  that  was  ruining  Europe ;  to  the  old  soldiers  and  generals 
the  chief  reason  for  it  seemed  their  need  of  active  service ;  to  the  regiments 
of  the  period,  the  necessity  of  re-establishing  les  bons  principes;  while  the 
diplomatists  of  the  time  set  it  down  to  the  alliance  of  Russia  with  Austria 
in  1809  not  having  been  with  sufficient  care  concealed  from  Napoleon, 
and  the  memorandum,  No.  178,  having  been  awkwardly  worded.  We  may 
well  understand  contemporaries  believing  in  those  causes,  and  in  a  count- 

568 


WAR  AND  PEACE  5&9 

less,  endless  number  more,  the  multiplicity  of  which  is  due  to  the  in¬ 
finite  variety  of  men’s  points  of  view.  But  to  us  of  a  later  generation,  con¬ 
templating  in  all  its  vastness  the  immensity  of  the  accomplished  fact,  and 
seeking  to  penetrate  its  simple  and  fearful  significance,  those  explanations 
must  appear  insufficient.  To  us  it  is  inconceivable  that  millions  of  Chris¬ 
tian  men  should  have  killed  and  tortured  each  other,  because  Napoleon 
,  was  ambitious,  Alexander  firm,  English  policy  crafty,  and  the  Duke  of 
Oldenburg  hardly  treated.  We  cannot  grasp  the  connection  between  these 
circumstances  and  the  bare  fact  of  murder  and  violence,  nor  why  the' 
duke’s  wrongs  should  induce  thousands  of  men  from  the  other  side  of 
Europe  to  pillage  and  murder  the  inhabitants  of  the  Smolensk  and  Mos¬ 
cow  provinces  and  to  be  slaughtered  by  them. 

For  us  of  a  later  generation,  who  are  not  historians  led  away  by  the 
process  of  research,  and  so  can  look  at  the  facts  with  common-sense  unob¬ 
scured,  the  causes  of  this  war  appear  innumerable  in  their  multiplicity. 
The  more  deeply  we  search  out  the  causes  the  more  of  them  we  discover; 
and  every  cause,  and  even  a  whole  class  of  causes  taken  separately,  strikes 
us  as  being  equally  true  in  itself,  and  equally  deceptive  through  its  insig¬ 
nificance  in  comparison  with  the  immensity  of  the  result,  and  its  inability 
to  produce  (without  all  the  other  causes  that  concurred  with  it)  the  effect 
that  followed.  Such  a  cause,  for  instance,  occurs  to  us  as  Napoleon’s  refusal 
to  withdraw  his  troops  beyond  the  Vistula,  and  to  restore  the  duchy  of 
Oldenburg;  and  then  again  we  remember  the  readiness  or  the  reluctance 
of  the  first  chance  French  corporal  to  serve  on  a  second  campaign ;  for  had 
he  been  unwilling  to  serve,  and  a  second  and  a  third,  and  thousands  of 
corporals  and  soldiers  had  shared  that  reluctance,  Napoleon’s  army  would 
have  been  short  of  so  many  men,  and  the  war  could  not  have  taken  place. 

If  Napoleon  had  not  taken  offence  at  the  request  to  withdraw  beyond 
the  Vistula,  and  had  not  commanded  his  troops  to  advance,  there  would 
have  been  no  war.  But  if  all  the  sergeants  had  been  unwilling  to  serve  on 
another  campaign,  there  could  have  been  no  war  either. 

And  the  war  would  not  have  been  had  there  been  no  intrigues  on  the 
part  of  England,  no  Duke  of  Oldenburg,  no  resentment  on  the  part  of 
Alexander;  nor  had  there  been  no  autocracy  in  Russia,  no  French  Revolu¬ 
tion  and  consequent  dictatorship  and  empire,  nor  all  that  led  to  the  French 
Revolution,  and  so  on  further  back:  without  any  one  of  those  causes, 
nothing  could  have  happened.  And  so  all  those  causes — myriads  of  causes 
— coincided  to  bring  about  what  happened.  And  consequently  nothing  was 
exclusively  the  cause  of  the  war,  and  the  war  was  bound  to  happen,  simply 
because  it  was  bound  to  happen.  Millions  of  men,  repudiating  their  com¬ 
mon-sense  and  their  human  feelings,  were  bound  to  move  from  west  to  east, 
and  to  slaughter  their  fellows,  just  as  some  centuries  before  hordes  of 
men  had  moved  from  east  to  west  to  slaughter  their  fellows. 

The  acts  of  Napoleon  and  Alexander,  on  whose  words  it  seemed  to 
depend  whether  this  should  be  done  or  not,  were  as  little  voluntary  as  the 
act  of  each  soldier,  forced  to  march  out  by  the  drawing  of  a  lot  or  by  con¬ 
scription.  This  could  not  be  otherwise,  for  in  order  that  the  will  of  Na- 


5/o  WAR  AND  PEACE 

poleon  and  Alexander  (on  whom  the  whole  decision  appeared  to  rest) 
should  be  effective,  a  combination  of  innumerable  circumstances  was 
essential,  without  any  one  of  which  the  effect  could  not  have  followed.  It 
was  essential  that  the  millions  of  men  in  whose  hands  the  real  power  lay — 
the  soldiers  who  fired  guns  and  transported  provisions  and  cannons — 
should  consent  to  carry  out  the  will  of  those  feeble  and  isolated  persons, 
and  that  they  should  have  been  brought  to  this  acquiescence  by  an  infinite 
number  of  varied  and  complicated  causes. 

We  are  forced  to  fall  back  upon  fatalism  in  history  to  explain  irrational 
events  (that  is  those  of  which  we  cannot  comprehend  the  reason).  The 
more  we  try  to  explain  those  events  in  history  rationally,  the  more  irra¬ 
tional  and  incomprehensible  they  seem  to  us.  Every  man  lives  for  himself, 
making  use  of  his  free-will  for  attainment  of  his  own  objects,  and  feels  in 
his  whole  being  that  he  can  do  or  not  do  any  action.  But  as  soon  as  he  does 
anything,  that  act,  committed  at  a  certain  moment  in  time,  becomes  irrev¬ 
ocable  and  is  the  property  of  history,  in  which  it  has  a  significance,  pre¬ 
destined  and  not  subject  to  free  choice. 

There  are  two  aspects  to  the  life  of  every  man:  the  personal  life,  which 
is  free  in  proportion  as  its  interests  are  abstract,  and  the  elemental  life 
of  the  swarm,  in  which  a  man  must  inevitably  follow  the  laws  laid  down 
for  him. 

Consciously  a  man  lives  on  his  own  account  in  freedom  of  will,  but  he 
serves  as  an  unconscious  instrument  in  bringing  about  the  historical  ends 
of  humanity.  An  act  he  has  once  committed  is  irrevocable,  and  that  act 
of  his,  coinciding  in  time  with  millions  of  acts  of  others,  has  an  historical 
value.  The  higher  a  man’s  place  in  the  social  scale,  the  more  connections 
he  has  with  others,  and  the  more  power  he  has  over  them,  the  more  con¬ 
spicuous  is  the  inevitability  and  predestination  of  every  act  he  commits. 
‘The  hearts  of  kings  are  in  the  hand  of  God.’  The  king  is  the  slave  of 
history. 

History — that  is  the  unconscious  life  of  humanity  in  the  swarm,  in  the 
community — makes  every  minute  of  the  life  of  kings  its  own,  as  an  instru¬ 
ment  for  attaining  its  ends. 

Although  in  that  year,  1812,  Napoleon  believed  more  than  ever  that 
to  shed  or  not  to  shed  the  blood  of  his  peoples  depended  entirely  on  his 
will  (as  Alexander  said  in  his  last  letter  to  him),  yet  then,  and  more  than 
at  any  time,  he  was  in  bondage  to  those  laws  which  forced  him,  while  to 
himself  he  seemed  to  be  acting  freely,  to  do  what  was  bound  to  be  his  share 
in  the  common  edifice  of  humanity,  in  history. 

The  people  of  the  west  moved  to  the  east  for  men  to  kill  one  another. 
And  by  the  law  of  the  coincidence  of  causes,  thousands  of.  petty  causes 
backed  one  another  up  and  coincided  with  that  event  to  bring  about  that 
movement  and  that  war:  resentment  at  the  non-observance  of  the  conti¬ 
nental  system,  and  the  Duke  of  Oldenburg,  and  the  massing  of  troops 
in  Prussia — a  measure  undertaken,  as  Napoleon  supposed,  with  the  object 
of  securing  armed  peace — and  the  French  Emperor’s  love  of  war,  to  which 
he  had  grown  accustomed,  in  conjunction  with  the  inclinations  of  his 


WAR  AND  PEACE  S7i 

people,  who  were  carried  away  by  the  grandiose  scale  of  the  preparations, 
and  the  expenditure  on  those  preparations,  and  the  necessity  of  recouping 
that  expenditure.  Then  there  was  the  intoxicating  effect  of  the  honours 
paid  to  the  French  Emperor  in  Dresden,  and  the  negotiations  too  of  the 
diplomatists,  who  were  supposed  by  contemporaries  to  be  guided  by  a 
genuine  desire  to  secure  peace,  though  they  only  inflamed  the  amour- 
propre  of  both  sides;  and  millions  upon  millions  of  other  causes,  chiming 
in  with  the  fated  event  and  coincident  with  it. 

When  the  apple  is  ripe  and  falls — why  does  it  fall?  Is  it  because  it  is 
drawn  by  gravitation  to  the  earth,  because  its  stalk  is  withered,  because  it 
is  dried  by  the  sun,  because  it  grows  heavier,  because  the  wind  shakes  it, 
or  because  the  boy  standing  under  the  tree  wants  to  eat  it? 

Not  one  of  those  is  the  cause.  All  that  simply  makes  up  the  conjunction 
of  conditions  under  which  every  living,  organic,  elemental  event  takes 
place.  And  the  botanist  who  says  that  the  apple  has  fallen  because  the 
cells  are  decomposing,  and  so  on,  will  be  just.as  right  as  the  boy  standing 
under  the  tree  who  says  the  apple  has  fallen  because  he  wanted  to  eat  it 
and  prayed  for  it  to  fall.  The  historian,  who  says  that  Napoleon  went  to 
Moscow  because  he  wanted  to,  and  was  ruined  because  Alexander  desired 
his  ruin,  will  be  just  as  right  and  as  wrong  as  the  man  who  says  that  the 
mountain  of  millions  of  tons,  tottering  and  undermined,  has  been  felled  by 
the  last  stroke  of  the  last  workingman’s  pickaxe.  In  historical  events  great 
men — so  called — are  but  the  labels  that  serve  to  give  a  name  to  an  event, 
and  like  labels,  they  have  the  least  possible  connection  with  the  event 
itself. 

Every  action  of  theirs,  that  seems  to  them  an  act  of  their  own  free-will, 
is  in  an  historical  sense  not  free  at  all,  but  in  bondage  to  the  whole  course 
of  previous  history,  and  predestined  from  all  eternity. 


II 

On  the  29th  of  May  Napoleon  left  Dresden,  where  he  had  been  spending 
three  weeks  surrounded  by  a  court  that  included  princes,  dukes,  kings, 
and  even  one  emperor.  Before  his  departure,  Napoleon  took  a  gracious 
leave  of  the  princes,  kings,  and  emperor  deserving  of  his  favour,  and 
sternly  upbraided  the  kings  and  princes  with  whom  he  was  displeased.  He 
made  a  present  of  his  own  diamonds  and  pearls — those,  that  is,  that  he 
had  taken  from  other  kings— to  the  Empress  of  Austria.  He  tenderly  em¬ 
braced  the  Empress  Marie  Louise — who  considered  herself  his  wife, 
though  he  had  another  wife  still  living  in  Paris — and  left  her,  so  his  his¬ 
torian  relates,  deeply  distressed  and  hardly  able  to  support  the  separation. 
Although  diplomatists  still  firmly  believed  in  the  possibility  of  peace,  and 
were  zealously  working  with  that  object,  although  the  Emperor  Napoleon, 
with  his  own  hand,  wrote  a  letter  to  the  Emperor  Alexander  calling  him 
Monsieur  mon  jrere,’  and  assuring  him  with  sincerity  that  he  had  no  de¬ 
fire  of  war,  and  would  always  love  and  honour  him,  he  set  off  to  join  the 


572  WAR  AND  PEACE 

army,  and  at  every  station  gave  fresh  commands,  hastening  the  progress' 
of  his  army  from  west  to  east.  He  drove  in  a  travelling  carriage,  drawn  by 
six  horses  and  surrounded  by  pages,  adjutants,  and  an  armed  escort,  along 
the  route  by  Posen,  Thorn,  Dantzig,  and  Konigsberg.  In  each  of  these 
towns  he  was  welcomed  with  enthusiasm  and  trepidation  by  thousands 
of  people. 

The  army  was  moving  from  west  to  east,  and  he  was  driven  after  it  by 
continual  relays  of  six  horses.  On  the  ioth  of  June  he  overtook  the  army 
and  spent  the  night  in  the  Vilkovik  forest,  in  quarters  prepared  for  him  on 
the  property  of  a  Polish  count. 

The  following  day  Napoleon  drove  on  ahead  of  the  army,  reached  the 
Niemen,  put  on  a  Polish  uniform  in  order  to  inspect  the  crossing  of  the 
river,  and  rode  out  on  the  river  bank. 

When  he  saw  the  Cossacks  posted  on  the  further  bank  and  the  expanse 
of  the  steppes — in  the  midst  of  which,  far  away,  was  the  holy  city,  Mos¬ 
cow,  capital  of  an  empire,  like  the  Scythian  empire  invaded  by  Alexander 
of  Macedon — Napoleon  surprised  the  diplomatists  and  contravened  all 
rules  of  strategy  by  ordering  an  immediate  advance,  and  his  troops  began 
crossing  the  Niemen  next  day. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  12th  of  June  he  came  out  of  his  tent,  which 
had  been  pitched  that  day  on  the  steep  left  bank  of  the  Niemen,  and 
looked  through  a  field-glass  at  his  troops  pouring  out  of  the  Vilkovik 
forest,  and  dividing  into  three  streams  at  the  three  bridges  across  the 
river.  The  troops  knew  of  the  Emperor’s  presence,  and  were  on  the  look¬ 
out  for  him.  When  they  caught  sight  of  his  figure  in  his  greatcoat  and  hat 
standing  apart  from  his  suite  in  front  of  his  tent  on  the  hill  opposite,  theyj 
threw  up  their  caps  and  shouted,  ‘Vive  VEmpereur !’  And  one  regiment' 
after  another,  in  a  continuous  stream,  flowed  out  of  the  immense  forest 
that  had  concealed  them,  and  split  up  to  cross  the  river  by  the  three 
bridges.  AVe  shall  make  some  way  this  time.  Oh,  when  he  takes  a  hand 
himself  things  begin  to  get  warm!  .  .  .  Name  of  God!  .  .  .  There  he 
is!  ...  Hurrah  for  the  Emperor!  So  those  are  the  Steppes  of  Asia!  A 
nasty  country  it  is,  though.  Good-bye,  Beauche;  I’ll  keep  the  finest  palace 
in  Moscow  for  you.  Good-bye!  good-luck!  .  .  .  Have  you  seen  the  Em¬ 
peror?  Hurrah  for  the  Emperor!  If  they  make  me  Governor  of  the  Indies, . 
Gerard,  I’ll  make  you  Minister  of  Cashmere,  that’s  settled.  Hurrah  for 
the  Emperor!  Hurrah!  hurrah!  hurrah!  The  rascally  Cossacks,  how  they 
are  running.  Hurrah  for  the  Emperor!  There  he  is!  Do  you  see  him?  I 
have  seen  him  twice  as  I  am  seeing  you.  The  little  corporal  ...  I  saw 
him  give  the  cross  to  one  of  the  veterans.  .  .  .  Hurrah  for  the  Emperor!’ 
Such  was  the  talk  of  old  men  and  young,  of  the  most  diverse  characters  ( 
and  positions  in  society.  All  the  faces  of  those  men  wore  one  common  ex-  1 
pression  of  joy  at  the  commencement  of  a  long-expected  campaign,  and 
enthusiasm  and  devotion  to  the  man  in  the  grey  coat  standing  on  the  hill 
opposite. 

On  the  13th  of  June  Napoleon  mounted  a  small  thoroughbred  Arab 
horse  and  galloped  towards  one  of  the  bridges  over  the  Niemen,  deafenec 


WARANDPEACE  573 

all  the  while  by  shouts  of  enthusiasm,  which  he  obviously  endured  simply 
because  they  could  not  be  prevented  from  expressing  in  such  shouts  their 
love  for  him.  But  those  shouts,  invariably  accompanying  him  everywhere, 
wearied  him  and  hindered  his  attending  to  the  military  problems  which 
beset  him  from  the  time  he  joined  the  army.  He  rode  over  a  swaying  bridge 
of  boats  to  the  other  side  of  the  river,  turned  sharply  to  the  left,  and  gal¬ 
loped  in  the  direction  of  Kovno,  preceded  by  horse  guards,  who  were 
breathless  with  delight  and  enthusiasm,  as  they  cleared  the  way  before 
him.  On  reaching  the  broad  river  Niemen,  he  pulled  up  beside  a  regiment 
of  Polish  Uhlans  on  the  bank. 

‘Vive  l’ Empereur !’  the  Poles  shouted  with  the  same  enthusiasm,  break¬ 
ing  their  line  and  squeezing  against  each  other  to  get  a  view  of  him.  Na¬ 
poleon  looked  up  and  down  the  river,  got  off  his  horse,  and  sat  down  on 
a  log  that  lay  on  the  bank.  At  a  mute  sign  from  him,  they  handed  him  the 
field-glass.  He  propped  it  on  the  back  of  a  page  who  ran  up  delighted.  He 
began  looking  at  the  other  side,  then,  with  absorbed  attention,  scrutinised 
the  map  that  was  unfolded  on  the  logs.  Without  raising  his  head  he  said 
something,  and  two  of  his  adjutants  galloped  off  to  the  Polish  Uhlans. 

‘What?  what  did  he  say?’  was  heard  in  the  ranks  of  the  Polish  Uhlans 
as  an  adjutant  galloped  up  to  them.  They  were  commanded  to  look  for  a 
fording-place  and  to  cross  to  the  other  side.  The  colonel  of  the  Polish 
Uhlans,  a  handsome  old  man,  flushing  red  and  stammering  from  excite¬ 
ment,  asked  the  adjutant  whether  he  would  be  permitted  to  swim  across 
the  river  with  his  men  instead  of  seeking  for  a  ford.  In  obvious  dread  of  a 
refusal,  like  a  boy  asking  permission  to  get  on  a  horse,  he  asked  to  be 
allowed  to  swim  across  the  river  before  the  Emperor’s  eyes.  The  adjutant 
replied  that  probably  the  Emperor  would  not  be  displeased  at  this  excess 
bf  zeal. 

No  sooner  had  the  adjutant  said  this  than  the  old  whiskered  officer,  with 
happy  face  and  sparkling  eyes,  brandished  his  sabre  in  the  air  shouting 
Vive  VEmpereur !’  and  commanding  his  men  to  follow  him,  he  set  spurs 
to  his  horse  and  galloped  down  to  the  river.  He  gave  a  vicious  thrust  to 
lis  horse,  that  floundered  under  him,  and  plunged  into  the  water,  making 
for  the  most  rapid  part  of  the  current.  Hundreds  of  Uhlans  galloped  in 
ifter  him.  It  was  cold  and  dangerous  in  the  middle  in  the  rapid  current. 
The  Uhlans  clung  to  one  another,  falling  off  their  horses.  Some  of  the 
lorses  were  drowned,  some,  too,  of  the  men;  the  others  struggled  to  swim 
tcross,  some  in  the  saddle,  others  clinging  to  their  horse’s  manes.  They 
ried  to  swim  straight  across,  and  although  there  was  a  ford  half  a  verst 
lway  they  were  proud  to  be  swimming  and  drowning  in  the  river  before 
he  eyes  of  that  man  sitting  on  the  log  and  not  even  looking  at  what  they 
vere  doing.  When  the  adjutant,  on  going  back,  chose  a  favourable  moment 
ind  ventured  to  call  the  Emperor’s  attention  to  the  devotion  of  the  Poles 
o  his  person,  the  little  man  in  the  grey  overcoat  got  up,  and  summoning 
3erthier,  he  began  walking  up  and  down  the  bank  with  him,  giving  him 
nstructions,  and  casting  now  and  then  a  glance  of  displeasure  at  the 
Irowning  Uhlans  who  had  interrupted  his  thoughts. 


574  WAR  AND  PEACE 

It  was  no  new  conviction  for  him  that  his  presence  in  any  quarter  of  the 
earth,  from  Africa  to  the  steppes  of  Moscow,  was  enough  to  impress  men 
and  impel  them  to  senseless  acts  of  self-sacrifice.  He  sent  for  his  horse  and 
rode  back  to  his  bivouac. 

Forty  Uhlans  were  drowned  in  the  river  in  spite  of  the  boats  sent  to 
their  assistance.  The  majority  struggled  back  to  the  bank  from  which 
they  had  started.  The  colonel,  with  several  of  his  men,  swam  across  the 
river  and  with  difficulty  clambered  up  the  other  bank.  But  as, soon  as  they 
clambered  out  in  drenched  and  streaming  clothes  they  shouted  ‘Vive  VEm* 
pereurl’  looking  ecstatically  at  the  place  where  Napoleon  had  stood, 
though  he  was  no  longer  there,  and  at  that  moment  thought  themselves 
happy. 

In  the  evening  between  giving  two  orders — one  for  hastening  the  ar-  ■ 
rival  of  the  counterfeit  rouble  notes  that  had  been  prepared  for  circulation 
in  Russia,  and  the  other  for  shooting  a  Saxon  who  had  been  caught  with  a 
letter  containing  a  report  on  the  disposition  of  the  French  army — Na¬ 
poleon  gave  a  third  order  for  presenting  the  colonel,  who  had  quite  un¬ 
necessarily  flung  himself  in  the  river,  the  order  of  the  Legion  d’Honneur, 
of  which  he  was  himself  the  head.  Quos  vult  perdere,  dementat. 

111 

The  Russian  Emperor  had  meanwhile  been  spending  more  than  a  month 
in  Vilna,  holding  reviews  and  inspecting  manoeuvres.  Nothing  was  in 
readiness  for  the  war,  which  all  were  expecting,  though  it  was  to  prepare  * 
for  it  that  the  Tsar  had  come  from  Petersburg.  There  was  no  general  plan 
of  action.  The  vacillation  between  all  the  plans  that  were  proposed  and 
the  inability  to  fix  on  any  one  of  them,  was  more  marked  than  ever  after 
the  Tsar  had  been  for  a  month  at  headquarters.  There  was  a  separate  com¬ 
mander-in-chief  at  the  head  of  each  of  the  three  armies;  but  there  was 
no  commander  with  authority  over  all  of  them,  and  the  Tsar  did  not  under¬ 
take  the  duties  of  such  a  commander-in-chief  himself. 

The  longer  the  Tsar  stayed  at  Vilna,  the  less  ready  was  the  Russian  . 
army  for  the  war,  which  they  had  grown  weary  of  expecting.  Every  effort 
of  the  men  who  surrounded  the  Tsar  seemed  to  be  devoted  to  making  their 
sovereign  spend  his  time  pleasantly  and  forget  the  impending  war. 

Many  balls  and  fetes  were  given  by  the  Polish  magnates,  by  members 
of  the  court,  and  by  the  Tsar  himself;  and  in  the  month  of  June  it  oc¬ 
curred  to  one  of  the  Polish  generals  attached  to  the  Tsar’s  staff  that  all  i 
the  generals  on  the  staff  should  give  a  dinner  and  a  ball  to  the  Tsar.  The 
suggestion  was  eagerly  taken  up.  The  Tsar  gave  his  consent.  The  generals 
on  the  staff  subscribed  the  necessary  funds.  The  lady  who  was  most  likely 
to  please  the  Tsar’s  taste  was  selected  as  hostess  for  the  ball.  Count  Ben- 
nigsen,  who  had  land  in  the  Vilna  province,  offered  his  house  in  the  out¬ 
skirts  for  this  fete,  and  the  13th  of  June  was  the  day  fixed  fa  a  ball,  a 


WARANDPEACE  575 

dinner,  with  a  regatta  and  fireworks  at  Zakreta,  Count  Bennigsen’s  subur¬ 
ban  house. 

On  the  very  day  on  which  Napoleon  gave  the  order  to  cross  the  Niemen, 
and  the  vanguard  of  his  army  crossed  the  Russian  frontier,  driving  back 
the  Cossacks,  Alexander  was  at  the  ball  given  by  the  generals  on  his  staff 
at  Count  Bennigsen’s  house. 

It  w’as  a  brilliant  and  festive  entertainment.  Connoisseurs  declared  that 
rarely  had  so  many  beauties  been  gathered  together  at  one  place. 
Countess  Bezuhov,  who  had  been  among  the  Russian  ladies  who  had  fol¬ 
lowed  the  Tsar  from  Petersburg  to  Vilna,  was  at  that  ball,  her  heavy, 
Russian  style  of  beauty — as  it  is  called — overshadowing  the  more  refined 
Polish  ladies.  She  was  much  noticed,  and  the  Tsar  had  deigned  to  bestow 
a  dance  upon  her. 

Boris  Drubetskoy,  who  had  left  his  wife  at  Moscow,  and  was  living 
‘en  garqon,’  as  he  said,  at  Vilna,  was  also  at  that  ball ;  and  although  he 
was  not  a  general  on  the  staff,  he  had  subscribed  a  large  sum  to  the  ball. 
Boris  was  now  a  wealthy  man  who  had  risen  to  high  honours.  He  no  longer 
sought  patronage,  but  was  on  an  equal  footing  with  the  most  distinguished 
men  of  his  age.  At  Vilna  he  met  Ellen,  whom  he  had  not  seen  for  a  long 
while.  As  Ellen  was  enjoying  the  good  graces  of  a  very  important  person¬ 
age  indeed,  and  Boris  had  so  recently  been  married,  they  made  no  allusion 
to  the  past,  but  met  as  good-natured,  old  friends. 

At  midnight  dancing  was  still  going  on.  Ellen  happening  to  have  no 
suitable  partner  had  herself  proposed  a  mazurka  to  Boris.  They  were  the 
third  couple.  Boris  was  looking  coldly  at  Ellen’s  splendid  bare  shoulders, 
which  rose  out  of  her  dress  of  dark  gauze  and  gold,  and  was  talking  to  her 
of  old  acquaintances,  and  yet  though  others  and  himself  too  were  unaware 
of  it,  he  never  for  a  second  ceased  observing  the  Tsar  who  was  in  the  same 
room.  The  Tsar  was  not  dancing;  he  was  standing  in  the  doorway,  stop¬ 
ping  one  person  after  the  other  with  the  gracious  words  he  alone  knew 
how  to  utter. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  mazurka,  Boris  saw  that  a  general  of  the  staff, 
Balashov,  one  of  the  persons  in  closest  attendance  on  the  Tsar,  went  up 
to  him,  and,  regardless  of  court  etiquette,  stopped  close  to  him,  while  he 
conversed  with  a  Polish  lady.  After  saying  a  few  words  to  the  lady,  the 
Tsar  glanced  inquiringly  at  Balashov,  and  apparently  seeing  that  he  was 
behaving  like  this  only  because  he  had  weighty  reasons  for  doing  so,  he 
gave  the  lady  a  slight  nod  and  turned  to  Balashov.  The  Tsar’s  counte¬ 
nance  betrayed  amazement,  as  soon  as  Balashov  had  begun  to  speak.  He 
took  Balashov’s  arm  and  walked  across  the  room  with  him,  unconsciously 
clearing  a  space  of  three  yards  on  each  side  of  him  as  people  hastily  drew 
back.  Boris  noticed  the  excited  face  of  Araktcheev  as  the  Tsar  walked  up 
the  room  with  Balashov.  Araktcheev,  looking  from  under  his  brows  at  the 
Tsar,  and  sniffing  with  his  red  nose,  moved  forward  out  of  the  crowd  as 
though  expecting  the  Tsar  to  apply  to  him.  (Boris  saw  that  Araktcheev 
envied  Balashov  and  was  displeased  at  any  important  news  having 
reached  •  Tsar  not  through  him.)  But  the  Tsar  and  Balashov  walked 


576  WAR  AND  PEACE 

out  by  the  door  into  the  lighted  garden,  without  noticing  Araktcheev. 
Araktcheev,  holding  his  sword  and  looking  wrathfully  about  him,  followed 
twenty  paces  behind  them. 

Boris  went  on  performing  the  figures  of  the  mazurka,  but  he  was  all  the 
while  fretted  by  wondering  what  the  news  could  be  that  Balashov  had 
brought,  and  in  what  way  he  could  find  it  out  before  other  people.  In  the 
figure  in  which  he  had  to  choose  a  lady,  he  whispered  to  Ellen  that  he 
wanted  to  choose  Countess  Pototsky,  who  had,  he  thought,  gone  out  on 
to  the  balcony,  and  gliding  over  the  parquet,  he  flew  to  the  door  that 
opened  into  the  garden,  and  seeing  the  Tsar  and  Balashov  coming  into 
the  verandah,  he  stood  still  there.  The  Tsar  and  Balashov  moved  towards 
the  door.  Boris,  with  a  show  of  haste,  as  though  he  had  not  time  to  move 
away,  squeezed  respectfully  up  to  the  doorpost  and  bowed  his  head.  The 
Tsar  in  the  tone  of  a  man  resenting  a  personal  insult  was  saying: 

‘To  enter  Russia  with  no  declaration  of  war!  I  will  consent  to  concilia¬ 
tion  only  when  not  a  single  enemy  under  arms  is  left  in  my  country,’  he 
said. 

It  seemed  to  Boris  that  the  Tsar  liked  uttering  these  words:  he  was 
pleased  with  the  form  in  which  he  had  expressed  his  feelings,  but  dis¬ 
pleased  at  Boris  overhearing  them. 

‘Let  nobody  know  of  it!  ’  the  Tsar  added,  frowning. 

Boris  saw  that  this  was  aimed  at  him,  and  closing  his  eyes,  inclined  his 
head  a  little.  The  Tsar  went  back  to  the  ballroom,  and  remained  there 
another  half  hour. 

Boris  was  the  first  person  to  learn  the  news  that  the  French  troops  had 
crossed  the  Niemen;  and,  thanks  to  that  fact,  was  enabled  to  prove  to 
various  persons  of  great  consequence,  that  much  that  was  hidden  from 
others  was  commonly  known  to  him,  and  was  thereby  enabled  to  rise  even 
higher  than  before  in  the  opinion  of  those  persons. 

The  astounding  news  of  the  French  having  crossed  the  Niemen  seemed 
particularly  unexpected  from  coming  after  a  month’s  uninterrupted  ex¬ 
pectation  of  it,  and  arriving  at  a  ball!  At  the  first  moment  of  amazement 
and  resentment  on  getting  the  news,  Alexander  hit  on  the  declaration  that 
has  since  become  famous— a  declaration  which  pleased  him  and  fully 
expressed  his  feelings.  On  returning  home  after  the  ball  at  two  o’clock  in 
the  night,  the  Tsar  sent  for  his  secretary,  Shishkov,  and  told  him  to  write 
a  decree  to  the  army  and  a  rescript  to  Field-Marshal  Prince  Saltykov;  and 
he  insisted  on  the  words  being  inserted  that  he  would  never  make  peace 
as  long  as  one  Frenchman  under  arms  remained  in  Russia. 

The  next  day  the  following  letter  was  written  to  Napoleon: 

Monsieur  mon  frere, — I  learnt  yesterday  that  in  spite  of  the  loyalty 
with  which  I  have  kept  my  engagements  with  your  Majesty,  your  troops 
have  crossed  the  frontiers  of  Russia,  and  I  have  this  moment  received  from 
Petersburg  the  note  in  which  Count  Lauriston  informs  me  as  cause  of  this 
invasion  that  your  Majesty  considers  us  to  be  in  hostile  relations  ever 


WARANDPEACE  577 

since  Prince  Kurakin  asked  for  his  passport.  The  causes  on  which  the  Due 
de  Bassano  based  his  refusal  to  give  these  passports  would  never  have  led 
me  to  suppose  that  the  action  of  my  ambassador  could  serve  as  a  ground 
for  invasion.  And,  indeed,  he  received  no  authorisation  from  me  in  his 
action,  as  has  been  made  known  by  him;  and  as  soon  as  I  heard  of  it  I 
immediately  expressed  my  displeasure  to  Prince  Kurakin,  commanding 
him  to  perform  the  duties  entrusted  to  him  as  before.  If  your  Majesty  is 
not  inclined  to  shed  the  blood  of  your  subjects  for  such  a  misunderstand¬ 
ing,  and  if  you  consent  to  withdraw  your  troops  from  Russian  territory, 
I  will  pass  over  the  whole  incident  unnoticed,  and  agreement  between  us 
will  be  possible.  In  the  opposite  case,  I  shall  be  forced  to  repel  an  invasion 
which  has  been  in  no  way  provoked  on  my  side.  Your  Majesty  has  it  in 
your  power  to  preserve  humanity  from  the  disasters  of  another  war.- — I 
am,  etc.,  *  (Signed)  Alexander. 


IV 

At  two  o’clock  in  the  night  of  the  13th  of  June,  the  Tsar  sent  for  Balashov, 
and,  reading  him  his  letter  to  Napoleon,  commanded  him  to  go  in  person 
and  give  the  letter  to  the  French  Emperor.  As  he  dismissed  Balashov,  he 
repeated  to  him  his  declaration  that  he  would  never  make  peace  as  long  as 
a  single  enemy  under  arms  remained  on  Russian  soil,  and  told  him  to 
be  sure  to  repeat  those  words  to  Napoleon.  The  Tsar  had  not  inserted  them 
in  his  letter  to  Napoleon,  because,  with  his  characteristic  tact,  he  felt  those 
words  would  be  inappropriate  at  the  moment  when  the  last  efforts  were 
being  made  for  conciliation ;  but  he  expressly  charged  Balashov  to  repeat 
that  message  by  word  of  mouth  to  Napoleon. 

Balashov  rode  out  on  the  night  between  the  13th  and  the  14th,  ac¬ 
companied  by  a  trumpeter  and  tw'o  Cossacks;  and  at  dawn  he  reached  the 
French  outposts  at  the  village  of  Rykonty  on  the  Russian  side  of  the 
Niemen.  He  was  stopped  by  the  sentinels  of  the  French  cavalry. 

A  French  subaltern  of  hussars,  in  a  crimson  uniform  and  a  fur  cap, 
shouted  to  Balashov  to  stop.  Balashov  did  not  immediately  obey,  but  went 
on  advancing  along  the  road  at  a  walking  pace. 

The  subaltern,  with  scowls  and  muttered  abuse,  swmoped  down  upon 
Balashov,  drew  his  sword,  and  shouted  rudely  to  the  Russian  general: 
‘Was  he  deaf  that  he  did  not  hear  when  he  was  spoken  to?’  Balashov  gave 
him  his  name.  The  subaltern  sent  a  soldier  to  his  superior  officer. 

Paying  no  further  attention  to  Balashov,  the  subaltern  began  talking 
with  his  comrades  about  regimental  matters,  without  looking  at  the  Rus¬ 
sian  general.  It  was  an  exceedingly  strange  sensation  for  Balashov,  who 
was  used  at  all  times  to  the  dignities  of  his  position,  was  always  in  contact 
with  the  highest  power  and  authority,  and  only  three  hours  before  had 
been  conversing  with  the  Tsar,  to  be  brought  here  on  Russian  soil  into 
collision  with  this  hostile,  and  still  more,  disrespectful  display  of  brute 
force. 


578  WAR  AND  PEACE 

The  sun  was  only  beginning  to  rise  behind  storm-clouds,  the  air  was 
fresh  and  dewy.  A  herd  of  cattle  was  being  driven  along  the  road  from  the 
village.  Larks  sprang  up  trilling  one  after  another  in  the  fields,  like  bubbles 
rising  to  the  surface  of  water. 

Balashov  looked  about  him,  awaiting  the  arrival  of  the  officer  from 
the  village.  The  Russian  Cossacks  and  trumpeter  and  the  French  hussars 
looked  at  one  another  now  and  then  in  silence. 

A  French  colonel  of  hussars,  evidently  only  just  out  of  bed,  came  riding 
out  of  the  village  on  a  handsome,  sleek,  grey  horse,  accompanied  by  two 
hussars.  The  officers,  the  soldiers,  and  the  horses  all  looked  smart  and 
well  satisfied. 

In  this  early  stage  of  the  campaign  the  troops  were  well  in  a  state  of 
good  discipline,  in  good,  almost  parade,  order,  and  engaged  in  peaceful 
pursuits,  with  a  shade  of  martial  swagger  in  their  dress,  and  a  shade  of 
gaiety  and  spirit  of  adventure  in  their  temper  that  always  accompanies  j. 
the  commencement  of  a  war. 

The  French  colonel  had  much  ado  to  suppress  his  yawns,  but  was  cour¬ 
teous  in  his  manner,  and  evidently  understood  all  the  importance  of 
Balashov’s  position.  He  led  him  past  the  line  of  outposts,  and  informed 
him  that  his  desire  to  be  presented  to  the  Emperor  would  in  all  probabil¬ 
ity  immediately  be  satisfied,  as  the  Emperor’s  quarters  were,  he  believed, 
not  far  off. 

They  rode  through  the  village  of  Rykonty,  past  French  picket  ropes, 
sentinels,  and  soldiers,  who  saluted  their  colonel  and  stared  with  curiosity 
at  the  Russian  uniform.  They  came  out  on  the  other  side  of  the  village,  and 
the  colonel  told  Balashov  that  they  were  only  two  kilometres  from  the 
commander  of  the  division,  who  would  receive  him  and  conduct  him  to 
his  destination. 

The  sun  had  by  now  fully  risen  and  was  shining  cheerfully  on  the  bright 
green  fields. 

They  had  just  passed  an  inn  and  were  riding  uphill  when  a  party  of 
horsemen  came  riding  downhill  towards  them.  The  foremost  figure  was  a 
tall  man,  in  a  hat  with  plumes,  mounted  on  a  raven  horse,  with  trappings  : 
glittering  in  the  sun.  He  had  a  scarlet  cloak,  and  curly  black  hair,  that 
floated  on  his  shoulders,  and  he  rode  in  the  French  fashion,  with  his  long  ’ 
legs  thrust  out  in  front.  This  personage  galloped  towards  Balashov,  with 
his  jewels  and  gold  lace  and  feathers  all  fluttering  and  glittering  in  the  ! 
bright  June  sun. 

Balashov  was  some  ten  yards  from  this  majestically  theatrical  figure  in 
bracelets,  feathers,  necklaces,  and  gold,  when  Julner,  the  French  colonel, 
whispered  to  him  reverentially,  ‘The  King  of  Naples!’  It  was  in  fact 
Murat,  who  was  now  styled  the  ‘King  of  Naples.’  Though  it  was  utterly  * 
incomprehensible  that  he  should  be  the  King  of  Naples,  he  was  addressed 
by  that  title,  and  was  himself  persuaded  of  his  royal  position,  and  conse¬ 
quently  behaved  with  an  air  of  greater  solemnity  and  dignity  than  hereto¬ 
fore.  So  firmly  did  he  believe  that  he  really  was  the  King  of  Naples,  that 
when,  just  before  leaving  Naples,  he  was  greeted  by  some  Italians  with 


WARANDPEACE  579 

shouts  of  ‘Long  live  the  King!  ’  when  walking  in  the  streets  with  his  wife, 
he  turned  to  her  with  a  pensive  smile  and  said,  ‘Poor  fellows,  they  don’t 
know  I  am  quitting  them  to-morrow.’ 

But  though  he  believed  so  implicitly  that  he  was  King  of  Naples,  and 
sympathised  with  his  subjects’  grief  at  losing  him,  after  he  had  been  com¬ 
manded  to  return  to  the  service,  and  especially  after  his  interview  with 
Napoleon  at  Dantzig,  when  his  most  august  brother-in-law  had  said,  ‘I 
have  made  you  king  that  you  may  rule  in  my  way,  and  not  in  your  own,’ 
he  had  cheerfully  resumed  his  familiar  duties;  and,  like  a  well-fed,  but 
not  over-fed  stallion  feeling  himself  in  harness,  prancing  in  the  shafts,  and 
decked  out  in  all  possible  motley  magnificence,  he  went  galloping  along 
the  roads  of  Poland,  with  no  notion  where  or  why  he  was  going. 

On  seeing  the  Russian  general  he  made  a  royal,  majestic  motion  of  his 
head  with  his  floating  curls,  and  looked  inquiringly  at  the  French  colonel. 
The  colonel  deferentially  informed  his  majesty  of  the  mission  of  Balashov, 
whose  name  he  could  not  pronounce.  ‘De  Bal-macheve! ’  said  the  King, 
resolutely  attacking  and  vanquishing  the  Colonel’s  difficulty.  ‘Charmed 
to  make  your  acquaintance,  general,’  he  added,  with  a  gesture  of  royal 
condescension.  As  soon  as  the  King  spoke  loudly  and  rapidly,  all  his 
royal  dignity  instantly  deserted  him,  and,  without  himself  being  aware 
of  it,  he  passed  into  the  tone  of  good-humoured  familiarity  natural  to  him. 
He  laid  his  hand  on  the  forelock  of  Balashov’s  horse.  ‘Well,  general,  every¬ 
thing  looks  like  war,’  he  said,  as  it  were  regretting  a  circumstance  on  which 
he  could  not  offer  an  opinion..  ‘Your  majesty,’  answered  Balashov,  ‘the 
Emperor,  my  master,  does  not  desire  war,  and  as  your  majesty  sees.’ 
Balashov  declined  ‘your  majesty’  in  all  its  cases,  using  the  title  with  an 
affectation  inevitable  in  addressing  a  personage  for  whom  such  a  title  was 
a  novelty. 

Murat’s  face  beamed  with  foolish  satisfaction  as  he  listened  to  ‘Mon¬ 
sieur  de  Balacheff.’  But  royalty  has  its  obligations.  He  felt  it  incumbent  on 
him  to  converse  with  Alexander’s  envoy  on  affairs  of  state  as  a  king  and 
an  ally.  He  dismounted,  and  taking  Balashov’s  arm,  and  moving  a  little 
away  from  the  suite,  who  remained  respectfully  waiting,  he  began  walking 
up  and  down  with  him,  trying  to  speak  with  grave  significance.  He  men¬ 
tioned  that  the  Emperor  Napoleon  had  been  offended  at  the  demand  that 
his  troops  should  evacuate  Prussia,  especially  because  that  demand  had 
been  made  public,  and  was  so  derogatory  to  the  dignity  of  France.  Bala¬ 
shov  said  that  there  was  nothing  derogatory  in  that  demand,  seeing  that 
.  .  .  Murat  interrupted  him. 

‘So  you  consider  that  the  Emperor  Alexander  is  not  responsible  for  the 
commencement  of  hostilities?’  he  said  suddenly,  with  a  foolish  and  good- 
humoured  smile. 

Balashov  began  to  explain  why  he  did  consider  that  Napoleon  was  re¬ 
sponsible  for  the  war. 

‘Ah,  my  dear  general,’  Murat  interrupted  him  again,  ‘with  all  my  heart 
I  wish  that  the  Emperors  would  settle  the  matter  between  themselves;  and 
that  the  war,  which  has  been  begun  by  no  desire  of  mine,  may  be  concluded 


S8o  WAR  AND  PEACE 

as  quickly  as  possible,’  he  said  in  the  tone  in  which  servants  speak  who 
are  anxious  to  remain  on  friendly  terms  though  their  masters  have  quar¬ 
relled.  And  he  changed  the  subject ;  inquiring  after  the  health  of  the  Grand 
Duke,  and  recalling  the  agreeable  time  he  had  spent  with  him  in  Naples. 
Then  suddenly,  as  though  recollecting  his  royal  dignity,  Murat  drew 
himself  up  majestically,  threw  himself  irtto  the  pose  in  which  he  had  stood 
at  his  coronation,  and  waving  his  right  arm,  said:  ‘I  will  detain  you  no 
longer,  general;  I  wish  you  success  in  your  mission.’  And,  with  a  flutter 
of  his  scarlet  cloak  and  his  feathers,  and  a  flash  of  his  precious  stones,  he 
rejoined  the  suite,  who  were  respectfully  awaiting  him. 

Balashov  rode  on  further,  expecting  from  Murat’s  words  that  he  would 
be  very  shortly  brought  before  Napoleon  himself.  But  at  the  next  village 
he  was  detained  by  the  sentinels  of  Davoust’s  infantry  corps,  just  as  he 
had  been  at  the  outposts.  An  adjutant  of  the  commander  of  that  corps  was 
sent  for  to  conduct  him  to  the  village  to  see  Marshal  Davoust. 


V 

Davoust  was  to  the  Emperor  Napoleon  what  Araktcheev  was  to  Alex¬ 
ander.  Davoust  was  not  like  Araktcheev  a  coward,  but  he  was  as  exacting 
and  as  cruel,  and  as  unable  to  express  his  devotion  except  by  cruelty. 

In  the  mechanism  of  the  state  organism  these  men  are  as  necessary  as 
wolves  in  the  organism  of  nature.  And  they  are  always  to  be  found  in  every 
government ;  they  always  make  their  appearance  and  hold  their  own,  in¬ 
congruous  as  their  presence  and  their  close  relations  with  the  head  of  the 
state  may  appear.  It  is  only  on  the  theory  of  this  necessity  that  one  can 
explain  the  fact  that  a  man  so  cruel — capable  of  pulling  out  grenadiers’ 
moustaches  with  his  own  hand — though  unable,  from  the  weakness  of  his 
nerves,  to  face  danger,  so  uncultured,  so  boorish  as  Araktcheev,  was  able 
to  retain  such  influence  with  a  sovereign  of  chivalrous  tenderness  and 
nobility  of  character  like  Alexander. 

Balashov  found  Davoust  sitting  on  a  tub  in  a  barn  adjoining  a  peasant’s 
hut.  He  was  occupied  in  writing,  auditing  accounts.  An  adjutant  was 
standing  beside  him.  Better  quarters  could  have  been  found,  but  Marshal 
Davoust  was  one  of  these  people  who  purposely  put  themselves  into  the 
most  dismal  conditions  of  life  in  order  to  have  a  right  to  be  dismal.  For 
the  same  reason  they  always  persist  in  being  busy  and  in  a  hurry. 

‘How  could  one  be  thinking  of  the  bright  side  of  life  when,  as  you  see,  I 
am  sitting  on  a  tub  in  a  dirty  barn,  hard  at  work?’  was  what  his  face  ex¬ 
pressed. 

The  great  desire  and  delight  of  such  people  on  meeting  others  enjoying 
life  is  to  throw  their  own  gloomy,  dogged  activity  into  their  faces.  Davoust 
gave  himself  that  satisfaction  when  Balashov  was  brought  in.  He  appeared 
even  more  deeply  engrossed  in  his  work  when  the  Russian  general  entered, 
and  glancing  through  his  spectacles  at  the  face  of  Balashov,  who  looked 
cheerful  from  the  brightness  of  the  morning  and  his  talk  with  Murat,  he 


WARANDPEACE  581 

did  not  get  up,  did  not  stir  even,  but  scowled  more  than  before,  and 
grinned  malignantly. 

Observing  the  disagreeable  impression  made  on  Balashov  by  this  re¬ 
ception,  Davoust  raised  his  head,  and  asked  him  frigidly  what  he  wanted. 

Assuming  that  such  a  reception  could  only  be  due  to  Davoust’s  being 
unaware  that  he  was  a  general  on  the  staff  of  Alexander,  and  his  repre¬ 
sentative  indeed  before  Napoleon,  Balashov  hastened  to  inform  him  of 
his  rank  and  his  mission.  But,  contrary  to  his  expectations,  Davoust  be¬ 
came  even  surlier  and  ruder  on  hearing  Balashov’s  words. 

‘Where  is  your  despatch?’  he  said.  ‘Give  it  to  me.  I  will  send  it  to  the 
Emperor.’ 

Balashov  said  that  he  was  under  orders  to  hand  the  document  to  the 
Emperor  in  person. 

‘The  commands  of  your  Emperor  are  obeyed  in  your  army;  but  here,’ 
said  Davoust,  ‘you  must  do  what  you  are  told.’ 

And,  as  though  to  make  the  Russian  general  still  more  sensible  of  his 
dependence  on  brute  force,  Davoust  sent  the  adjutant  for  the  officer  on 
duty. 

Balashov  took  out  the  packet  that  contained  the  Tsar’s  letter,  and  laid 
it  on  the  table  (a  table  consisting  of  a  door  laid  across  two  tubs  with  the 
hinges  still  hanging  on  it).  Davoust  took  the  packet  and  read  the  address 
on  it. 

‘You  are  perfectly  at  liberty  to  show  me  respect  or  not,  as  you  please,’ 
said  Balashov.  ‘But,  permit  me  to  observe  that  I  have  the  honour  to  serve 
as  a  general  on  the  staff  of  his  majesty  .  .  .’ 

Davoust  glanced  at  him  without  a  word,  and  plainly  derived  satisfaC’ 
tion  from  signs  of  emotion  and  confusion  on  Balashov’s  face. 

‘You  will  be  shown  what  is  fitting,’  he  said,  and  putting  the  envelope  in 
his  pocket  he  walked  out  of  the  barn. 

A  minute  later  an  adjutant  of  the  marshal's,  Monsieur  de  Castre,  came 
in  and  conducted  Balashov  to  the  quarters  that  had  been  assigned  him. 

He  dined  that  day  in  the  barn  with  the  marshal,  sitting  down  to  the  door 
laid  across  the  tubs. 

Next  day  Davoust  went  out  early  in  the  morning,  but  before  starting 
he  sent  for  Balashov,  and  told  him  peremptorily  that  he  begged  him  to 
remain  there,  to  move  on  with  the  baggage-wagons  should  the  command 
be  given  to  do  so,  and  to  have  no  conversation  with  any  one  but  Monsieur 
de  Castre. 

After  four  days  spent  in  solitude  and  boredom,  with  a  continual  sense  of 
dependence  and  insignificance,  particularly  galling  after  the  position  of 
power  which  he  had  hitherto  occupied,  after  several  marches  with  the 
marshal’s  baggage  and  the  French  troops,  who  were  in  possession  of  the 
whole  district,  Balashov  was  brought  back  to  Vilna,  now  occupied  by  the 
French,  and  re-entered  the  town  by  the  very  gate  by  which  he  had  left  it 
four  days  earlier. 

Next  day  the  Emperor’s  gentleman-in-waiting,  Count  de  Turenne, 


582  WARANDPEACE 

came  to  Balashov  with  a  message  that  it  was  the  Emperor  Napoleon’s 
pleasure  to  grant  him  an  audience. 

Four  days  before  sentinels  of  the  Preobrazhensky  regiment  had  been 
on  guard  before  the  very  house  to  which  Balashov  was  conducted.  Now 
two  French  grenadiers  were  on  duty  before  it,  wearing  fur  caps  and  blue 
uniforms  open  over  the  breast,  while  an  escort  of  hussars  and  Uhlans,  and 
a  brilliant  suite  of  adjutants,  pages,  and  generals  were  waiting  for  Na¬ 
poleon  to  come  out,  forming  a  group  round  his  saddle-horse  at  the  steps 
and  his  Mameluke,  Rustan.  Napoleon  received  Balashov  in  the  very  house 
in  Vilna  from  which  Alexander  had  despatched  him. 


VI 

Though  Balashov  was  accustomed  to  the  pomp  of  courts,  he  was  im¬ 
pressed  by  the  splendour  and  luxury  of  Napoleon’s  court. 

Count  de  Turenne  led  him  into  the  great  reception-room,  where  a 
number  of  generals,  gentlemen-in-waiting,  and  Polish  magnates  were 
waiting  to  see  the  Emperor.  Many  of  them  Balashov  had  seen  at  the  court 
of  the  Russian  Emperor.  Duroc  told  him  that  the  Emperor  Napoleon 
would  receive  the  Russian  general  before  going  out  for  his  ride. 

After  a  delay  of  several  moments,  a  gentleman-in-waiting  came  into  the 
great  reception-room,  and  bowing  courteously  to  Balashov,  invited  him  to 
follow  him. 

Balashov  went  into  the  little  reception-room,  from  which  one  door  led 
to  the  study,  the  room  where  he  had  received  the  Russian  Emperor’s  last 
charges  before  setting  off.  Balashov  stood  for  a  couple  of  minutes  waiting. 
Hurried  steps  were  audible  through  the  door.  Both  halves  of  the  door 
were  swiftly  thrown  open,  and  in  the  complete  stillness  that  followed  other 
firm  and  resolute  steps  could  be  heard  from  the  study:  it  was  Napoleon. 
He  had  only  just  finished  dressing  for  his  ride.  He  was  wearing  a  blue  uni¬ 
form,  open  over  a  white  waistcoat,  that  came  low  down  over  his  round 
belly,  riding-boots,  and  white  doeskin  breeches,  fitting  tightly  over  his 
fat,  short  legs.  His  short  hair  had  evidently  just  been  brushed,  but  one 
lock  hung  down  in  the  middle  of  his  broad  forehead.  His  plump,  white 
neck  stood  out  in  sharp  contrast  to  the  black  collar  of  his  uniform;  he 
smelt  of  eau-de-cologne.  His  still  young-looking,  full  face,  with  its  promi¬ 
nent  chin,  wore  an  expression  of  imperial  graciousness  and  majestically 
condescending  welcome. 

He  walked  out  with  a  quivering  strut,  his  head  thrown  a  little  back.  His 
whole  stout,  short  figure,  with  his  broad,  fat  shoulders  and  his  prominent 
stomach  and  chest,  had  that  imposing  air  of  dignity  common  in  men  of 
forty  who  live  in  comfort.  It  was  evident,  too,  that  he  happened  that  day 
to  be  in  a  particularly  good  humour. 

He  nodded  in  acknowledgment  of  Balashov’s  low  and  respectful  bow, 
and  going  up  to  him,  began  to  talk  at  once  like  a  man  who  values  every 


WARANDPEACE  S«3 

minute  of  his  time,  and  will  not  deign  to  preface  what  he  is  going  to  say, 
as  he  is  sure  of  always  speaking  well  and  saying  the  right  thing. 

‘Good-day,  general!  ’  said  he.  ‘I  have  received  the  Emperor  Alexander’s 
letter  that  you  brought,  and  I. am  very  glad  to  see  you.’  He  glanced  at 
Balashov’s  face  with  his  large  eyes,  and  immediately  looked  past  him. 

It  was  obvious  that  he  took  no  interest  in  Balashov’s  personality.  It  was 
plain  that  only  what  was  passing  in  his  soul  had  for  him  any  interest.  All 
that  was  outside  him  had  no  significance  for  him,  because  everything  in 
the  world  depended,  as  he  fancied,  on  his  will. 

‘I  do  not,  and  did  not,  desire  war,’  he  said,  ‘but  you  have  forced  me 
to  it.  Even  now’  (he  threw  emphasis  on  the  word)  ‘I  am  ready  to  receive 
any  explanations  you  can  give  me.’  And  he  began  briefly  and  clearly  ex¬ 
plaining  the  grounds  of  his  displeasure  with  the  Russian  government. 

Judging  from  the  studiously  composed  and  amicable  tone  of  the  French 
Emperor,  Balashov  was  thoroughly  persuaded  that  he  was  desirous  of 
peace,  and  intended  to  enter  into  negotiations. 

‘Sire!  The  Emperor,  my  sovereign,’  Balashov  began,  meaning  to  utter 
the  speech  he  had  prepared  long  before  as  soon  as  Napoleon  had  finished 
speaking,  and  looked  inquiringly  at  him.  But  the  look  the  Emperor  turned 
upon  him  disconcerted  him.  ‘You  are  embarrassed;  recover  yourself,’ 
Napoleon  seemed  to  say,  as  with  a  hardly  perceptible  smile  he  scanned 
Balashov’s  sword  and  uniform.  Balashov  regained  his  composure,  and  be¬ 
gan  to  speak.  He  said  that  the  Emperor  Alexander  did  not  regard  Kura¬ 
kin’s  asking  for  his  passport  a  sufficient  cause  for  war;  that  Kurakin  had 
acted  on  his  own  initiative  without  the  Tsar’s  consent;  that  the  Tsar  did 
not  desire  war,  and  that  he  had  no  relations  with  England. 

‘Not  as  yet,’  Napoleon  put  in,  and  as  though  afraid  to  abandon  himself 
to  his  feelings,  he  frowned  and  nodded  slightly  as  a  sign  to  Balashov  that 
he  might  continue. 

After  saying  all  he  had  been  instructed  to  say,  Balashov  wound  up  by 
saying  that  the  Emperor  Alexander  was  desirous  of  peace,  but  that  he 
would  not  enter  into  negotiations  except  upon  condition  that  ...  At  that 
point  Balashov  hesitated;  he  recollected  words  the  Emperor  Alexander 
had  not  written  in  his  letter,  but  had  insisted  on  inserting  in  the  rescript 
to  Saltykov,  and  had  commanded  Balashov  to  repeat  to  Napoleon.  Bala¬ 
shov  remembered  those  words:  ‘As  long  as  a  single  enemy  under  arms 
remains  on  Russian  soil,’  but  some  complicated  feeling  checked  his  utter¬ 
ance  of  them.  He  could  not  utter  those  words,  though  he  tried  to  do  so.  He 
stammered,  and  said:  ‘On  condition  the  French  troops  retreat  beyond  the 
Niemen.’ 

Napoleon  observed  Balashov’s  embarrassment  in  the  utterance  of 
those  last  words:  his  face  quivered,  and  the  calf  of  his  left  leg  began 
twitching  rhythmically.  Not  moving  from  where  he  stood,  he  began 
speaking  in  a  louder  and  more  hurried  voice  than  before.  During  the 
speech  that  followed  Balashov  could  not  help  staring  at  the  twitching  of 
Napoleon’s  left  leg,  which  grew  more  marked  as  his  voice  grew  louder. 

‘I  am  no  less  desirous  of  peace  than  the  Emperor  Alexander,’  he  began. 


584  WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Haven’t  I  been  doing  everything  for  the  last  eighteen  months  to  obtain  it? 
For  eighteen  months  I  have  been  waiting  for  an  explanation,  but  before 
opening  negotiations,  what  is  it  that’s  required  of  me?’  he  said,  frowning  : 
and  making  a  vigorous  gesticulation  with  his  fat,  little  white  hand. 

‘The  withdrawal  of  the  forces  beyond  the  Niemen,  sire,’  said  Balashov. 

‘Beyond  the  Niemen?’  repeated  Napoleon.  ‘So  now  you  want  me  to 
retreat  beyond  the  Niemen — only  beyond  the  Niemen?’  repeated  Na¬ 
poleon,  looking  straight  at  Balashov. 

Balashov  bowed  his  head  respectfully. 

Four  months  before  he  had  been  asked  to  withdraw  from  Pomerania; 
now  withdrawal  beyond  the  Niemen  was  all  that  was  required.  Napoleon 
turned  quickly  away,  and  began  walking  up  and  down  the  room. 

‘You  say  that  I  am  required  to  withdraw  beyond  the  Niemen  before 
opening  negotiations;  but  two  months  ago  I  was  required  in  the  same 
way  to  withdraw  beyond  the  Oder  and  the  Vistula,  and  in  spite  of  that 
you  agree  to  enter  into  negotiations.’ 

He  strode  in  silence  from  one  corner  of  the  room  to  the  other  and 
stopped  again,  facing  Balashov.  Balashov  noticed  that  his  left  leg  was 
twitching  more  rapidly  than  ever,  and  his  face  looked  as  though  petrified 
in  its  stern  expression.  Napoleon  was  aware  of  this  twitching.  The  vibra¬ 
tion  of  my  left  calf  is  a  great  sign  with  me,’  he  said  in  later  days. 

‘Such  demands  as  to  retire  beyond  the  Oder  and  the  Vistula  may  be 
made  to  a  prince  of  Baden,  but  not  to  me,’  Napoleon  almost  screamed, 
quite  to  his  own  surprise.  ‘If  you  were  to  give  me  Petersburg  and  Moscow 
I  wouldn’t  accept  such  conditions.  You  say:  I  began  the  war.  But  who  was  i 
the  first  to  join  his  army?  The  Emperor  Alexander,  and  not  I.  And  you 
offer  me  negotiations  when  I  have  spent  millions,  when  you  are  in  alliance 
with  England,  and  when  your  position  is  weak— you  offer  me  negotiations! 
What  is  the  object  of  your  alliance  with  England?  What  has  it  given  you?’  : 
he  asked  hurriedly.  The  motive  of  his  words  was  obviously  now  not  to 
enlarge  on  the  benefits  of  peace  and  to  consider  its  possibility,  but  simply 
to  prove  his  own  rectitude,  and  his  own  power,  and  point  out  the  duplicity 
and  the  errors  of  Alexander. 

He  had  plainly  intended  in  entering  on  this  conversation  to  point  out 
the  advantages  of  his  own  position,  and  to  signify  that  in  spite  of  them  he 
would  entertain  the  proposal  of  negotiations.  But  he  had  begun  talking, 
and  the  more  he  talked  the  less  able  was  he  to  control  the  tenor  of  his 
words. 

The  whole  gist  of  his  words  now  was  obviously  to  glorify  himself  and 
to  insult  Alexander,  precisely  what  he  had  least  intended  doing  at  the 
beginning  of  the  interview. 

‘I  am  told  you  have  concluded  a  peace  with  the  Turks?’ 

Balashov  bent  his  head  affirmatively.  ‘Peace  has  been  concluded  .  . 
he  began.  But  Napoleon  did  not  allow  him  to  speak.  He  clearly  did  not 
wish  any  one  to  speak  but  himself,  and  he  went  on  with  the  unrestrained 
volubility  and  irritability  to  which  people  spoilt  by  success  are  so  prone. 

‘Yes,  I  know  you  have  made  peace  with  the  Turks  without  gaining 


WARANDPEACE  585 

Moldavia  and  Wallachia.  I  would  have  given  your  Emperor  those 
provinces  just  as  I  gave  him  Finland.  Yes,’  he  went  on,  ‘I  promised,  and 
would  have  given  the  Emperor  Alexander  Moldavia  and  Wallachia,  but 
now  he  will  not  possess  those  fair  provinces.  He  might  have  united  them 
to  his  empire,  however,  and  he  would  have  enlarged  the  frontiers  of 
Russia  from  the  Gulf  of  Bothnia  to  the  mouths  of  the  Danube.  Catherine 
the  Great  could  have  done  no  more,’  Napoleon  declared,  growing  hotter 
and  hotter  as  he  walked  up  and  down  the  room,  and  repeated  to  Balashov 
almost  the  words  he  had  used  to  Alexander  himself  at  Tilsit.  ‘All  that  he 
would  have  owed  to  my  friendship.  Ah,  what  a  fine  reign!  what  a  fine  reign 
might  have  been  that  of  the  Emperor  Alexander.  Oh,  what  a  grand  reign,’ 
he  repeated  several  times.  He  stopped,  took  a  gold  snuff-box  out  of  his 
pocket,  and  greedily  put  it  to  his  nose. 

He  turned  a  commiserating  glance  on  Balashov,  and  as  soon  as  he 
would  have  made  some  observation,  he  hurriedly  interrupted  him  again. 

‘What  could  he  desire  and  look  for  that  he  would  not  have  gained  from 
my  friendship?  .  .  .’  said  Napoleon,  shrugging  his  shoulders  with  an  air 
of  perplexity.  ‘No,  he  has  thought  better  to  surround  himself  with  my 
enemies.  And  with  whom?’  he  went  on.  ‘He  has  gathered  round  him  the 
Steins,  the  Armfeldts,  the  Bennigsens,  the  Wintzengerodes.  Stein  is  a 
traitor,  driven  out  of  his  own  country;  Armfeldt  an  intriguing  debauchee; 
Wintzengerode  a  renegade  French  subject;  Bennigsen  is,  indeed,  rather 
more  of  a  soldier  than  the  rest,  but  still  he’s  incompetent;  he  could  do 
nothing  in  1807,  and  I  should  have  thought  he  must  recall  painful  memo¬ 
ries  to  the  Emperor  Alexander.  .  .  .  Even  supposing  he  might  make  use 
of  them  if  they  were  competent,’  Napoleon  went  on,  his  words  hardly 
able  to  keep  pace  with  the  rush  of  ideas  that  proved  to  him  his  right  or  his 
might  (which  to  his  mind  meant  the  same),  ‘but  they  are  not  even  that! 
They  are  no  use  for  war  or  for  peace!  Barclay,  I’m  told,  is  more  capable 
than  all  of  them,  but  I  shouldn’t  say  so,  judging  from  his  first  manoeuvres. 
And  what  are  they  doing,  what  are  all  these  courtiers  doing?  Pfuhl  is 
making  propositions,  Armfeldt  is  quarrelling,  Bennigsen  is  considering, 
while  Barclay,  who  has  been  sent  for  to  act,  can  come  to  no  decision,  and 
is  wasting  time  and  doing  nothing.  Bagration  is  the  only  one  that  is  a 
real  general.  He  is  stupid,  but  he  has  experience,  judgment,  and  determina¬ 
tion.  .  .  .  And  what  part  does  your  young  Emperor  play  in  this  unseemly 
crowd?  They  compromise  him  and  throw  upon  him  the  responsibility  of 
all  that  happens.  A  sovereign  ought  not  to  be  with  the  army  except  when 
he  is  a  general,’  he  said,  obviously  uttering  these  words  as  a  direct  chal¬ 
lenge  to  the  Tsar.  Napoleon  knfew  how  greatly  Alexander  desired  to  be  a 
great  general.  ‘It’s  a  week  now  since  the  campaign  commenced,  and  you 
haven’t  even  succeeded  in  defending  Vilna.  You  have  been  divided  in  two 
and  driven  out  of  the  Polish  provinces.  Your  army  is  discontented  .  .  .’ 

‘On  the  contrary,  your  majesty,’  said  Balashov,  who  scarcely  had  time 
to  recollect  what  had  been  said  to  him,  and  had  difficulty  in  following 
these  verbal  fireworks,  ‘the  troops  are  burning  with  eagerness  .  .  .’ 

‘I  know  all  that,’  Napoleon  cut  him  short ;  ‘I  know  all  that,  and  I  know 


SS6  WARANDPEACE 

the  number  of  your  battalions  as  exactly  as  I  know  my  own.  You  have  not 
two  hundred  thousand  troops,  while  I  have  three  times  as  many.  I  give 
you  my  word  of  honour,’  said  Napoleon,  forgetting  that  his  word  of 
honour  could  carry  no  weight — ‘my  word  of  honour  that  I  have  five  hun¬ 
dred  and  thirty  thousand  men  this  side  of  the  Vistula.  The  Turks  will  be 
no  help  to  you ;  they  are  good  for  nothing,  and  have  proved  it  by  making 
peace  with  you.  As  for  the  Swedes,  it’s  their  destiny  to  be  governed  by 
mad  kings.  Their  king  was  mad.  They  changed  him  for  another,  Berna- 
dotte,  who  promptly  went  mad;  for  no  one  not  a  madman  could,  being 
a  Swede,  ally  himself  with  Russia.’ 

Napoleon  laughed  malignantly,  and  again  put  his  snuff-box  to  his  nose. 

To  each  of  Napoleon’s  phrases  Balashov  had  a  reply  ready,  and  tried  > 
to  utter  it.  He  was  continually  making  gestures  indicative  of  a  desire  to 
speak,  but  Napoleon  always  interrupted  him.  To  his  remarks  on  the  in-  j 
sanity  of  the  Swedes,  Balashov  would  have  replied  that  Sweden  was  as  i 
good  as  an  island  with  Russia  to  back  her.  But  Napoleon  shouted  angrily 
to  drown  his  voice.  Napoleon  was  in  that  state  of  exasperation  when  a  man 
wants  to  go  on  talking  and  talking  simply  to  prove  to  himself  that  he  is 
right.  Balashov  began  to  feel  uncomfortable.  As  an  envoy,  he  was  anxious 
to  keep  up  his  dignity,  and  felt  it  essential  to  make  some  reply.  But  as  a 
man  he  felt  numb,  repelled  by  the  uncontrolled,  irrational  fury  to  which 
Napoleon  abandoned  himself.  He  knew  that  nothing  Napoleon  might  say 
now  had  any  significance  and  believed  that  he  would  himself  on  regaining 
his  composure  be  ashamed  of  his  words.  Balashov  remained  standing,  j 
looking  with  downcast  eyes  at  Napoleon’s  fat  legs  as  they  moved  to  and 
fro.  He  tried  to  avoid  his  eyes. 

‘And  what  are  your  allies  to  me?’  said  Napoleon.  ‘I  have  allies  too — 
the  Poles.  There  are  eighty  thousand  of  them  and  they  fight  like  lions. 
And  there  will  be  two  hundred  thousand.’ 

He  was  probably  still  more  exasperated  at  having  told  this  obvious 
falsehood  and  at  Balashov’s  standing  mutely  before  him  in  that  pose  of 
resignation  to  his  fate.  He  turned  sharply  round  and  going  right  up  to 
Balashov,  gesticulating  rapidly  and  vigorously  with  his  white  hands  close 
to  his  face,  he  almost  shouted:  ‘Let  me  tell  you,  if  you  stir  Prussia  up 
against  me,  let  me  tell  you,  I’ll  wipe  her  off  the  map  of  Europe,’  he  said, 
his  face  pale  and  distorted  with  anger,  as  he  smote  one  little  hand  vigor¬ 
ously  against  the  other.  ‘Yes,  I’ll  thrust  you  beyond  the  Dwina,  beyond 
the  Dnieper,  and  I’ll  restore  the  frontier  that  Europe  was  criminal  and 
blind  to  let  you  overstep.  Yes,  that’s  what’s  in  store  for  you,  that’s  what 
you  will  gain  by  alienating  me,’  he  said,  and  he  walked  in  silence  several 
times  up  and  down  the  room,  his  thick  shoulders  twitching.  He  put  the 
snuff-box  in  his  waistcoat  pocket,  pulled  it  out  again,  held  it  several  times 
to  his  nose,  and  stood  still  facing  Balashov.  He  paused,  looked  sarcasti¬ 
cally  straight  into  Balashov’s  face  and  said  in  a  low  voice:  ‘And  yet  what 
a  fine  reign  your  master  might  have  had.’ 

Balashov,  feeling  it  incumbent  upon  him  to  reply,  said  Russia  did  not 
look  at  things  in  such  a  gloomy  light.  Napoleon  was  silent,  still  looking 


WAR  AND  PEACE  587 

ironically  at  him  and  obviously  not  listening  to  him.  Balashov  said  that  in 
Russia  the  best  results  were  hoped  for  from  the  war.  Napoleon  nodded 
condescendingly,  as  though  to  say,  ‘I  know  it’s  your  duty  to  say  that,  but 
you  don’t  believe  in  it  yourself;  you  are  convinced  by  me.’  Towards  the 
end  of  Balashov’s  speech,  Napoleon  pulled  out  his  snuff-box  again,  took 
a  sniff  from  it  and  tapped  twice  with  his  foot  on  the  ground  as  a  signal.  The 
door  opened,  a  gentleman-in-waiting,  threading  his  way  in  respectfully, 
handed  the  Emperor  his  hat  and  gloves,  another  handed  him  a  pocket- 
handkerchief.  Napoleon,  without  bestowing  a  glance  upon  them,  turned 
to  Balashov. 

‘Assure  the  Emperor  Alexander  from  me,’  he  said,  taking  his  hat,  ‘that 
I  am  devoted  to  him  as  before;  I  know  him  thoroughly,  and  I  prize  very 
highly  his  noble  qualities.  I  detain  you  no  longer,  general ;  you  shall  receive 
my  letter  to  the  Emperor.’  And  Napoleon  walked  rapidly  to  the  door. 
There  was  a  general  stampede  from  the  great  reception-room  down  the 
staircase. 

VII 

After  all  Napoleon  had  said  to  him,  after  those  outbursts  of  wrath,  and 
after  the  last  frigidly  uttered  words,  ‘I  will  not  detain  you,  general;  you 
shall  receive  my  letter,’  Balashov  felt  certain  that  Napoleon  would  not 
care  to  see  him  again,  would  avoid  indeed  seeing  again  the  envoy  who  had 
been  treated  by  him  with  contumely,  and  had  been  the  eyewitness  of  his 
undignified  outburst  of  fury.  But  to  his  surprise  Balashov  received  through 
Duroc  an  invitation  to  dine  that  day  at  the  Emperor’s  table. 

There  were  present  at  dinner,  Bessieres,  Caulaincourt,  and  Berthier. 

Napoleon  met  Balashov  with  a  good-humoured  and  friendly  air.  He 
had  not  the  slightest  appearance  of  embarrassment  or  regret  for  his  out¬ 
break  in  the  morning.  On  the  contrary  he  seemed  trying  to  encourage 
Balashov.  It  was  evident  that  it  had  long  been  Napoleon’s  conviction 
that  no  possibility  existed  of  his  making  mistakes.  To  his  mind  all  he  did 
was  good,  not  because  it  was  in  harmony  with  any  preconceived  notion 
of  good  or  bad,  but  simply  because  it  was  he  who  did  it. 

The  Emperor  was  in  excellent  spirits  after  his  ride  about  Vilna,  greeted 
and  followed  with  acclamations  by  crowds  of  the  inhabitants.  From  every 
window  in  the  streets  through  which  he  had  passed  draperies  and  flags 
with  his  monogram  had  been  hanging,  and  Polish  ladies  had  been  waving 
handkerchiefs  to  welcome  him. 

At  dinner  he  sat  Balashov  beside  him,  and  addressed  him  affably.  He 
addressed  him  indeed  as  though  he  regarded  Balashov  as  one  of  his  own 
courtiers,  as  one  of  the  people,  who  would  sympathise  with  his  plans  and 
be  sure  to  rejoice  at  his  successes.  He  talked,  among  other  things,  of  Mos¬ 
cow,  and  began  asking  Balashov  questions  about  the  ancient  Russian 
capital,  not  simply  as  a  traveller  of  inquiring  mind  asks  about  a  new  place 
he  intends  to  visit,  but  apparently  with  the  conviction  that  Balashov  as  a 
Russian  must  be  flattered  at  his  interest  in  it. 


58S  WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘How  many  inhabitants  are  there  in  Moscow,  how  many  horses?  Is  ir 
true  that  Moscow  is  called  the  holy  city?  How  many  churches  are  there 
in  Moscow?’  he  asked. 

And  when  he  was  told  there  were  over  two  hundred  churches,  he  said: 

‘Why  is  there  such  a  great  number  of  churches?’ 

‘The  Russians  are  very  religious,’  replied  Balashov. 

‘A  great  number,  however,  of  monasteries  and  churches  is  always  a 
sign  of  the  backwardness  of  a  people,’  said  Napoleon,  looking  at  Caulain- 
court  for  appreciation  of  this  remark. 

Balashov  ventured  respectfully  to  differ  from  the  opinion  of  the  French 
Emperor. 

‘Every  country  has  its  customs,’  he  observed. 

‘But  there’s  nothing  like  that  anywhere  else  in  Europe,’  said  Napoleon, 

‘I  beg  your  majesty’s  pardon,’  said  Balashov;  ‘besides  Russia,  there 
is  Spain,  where  there  is  also  a  great  number  of  churches  and  monasteries.’ 

This  reply  of  Balashov’s,  which  suggested  a  covert  allusion  to  the  re¬ 
cent  discomfiture  of  the  French  in  Spain,  was  highly  appreciated  when 
Balashov  repeated  it  at  the  court  of  the  Emperor  Alexander,  though  at 
the  time  at  Napoleon’s  dinner-table  it  was  very  little  appreciated  and 
passed  indeed  unnoticed. 

From  the  indifferent  and  perplexed  faces  of  the  marshals  present  it  was 
obvious  that  they  were  puzzled  to  discover  wherein  lay  the  point  of  the 
retort,  suggested  by  Balashov’s  intonation.  ‘If  there  were  a  point,  we  fail 
to  catch  it,  or  the  remark  was  perhaps  really  pointless,’  their  expression 
seemed  to  say.  So  little  effect  had  this  retort  that  Napoleon  indeed  cer¬ 
tainly  saw  nothing  in  it;  and  he  naively  asked  Balashov  through  what 
towns  the  direct  road  from  Vilna  to  Moscow  passed.  Balashov,  who  had 
been  all  dinner-time  on  his  guard,  replied  that  as,  according  to  the  proverb, 
every  road  leads  to  Rome,  every  road  leads  to  Moscow;  that  there  were 
very  many  roads,  and  among  them  was  the  road  to  Poltava,  the  one  se¬ 
lected  by  Charles  xn.  Balashov  could  not  help  flushing  with  delight  at  the 
felicity  of  this  reply.  Balashov  had  hardly  uttered  the  last  word  ‘Poltava’ 
when  Caulaincourt  began  talking  of  the  badness  of  the  road  from  Peters¬ 
burg  to  Moscow  and  his  own  Petersburg  reminiscences. 

After  dinner  they  went  to  drink  coffee  in  Napoleon’s  study,  which  had 
four  days  before  been  the  study  of  the  Emperor  Alexander.  Napoleon  sat 
down,  stirring  his  coffee  in  a  Sevres  cup,  and  motioned  Balashov  to  a  seat 
beside  him. 

There  is  a  well-known  after-dinner  mood  which  is  more  potent  than  any 
rational  consideration  in  making  a  man  satisfied  with  himself  and  disposed 
to  regard  every  one  as  a  friend.  Napoleon  was  under  the  influence  of  this 
mood.  He  fancied  himself  surrounded  by  persons  who  adored  him.  He  felt 
no  doubt  that  Balashov  too  after  his  dinner  was  his  friend  and  his  worship¬ 
per.  Napoleon  addressed  him  with  an  amicable  and  rather  ironical  smile. 

‘This  is  the  very  room,  I  am  told,  in  which  the  Emperor  Alexander  used 
to  sit.  Strange,  isn’t  it,  general?’  he  said,  obviously  without  the  slightest 
misgiving  that  this  remark  could  be  other  than  agreeable  to  the  Russian, 


WARANDPEACE  589 

since  it  afforded  a  proof  of  his,  Napoleon's,  superiority  over  Alexander. 

Balashov  could  make  no  reply  to  this,  and  he  bowed  in  silence. 

‘Yes,  four  days  ago,  Wintzengerode  and  Stein  were  deliberating  in  this 
very  room,’  Napoleon  continued,  with  the  same  confident  and  ironical 
smile.  ‘What  I  can’t  understand,’  he  said,  ‘is  the  Emperor  Alexander’s 
gathering  round  him  all  my  personal  enemies.  That  I  do  not  understand. 
Didn’t  he  consider  that  I  might  do  the  same?’  he  asked  Balashov;  and 
obviously  the  question  brought  him  back  to  a  reminiscence  of  the  morn¬ 
ing’s  anger,  which  was  still  fresh  in  him.  ‘And  let  him  know  that  I  will  do 
so,’  Napoleon  said,  getting  up  and  pushing  away  his  cup.  ‘I’ll  drive  all  his 
kith  and  kin  out  of  Germany — the  Wurtembergs  and  Badens  and  Weimars 
.  .  .  Yes,  I’ll  drive  them  out.  Let  him  get  a  refuge  ready  for  them  in 
Russia.’ 

Balashov  bowed  his  head,  with  an  air  that  indicated  that  he  would  be 
glad  to  withdraw,  and  was  simply  listening  because  he  had  no  alternative 
but  to  listen  to  what  was  said  to  him.  Napoleon  did  not  notice  this  expres¬ 
sion.  He  was  addressing  Balashov  now,  not  as  the  envoy  of  his  enemy,  but 
as  a  man  now  quite  devoted  to  him  and  certain  to  rejoice  at  the  humilia¬ 
tion  of  his  former  master. 

‘And  why  has  the  Emperor  Alexander  taken  the  command  of  his  troops? 
What’s  that  for?  War  is  my  profession,  but  his  work  is  to  reign  and  not 
to  command  armies.  What  has  induced  him  to  take  such  a  responsibility 
on  himself?’ 

Napoleon  again  took  his  snuff-box,  walked  several  times  in  silence  up 
and  down  the  room,  and  all  at  once  surprised  Balashov  by  coming  close 
up  to  him.  And  with  a  faint  smile,  as  confidently,  rapidly,  and  swiftly,  as 
though  he  were  doing  something  that  Balashov  could  not  but  regard  as 
an  honour  and  a  pleasure,  he  put  his  hand  up  to  the  face  of  the  Russian 
general  of  forty,  and  gave  him  a  little  pinch  on  the  ear  with  a  smile  on 
his  lips. 

To  have  the  ear  pulled  by  the  Emperor  was  regarded  as  the  greatest 
honour  and  mark  of  favour  at  the  French  court. 

‘Well,  you  say  nothing,  admirer  and  courtier  of  the  Emperor  Alexan¬ 
der,’  he  said,  as  though  it  were  comic  that  there  should  be  in  his  presence 
a  courtier  and  worshipper  of  any  man  other  than  him,  Napoleon.  ‘Are  the 
horses  ready  for  the  general?’  he  added,  with  a  slight  nod  in  acknowl¬ 
edgment  of  Balashov’s  bow.  ‘Give  him  mine;  he  has  a  long  way  to  go.  .  .  .’ 

The  letter  taken  back  by  Balashov  was  Napoleon’s  last  letter  to  Alex¬ 
ander.  Every  detail  of  the  conversation  was  transmitted  to  the  Russian 
Emperor,  and  the  war  began. 


VIII 

After  his  interview  with  Pierre  in  Moscow,  Prince  Andrey  went  away 
to  Petersburg,  telling  his  family  that  he  had  business  there.  In  reality  his 
object  was  to  meet  Anatole  Kuragin  there.  He  thought  it  necessary  to 


5QO  WARANDPEACE 

meet  him.  but  on  inquiring  for  him  when  he  reached  Petersburg,  he  found  1 
he  was  no  longer  there.  Pierre  had  let  his  brother-in-law  know  that  Prince 
Andrey  was  on  his  track.  Anatole  Kuragin  had  promptly  obtained  a 
commission  from  the  minister  of  war,  and  had  gone  to  join  the  army 
in  Moldavia.  While  in  Petersburg  Prince  Andrey  met  Kutuzov,  his  old 
general,  who  was  always  friendly  to  him,  and  Kutuzov  proposed  that  he 
should  accompany  him  to  Moldavia,  where  the  old  general  was  being 
sent  to  take  command  of  the  army.  Prince  Andrey  received  an  appoint¬ 
ment  on  the  staff  of  the  commander,  and  went  to  Turkey. 

Prince  Andrey  did  not  think  it  proper  to  write  to  Kuragin  to  challenge 
him  to  a  duel.  He  thought  that  a  challenge  coming  from  him,  without 
any  new  pertext  for  a  duel,  would  be  compromising  for  the  young  Countess 
Rostov;  and  therefore  he  was  seeking  to  encounter  Kuragin  in  person  in 
order  to  pick  a  quarrel  with  him  that  would  serve  as  a  pretext  for  a  duel. 
But  in  the  Turkish  army  too  Prince  Andrey  failed  to  come  across  Kuragin. 
The  latter  had  returned  to  Russia  shortly  after  Prince  Andrey  reached 
the  Turkish  army.  In  a  new  country,  amid  new  surroundings,  Prince 
Andrey  found  life  easier  to  bear.  After  his  betrothed’s  betrayal  of  him, 
which  he  felt  the  more  keenly,  the  more  studiously  he  strove  to  conceal 
its  effect  on  him  from  others,  he  found  it  hard  to  bear  the  conditions  of 
life  in  which  he  had  been  happy,  and  felt  still  more  irksome  the  freedom 
and  independence  he  had  once  prized  so  highly.  He  could  not  now  think 
the  thoughts  that  had  come  to  him  for  the  first  time  on  the  field  of 
Austerlitz,  that  he  had  loved  to  develop  with  Pierre,  and  that  had  en¬ 
riched  his  solitude  at  Bogutcharovo,  and  later  on  in  Switzerland  and  in 
Rome.  Now  he  dreaded  indeed  those  ideas  that  had  then  opened  to  him 
■boundless  vistas  of  light.  Now  he  was  occupied  only  with  the  most  prac¬ 
tical  interests  lying  close  at  hand,  and  in  no  way  associated  with  those 
old  ideals.  He  clutched  at  these  new  interests  the  more  eagerly  the  more 
the  old  ideals  were  hidden  from  him.  It  was  as  though  the  infinite,  fathom¬ 
less  arch  of  heaven  that  had  once  stood  over  him  had  been  suddenly 
transformed  into  a  low,  limited  vault  weighing  upon  him,  with  everything 
in  it  clear,  but  nothing  eternal  and  mysterious. 

Of  the  pursuits  that  presented  themselves,  military  service  was  the 
simplest  and  the  most  familiar  to  him.  He  performed  the  duties  of  a 
general  on  duty  on  Kutuzov’s  staff  with  zeal  and  perseverance,  surprising 
Kutuzov  by  his  eagerness  for  work  and  his  conscientiousness.  When  he 
missed  Kuragin  in  Turkey,  Prince  Andrey  did  not  feel  it  necessary  to 
gallop  back  to  Russia  in  search  of  him.  Yet  in  spite  of  all  his  contempt 
for  Kuragin,  in  spite  of  all  the  arguments  by  which  he  sought  to  persuade 
himself  that  Kuragin  was  not  worth  his  stooping  to  quarrel  with  him, 
he  knew  that  whatever  length  of  time  might  elapse,  when  he  did  meet  him, 
he  would  be  unable  to  help  challenging  him,  as  a  starving  man  cannot 
help  rushing  upon  food.  And  the  consciousness  that  the  insult  W2S  not 
yet  avenged,  that  his  wrath  had  not  been  expended,  but  was  still  stored 
up  in  his  heart,  poisoned  the  artificial  composure,  which  Prince  Andrey 


WARANDPEACE  59* 

succeeded  in  obtaining  in  Turkey  in  the  guise  of  studiously  busy  and 
somewhat  ambitious  and  vain  energy. 

In  1812,  when  the  news  of  the  war  with  Napoleon  reached  Bucharest 
(where  Kutuzov  had  been  fourteen  months,  spending  days  and  nights 
together  with  his  Wallachian  mistress),  Prince  Andrey  asked  to  be  trans¬ 
ferred  to  the  western  army.  Kutuzov,  who  was  by  now  sick  of  Bolkonsky’s 
energy,  and  felt  it  a  standing  reproach  to  his  sloth,  was  very  ready  to 
let  him  go,  and  gave  him  a  commission  for  Barclay  de  Tolly. 

Before  joining  the  army  of  the  west,  which  was  in  May  encamped  at 
Drissa,  Prince  Andrey  went  to  Bleak  Hills,  which  was  directly  in  his 
road,  only  three  versts  from  the  Smolensk  high-road.  The  last  three  years 
of  Prince  Andrey’s  life  had  been  so  full  of  vicissitudes,  he  had  passed 
through  such  changes  of  thought  and  feeling,  and  seen  such  varied  life 
(he  had  travelled  both  in  the  east  and  the  west),  that  it  struck  him  as 
strange  and  amazing  to  find  at  Bleak  Plills  life  going  on  in  precisely  the 
same  routine  as  ever.  He  rode  up  the  avenue  to  the  stone  gates  of  the 
house,  feeling  as  though  it  were  the  enchanted,  sleeping  castle.  The  same 
sedateness,  the  same  cleanliness,  the  same  silence  reigned  in  the  house; 
there  was  the  same  furniture,  the  same  walls,  the  same  sounds,  the  same 
smell,  and  the  same  timid  faces,  only  a  little  older.  Princess  Marya  was 
just  the  same  timid,  plain  girl,  no  longer  in  her  first  youth,  wasting  the 
best  years  of  her  life  in  continual  dread  and  suffering,  and  getting  no 
benefit  or  happiness  out  of  her  existence.  Mademoiselle  Bourienne  was 
just  the  same  self-satisfied,  coquettish  girl,  enjoying  every  moment  of 
her  life,  and  filled  with  the  most  joyous  hopes  for  the  future.  She  seemed 
only  to  have  gained  boldness,  so  Prince  Andrey  thought.  The  tutor  he  had 
brought  back  from  Switzerland,  Dessalle,  was  wearing  a  coat  of  Russian 
cut,  and  talked  broken  Russian  to  the  servants,  but  he  was  just  the  same 
narrow-minded,  cultivated,  conscientious,  pedantic  preceptor.  The  only 
physical  change  apparent  in  the  old  prince  was  the  loss  of  a  tooth,  that 
left  a  gap  at  the  side  of  his  mouth.  In  character  he  was  the  same  as  ever, 
only  showing  even  more  irritability  and  scepticism  as  to  everything  that 
happened  in  the  world.  Nikolushka  was  the  only  one  who  had  changed: 
he  had  grown  taller,  and  rosy,  and  had  curly  dark  hair.  When  he  was 
merry  and  laughing,  he  unconsciously  lifted  the  upper  lip  of  his  pretty 
little  mouth,  just  as  his  dead  mother,  the  little  princess,  used  to  do.  He 
was  the  only  one  not  in  bondage  to  the  law  of  sameness  that  reigned  in  that 
spellbound  sleeping  castle.  But  though  externally  all  was  exactly  as  of  old, 
the  inner  relations  of  all  the  persons  concerned  had  changed  since  Prince 
Andrey  had  seen  them  last.  The  household  was  split  up  into  two  hostile 
camps,  which  held  aloof  from  one  another,  and  only  now  came  together 
in  his  presence,  abandoning  their  ordinary  habits  on  his  account.  To  one 
camp  belonged  the  old  prince,  Mademoiselle  Bourienne,  and  the  architect ; 
to  the  other — Princess  Marya,  Dessalle,  Nikolushka,  and  all  the  nurses. 

During  his  stay  at  Bleak  Hills  all  the  family  dined  together,  but  every 
one  was  ill  at  ease,  and  Prince  Andrey  felt  that  he  was  being  treated  as  a 
guest  for  whom  an  exception  was  being  made,  and  that  his  presence 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


592 

made  all  of  them  feel  awkward.  The  first  day  Prince  Andrey  could  not 
help  being  aware  of  this  at  dinner,  and  sat  in  silence.  The  old  prince 
noticed  his  unnatural  dumbness,  and  he,  too,  preserved  a  sullen  silence, 
and  immediately  after  dinner  withdrew  to  his  own  room.  Later  in  the 
evening  when  Prince  Andrey  went  in  to  him,  and  began  telling  him  about 
the  campaign  of  the  young  Prince  Kamensky  to  try  and  rouse  him,  the 
old  prince,  to  his  surprise,  began  talking  about  Princess  Marya,  grumbling 
at  her  superstitiousness,  and  her  dislike  of  Mademoiselle  Bourienne,  who 
was,  he  said,  the  only  person  really  attached  to  him. 

The  old  prince  declared  that  it  was  all  Princess  Marya’s  doing  if  he 
were  ill;  that  she  plagued  and  worried  him  on  purpose,  and  that  she  was 
spoiling  little  Prince  Nikolay  by  the  way  she  petted  him,  and  the  silly 
tales  she  told  him.  The  old  prince  knew  very  well  that  he  tormented  his 
daughter,  and  that  her  life  was  a  very  hard  one.  But  he  knew,  too,  that 
he  could  not  help  tormenting  her,  and  considered  that  she  deserved  it. 
‘Why  is  it  Andrey,  who  sees  it,  says  nothing  about  his  sister?’  the  old 
prince  wondered.  ‘Why,  does  he  suppose  I’m  a  scoundrel  or  an  old  fool  to 
be  alienated  from  my  daughter  and  friendly  with  this  Frenchwoman  for 
no  good  reason?  He  doesn’t  understand,  and  so  I  must  explain  it  to  him; 
he  must  hear  what  I  have  to  say  about  it,’  thought  the  old  prince,  and  so 
he  began  to  explain  the  reason  why  he  could  not  put  up  with  his  daugh¬ 
ter’s  unreasonable  character. 

‘If  you  ask  me,’  said  Prince  Andrey,  not  looking  at  his  father  (it  was 
the  first  time  in  his  life  that  he  had  blamed  his  father),  ‘I  did  not  wish 
to  speak  of  it— but,  if  you  ask  me,  I’ll  tell  you  my  opinion  frankly  in 
regard  to  the  whole  matter.  If  there  is  any  misunderstanding  and  estrange¬ 
ment  between  you  and  Masha,  I  can’t  blame  her  for  it — I  know  how  she 
loves  and  respects  you.  If  you  ask  me,’  Prince  Andrey  continued,  losing 
his  temper,  as  he  very  readily  did  in  these  latter  days,  ‘I  can  only  say 
one  thing;  if  there  are  misunderstandings,  the  cause  of  them  is  that  worth¬ 
less  woman,  who  is  not  fit  to  be  my  sister’s  companion.’ 

The  old  man  stared  for  a  moment  at  his  son,  and  a  forced  smile  re¬ 
vealed  the  loss  of  a  tooth,  to  which  Prince  Andrey  could  not  get  accus¬ 
tomed,  in  his  face. 

‘What  companion,  my  dear  fellow?  Eh!  So  you’ve  talked  it  over 
already!  Eh?’ 

‘Father,  I  had  no  wish  to  judge  you,’  said  Prince  Andrey,  in  a  hard 
and  spiteful  tone,  ‘but  you  have  provoked  me,  and  I  have  said,  and  shall 
always  say,  that  Marie  is  not  to  blame,  but  the  people  to  blame — the 
person  to  blame — is  that  Frenchwoman  .  . 

‘Ah,  he  has  passed  judgment!  ...  he  has  passed  judgment!’  said 
the  old  man,  in  a  low  voice,  and  Prince  Andrey  fancied,  with  embarrass¬ 
ment.  But  immediately  after  he  leapt  up  and  screamed,  ‘Go  away,  go 
away!  Let  me  never  set  eyes  on  you  again!  .  .  .’ 

Prince  Andrey  would  have  set  off  at  once,  but  Princess  Marya  begged 
him  to  stay  one  day  more.  During  that  day  Prince  Andrey  did  not  see 
his  father,  who  never  left  his  room,  and  admitted  no  one  to  see  him  but 


WARANDPEACE  593 

Mademoiselle  Bourienne  and  Tihon,  from  whom  he  inquired  several 
times  whether  his  son  had  gone.  The  following  day  before  starting,  Prince 
Andrey  went  to  the  part  of  the  house  where  his  son  was  to  be  found. 
The  sturdy  little  boy,  with  curls  like  his  mother’s,  sat  on  his  knee.  Prince 
Andrey  began  telling  him  the  story  of  Bluebeard,  but  he  sank  into  dreamy 
meditation  before  he  had  finished  the  story.  He  was  not  thinking  of  the 
pretty  boy,  his  child,  even  while  he  held  him  on  his  knee;  he  was  thinking 
of  himself.  He  sought  and  was  horrified  not  to  find  in  himself  either  re¬ 
morse  for  having  provoked  his  father’s  anger,  or  regret  at  leaving  home 
(for  the  first  time  in  his  life)  on  bad  terms  with  him.  What  meant  still 
more  to  him  was  that  he  could  not  detect  in  himself  a  trace  of  the  tender 
affection  he  had  once  felt  for  his  boy,  and  had  hoped  to  revive  in  his  heart, 
when  he  petted  the  child  and  put  him  on  his  knee. 

‘Come,  tell  me  the  rest,’  said  the  boy.  Prince  Andrey  took  him  off  his 
knee  without  answering,  and  went  out  of  the  room. 

As  soon  as  Prince  Andrey  gave  up  his  daily  pursuits,  especially  to 
return  to  the  old  surroundings  in  which  he  had  been  when  he  was  happy, 
weariness  of  life  seized  upon  him  as  intensely  as  ever,  and  he  made  haste 
to  escape  from  these  memories,  and  to  find  some  work  to  do  as  quickly 
as  possible. 

‘Are  you  really  going,  Andrey?’  his  sister  said  to  him. 

‘Thank  God  that  I  can  go,’  said  Prince  Andrey.  ‘I  am  very  sorry  you 
can’t  too.’ 

‘What  makes  you  say  that?’  said  Princess  Marya.  ‘How  can  you  say 
that  when  you  are  going  to  this  awful  war,  and  he  is  so  old?  Mademoiselle 
Bourienne  told  me  he  keeps  asking  about  you.  .  .  As  soon  as  she  spoke 
of  that,  her  lips  quivered,  and  tears  began  to  fall.  Prince  Andrey  turned 
away  and  began  walking  up  and  down  the  room. 

‘Ah,  my  God!  my  God!’  he  said.  ‘And  to  think  what  and  who — wrhat 
scum  can  be  the  cause  of  misery  to  people!’  he  said  with  a  malignance 
that  terrified  Princess  Marya. 

She  felt  that  when  he  uttered  the  word  ‘scum,’  he  was  thinking  not 
only  of  Mademoiselle  Bourienne,  who  was  the  cause  of  her  misery,  but  also 
of  the  man  who  had  ruined  his  own  happiness.  ‘Andrey,  one  thing  I  beg, 
I  beseech  of  you,’  she  said,  touching  his  elbow  and  looking  at  him  with 
eyes  that  shone  though  her  tears.  ‘I  understand  you.’  (Princess  Marya 
dropped  her  eyes.)  ‘Don’t  imagine  that  sorrow  is  the  work  of  men.  Men 
are  His  instruments.’  She  glanced  upwards  a  little  above  Prince  Andrey’s 
head  with  the  confident,  accustomed  glance  with  which  one  looks  towards 
a  familiar  portrait.  ‘Sorrow  is  sent  by  Him,  and  not  by  men.  Men  are 
the  instrument  of  His  will,  they  are  not  to  blame.  If  it  seems  to  you  that 
some  one  has  wronged  you — forget  it,  and  forgive.  We  have  no  right  to 
punish.  And  you  will  know  the  happiness  of  forgiveness.’ 

‘If  I  were  a  woman,  I  would,  Marie.  That’s  a  woman’s  virtue.  But  a 
man  must  not,  and  cannot,  forgive  and  forget,’  he  said,  and  though  till 
that  minute  he  had  not  been  thinking  of  Kuragin,  all  his  unsatisfied 
revenge  rose  up  again  in  his  heart.  ‘If  Marie  is  beginning  to  persuade  me 


594  WARANDPEACE 

to  forgive,  it  means  that  I  ought  Jong  ago  to  have  punished  him,’  he 
thought. 

And  making  no  further  reply  to  Princess  Marya,  he  began  dreaming 
now  of  the  happy  moment  of  satisfied  hate  when  he  would  meet  Kuragin. 
He  knew  he  was  with  the  army. 

Princess  Marya  besought  her  brother  to  stay  another  day,  telling  him 
how  wretched  her  father  would  be,  she  knew,  if  Andrey  went  away  with¬ 
out  being  reconciled  to  him.  But  Prince  Andrey  answered  that  he  would 
probably  soon  be  back  from  the  army,  that  he  would  certainly  write  to  his 
father,  and  that  their  quarrel  would  only  be  more  embittered  by  his 
staying  longer  now.  ‘Remember  that  misfortunes  come  from  God,  and 
that  men  are  never  to  blame,’  were  the  last  words  he  heard  from  his  sister, 
as  he  said  good-bye  to  her. 

‘So  it  must  be  so!’  thought  Prince  Andrey,  as  he  drove  out  of  the 
avenue.  ‘She,  poor  innocent  creature,  is  left  to  be  victimised  by  an  old 
man,  who  has  outlived  his  wits.  The  old  man  feels  he  is  wrong,  but  he 
can’t  help  himself.  My  boy  is  growing  up  and  enjoying  life  in  which  he 
will  be  deceived  or  deceiving  like  every  one  else.  I  am  going  to  the  army— 
what  for?  I  don’t  know  myself;  and  I  want  to  meet  that  man  whom  I 
despise,  so  as  to  give  him  a  chance  to  kill  me  and  sneer  at  me!  ’  All  the 
conditions  of  life  had  been  the  same  before,  but  before  they  had  all 
seemed  to  him  coherent,  and  now  they  had  all  fallen  apart.  Life  seemed 
to  Prince  Andrey  a  series  of  senseless  phenomena  following  one  another 
without  any  connection. 

IX 

' 

Prince  Andrey  reached  the  headquarters  of  the  army  at  the  end  of 
June.  The  first  army,  with  which  the  Tsar  was,  was  stationed  in  a 
fortified  camp  at  Drissa.  The  second  army  was  retreating,  striving  to 
effect  a  junction  with  the  first  army,  from  which — so  it  was  said — it  had 
been  cut  off  by  immense  forces  of  the  French.  Every  one  was  dissatisfied 
with  the  general  course  of  events  in  the  Russian  army.  But  no  one  even 
dreamed  of  any  danger  of  the  Russian  provinces  being  invaded,  no  one 
imagined  the  war  could  extend  beyond  the  frontiers  of  the  western  Polish 
provinces. 

Prince  Andrey  found  Barclay  de  Tolly,  to  whom  he  was  sent,  on  the 
bank  of  the  Drissa.  Since  there  was  not  one  large  village  nor  dwelling- 
place  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  camp,  the  immense  multitude  of  gen¬ 
erals  and  courtiers  accompanying  the  army  were  distributed  about  the 
neighbourhood  for  ten  versts  round  in  the  best  houses  of  the  villages  on 
both  sides  of  the  river.  Barclay  de  Tolly  was  staying  four  versts  away 
from  the  Tsar.  He  gave  Bolkonsky  a  dry  and  frigid  reception,  and  said 
in  his  German  accent  that  he  would  mention  him  to  the  Tsar  so  that  a 
definite  appointment  might  be  given  him,  and  that  meanwhile  he  begged 
him  to  remain  on  his  staff.  Anatole  Kuragin,  whom  Prince  Andrey  had 
expected  to  find  in  the  army,  was  not  here.  He  was  in  Petersburg,  and 


WAR  AND  PEACE  *  595 

Bolkonsky  was  glad  to  hear  it.  He  was  absorbed  in  the  interest  of  being 
at  the  centre  of  the  immense  war  that  was  in  progress,  and  he  was  relieved 
to  be  free  for  a  time  from  the  irritability  produced  in  him  by  the  idea 
of  Kuragin.  The  first  four  days,  during  which  he  was  not  called  upon  to 
do  anything,  he  spent  in  riding  round  the  whole  of  the  fortified  camp,  and 
by  the  aid  of  his  experiences  and  his  conversations  with  persons  of  greater 
experience,  he  tried  to  form  a  definite  idea  about  it.  But  the  question 
whether  such  a  camp  were  of  use  at  all  or  not  remained  an  open  one  in 
his  mind.  He  had  already,  from  his  own  military  experience,  formed 
the  conviction  that  in  war  the  most  deeply  meditated  plans  are  of  no 
avail  (as  he  had  seen  at  Austerlitz),  that  everything  depends  on  how 
unexpected  actions  of  the  enemy,  actions  that  cannot  possibly  be  foreseen, 
are  met;  that  all  depends  on  how,  and  by  whom,  the  battle  is  led.  In 
order  to  settle  this  last  question  to  his  own  satisfaction,  Prince  Andrey 
took  advantage  of  his  position  and  his  acquaintances  to  try  to  get  an 
insight  into  the  character  of  the  persons  and  parties  who  had  a  hand  in 
the  organisation  of  the  army.  This  was  the  general  idea  he  gained  of  the 
position  of  affairs. 

While  the  Tsar  had  been  at  Vilna,  the  army  had  been  divided  into  three. 
The  first  army  was  under  the  command  of  Barclay  de  Tolly,  the  second 
under  the  command  of  Bagration,  and  the  third  under  the  command  of 
Tormasov.  The  Tsar  was  with  the  first  army,  but  not  in  the  capacity  of 
commander-in-chief.  In  the  proclamations,  it  was  announced  that  the 
Tsar  would  be  with  the  army,  but  it  was  not  announced  that  he  would 
take  the  command.  Moreover,  there  was  in  attendance  on  the  Tsar  per¬ 
sonally  not  a  commander-in-chief’s  staff,  but  the  staff  of  the  imperial 
headquarters.  The  chief  officer  of  the  imperial  staff  was  General-Quarter¬ 
master  Volkonsky,  and  it  contained  generals,  aides-de-camp,  diplomatic 
officials,  and  an  immense  number  of  foreigners,  but  it  was  not  a  military 
staff.  The  Tsar  had  also  in  attendance  on  him  in  no  definite  capacity, 
Araktcheev,  the  late  minister  of  war;  Count  Bennigsen,  by  seniority  the 
first  of  the  generals;  the  Tsarevitch,  Konstantin  Pavlovitch;  Count 
Rumyantsev,  the  chancellor;  Stein,  the  former  Prussian  minister;  Arm- 
feldt,  the  Swedish  general;  Pfuhl,  the  chief  organiser  of  the  plan  of  the 
campaign;  Paulucci,  a  Sardinian  refugee,  who  had  been  made  a  general- 
adjutant;  Woltzogen;  and  many  others.  Though  those  personages  had  no 
definite  posts  in  the  army,  yet,  from  their  position,  they  had  influence, 
and  often  the  commander  of  a  corps,  or  even  one  of  the  commanders-in- 
chief,  did  not  know  in  what  capacity  Bennigsen  or  the  Tsarevitch  or 
Araktcheev  or  Prince  Volkonsky  addressed  some  advice  or  inquiry  to  him, 
and  could  not  tell  whether  some  command  in  the  form  of  advice  came 
directly  from  the  person  who  got  it  or  through  him  from  the  Tsar;  and 
whether  he  ought  or  ought  not  to  obey  it.  But  all  this  formed  simply  the 
external  aspect  of  the  situation ;  the  inner  import  of  the  presence  of  the 
Tsar  and  all  these  great  personages  was,  from  a  courtier’s  point  of  view 
(and  in  the  presence  of  a  monarch  all  men  become  courtiers),  plain  to  all. 
All  grasped  the  fact  that  though  the  Tsar  was  not  formally  assuming  the 


506  WARANDPEACE 

position  of  commander-in-chief,  he  did,  in  fact,  hold  the  supreme  control 
of  all  the  armies  in  his  hands,  and  the  persons  about  him  were  his  council¬ 
lors.  Araktcheev  was  a  trusty  administrator,  a  stern  upholder  of  discipline, 
and  careful  of  the  safety  of  the  Tsar.  Bennigsen  was  a  landholder  in  the 
neighbourhood,  and  seemed  to  feel  it  his  function  to  entertain  the  Tsar 
there;  while  he  was  in  reality,  too,  a  good  general,  useful  as  an  adviser, 
and  useful  to  have  in  readiness  to  replace  Barclay  at  any  time.  The 
Tsarevitch  was  there  because  he  thought  fit  to  be.  The  former  Prussian 
minister,  Stein,  was  there  because  his  advice  might  be  useful,  and  the 
Emperor  Alexander  had  a  high  opinion  of  his  personal  qualities.  Arm- 
feldt  was  a  bitter  enemy  of  Napoleon,  and  had  self-confidence,  which 
never  failed  to  have  influence  with  Alexander.  Paulucci  was  there  because 
he  was  bold  and  decided  in  his  utterances.  The  generals  on  the  staff  were 
there  because  they  were  always  where  the  Emperor  was;  and  the  last 
and  principal  figure,  Pfuhl,  was  there  because  he  had  created  a  plan  of 
warfare  against  Napoleon,  and  having  made  Alexander  believe  in  the 
consistency  of  this  plan,  was  now  conducting  the  plan  of  the  whole  cam¬ 
paign.  Pfuhl  was  accompanied  by  Woltzogen,  who  put  Pfuhl’s  ideas  into 
a  more  easily  comprehensible  form  than  could  be  done  by  Pfuhl  himself, 
who  was  a  rigid  theorist,  with  an  implicit  faith  in  his  own  views,  and  an 
absolute  contempt  for  everything  else. 

The  above-mentioned  were  the  most  prominent  personages  about  the 
Tsar,  and  among  them  the  foreigners  were  in  the  ascendant,  and  were 
every  day  making  new  and  startling  suggestions  with  the  audacity  char¬ 
acteristic  of  men  who  are  acting  in  a  sphere  not  their  own.  But,  besides 
those,  here  were  many  more  persons  of  secondary  importance,  who  were 
with  the  army  because  their  principals  were  there. 

In  this  vast,  brilliant,  haughty,  and  uneasy  world,  among  all  these 
conflicting  voices,  Prince  Andrey  detected  the  following  sharply  opposed 
parties  and  differences  of  opinion. 

The  first  party  consisted  of  Pfuhl  and  his  followers ;  military  theorists, 
who  believe  in  a  science  of  war,  having  its  invariable  laws — laws  of  oblique 
movements,  out-flanking,  etc.  Pfuhl  and  his  adherents  demanded  that 
the  army  should  retreat  into  the  heart  of  the  country  in  accordance  with 
the  exact  principles  laid  down  by  their  theory  of  war,  and  in  every 
departure  from  this  theory  they  saw  nothing  but  barbarism,  ignorance,  or 
evil  intention.  To  this  party  belonged  Woltzogen,  Wintzengerode,  and 
others — principally  Germans. 

The  second  party  was  in  direct  opposition  to  the  first.  As  is  always 
the  case  where  there  is  one  extreme  opinion,  representatives  had  come  for¬ 
ward  of  the  opposite  extreme.  This  party  had  urged  an  advance  from 
Vilna  into  Poland  regardless  of  all  previous  plans.  This  party,  while 
advocating  bold  action,  consisted  of  the  representatives  of  nationalism, 
which  made  them  even  more  one-sided  in  their  views.  They  were  Russians: 
Bagration,  Yermolov,  who  was  just  beginning  to  make  his  mark,  and 
some  others.  Yermolov’s  well-known  joke  was  much  quoted  at  the  time — 
a  supposed  petition  to  the  Tsar  for  promotion  to  be  a  ‘German.’  The 


WARANDPEACE  597 

members  of  this  party,  recalling  Suvorov,  maintained  that  what  was 
wanted  was  not  reasoning  and  sticking  pins  into  maps,  but  fighting, 
beating  the  enemy,  preventing  the  enemy  from  getting  into  Russia,  and 
keeping  up  the  spirits  of  the  army. 

To  the  third  party,  in  which  the  Tsar  was  disposed  to  place  most 
confidence,  belonged  the  courtiers,  who  tried  to  effect  a  compromise  be¬ 
tween  the  two  contending  sides.  The  members  of  this  party — to  which 
Araktcheev  belonged — were  mostly  not  military  men,  and  they  spoke 
and  reasoned  as  men  usually  do  who  have  no  convictions,  but  wish  to 
pass  for  having  them.  They  admitted  that  a  war  with  such  a  genius  as 
Bonaparte  (they  called  him  Bonaparte  again  now)  did  undoubtedly  call 
for  the  profoundest  tactical  considerations  and  thorough  scientific  knowl¬ 
edge,  and  that  on  that  side  Pfuhl  was'  a  genius.  But,  at  the  same  time, 
they  acknowledged  that  it  could  not  be  denied  that  theorists  were  often 
one-sided,  and  so  one  should  not  put  implicit  confidence  in  them,  but 
should  listen  too  to  what  Pfuhl’s  opponents  urged,  and  also  to  the  views 
of  practical  men  who  had  experience,  and  should  take  a  middle  course. 
They  advocated  maintaining  the  camp  at  Drissa  on  Pfuhl’s  plan,  but 
altering  his  disposition  of  the  other  two  armies.  Though  by  this  course 
of  action  neither  aim  could  be  attained,  this  seemed  to  the  party  of 
compromise  the  best  line  to  adopt. 

Of  the  fourth  section  of  opinions,  the  most  prominent  representative 
was  the  Grand  Duke,  and  heir-apparent,  who  could  not  get  over  his  rude 
awakening  at  Austerlitz.  He  had  ridden  out  at  the  head  of  his  guards 
in  helmet  and  cuirass  as  though  to  a  review,  expecting  gallantly  to  rout 
the  French,  and  finding  himself  unexpectedly  just  in  the  line  of  the 
enemy’s  fire,  had  with  difficulty  escaped  in  the  general  disorder.  The 
members  of  this  party  had  at  once  the  merit  and  the  defect  of  sincerity 
in  their  convictions.  They  feared  Napoleon;  they  saw  his  strength  andT 
their  own  weakness,  and  frankly  admitted  it.  They  said:  ‘Nothing  but 
a  huge  disgrace  and  ruin  can  come  of  the  war!  We  have  abandoned  Vilna, 
and  abandoned  Vitebsk,  and  we  are  abandoning  the  Drissa  too.  The  only 
sensible  thing  left  for  us  to  do  is  to  conclude  peace,  and  as  soon  as  possible, 
before  we  have  been  driven  out  of  Petersburg!  ’ 

This  view  was  widely  diffused  in  the  higher  military  circles,  and  found 
adherents,  too,  in  Petersburg — one  of  them  being  the  chancellor 
Rumyantsev,  who  advocated  peace  on  other  political  considerations. 

A  fifth  section  were  the  adherents  of  Barclay  de  Tolly,  not  so  much 
from  his  qualities  as  a  man,  as  a  minister  of  war  and  commander-in-chief. 
‘Whatever  he  may  be,’  they  always  began,  ‘he  is  an  honest,  practical 
man,  and  there  is  nobody  better.  Let  him  have  sole  responsibility,  since 
war  can  never  be  prosecuted  successfully  under  divided  authority,  and 
he  will  show  what  he  can  do,  as  he  did  in  Finland.  We  owe  it  simply  to 
Barclay  that  our  army  is  strong  and  well  organised,  and  has  retreated 
to  the  Drissa  without  disaster.  If  Barclay  is  replaced  by  Bennigsen  now, 
everything  will  be  lost;  for  Bennigsen  has  proved  his  incapacity  already 
in  1807.’  Such  was  the  line  of  argument  of  the  fifth  party. 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


598 

The  sixth  party,  the  partisans  of  Bennigsen,  maintained  on  the  con¬ 
trary  that  there  was  after  all  no  one  more  capable  and  experienced  than 
Bennigsen,  and  that  whatever  else  were  done  they  would  have  to  come 
back  to  him.  They  maintained  that  the  whole  Russian  retreat  to  Drissa 
had  been  an  uninterrupted  series  of  shameful  disasters  and  blunders. 
‘Let  them  blunder  now  if  they  will,’  they  said;  ‘the  more  blunders  the 
better,  at  least  it  will  teach  them  all  the  sooner  that  we  can’t  go  on  like  , 
this.  And  we  want  none  of  your  Barclays,  but  a  man  like  Bennigsen,  who 
showed  what  he  was  in  1807,  so  that  Napoleon  himself  had  to  do  him  jus¬ 
tice,  and  a  man,  too,  is  needed  to  whom  all  would  readily  intrust  authority, 
and  Bennigsen  is  the  only  such  man.’ 

The  seventh  class  were  persons  such  as  are  always  found  in  courts, 
and  especially  in  the  courts  of  young  sovereigns,  and  were  particularly 
plentiful  in  the  suite  of  Alexander — generals  and  adjutants,  who  were 
passionately  devoted  to  the  Tsar,  not  merely  as  an  emperor,  but  sincerely 
and  disinterestedly  adored  him  as  a  man,  as  Rostov  had  adored  him  in 
1805,  and  saw  in  him  every  virtue  and  good  quality  of  humanity.  These 
persons,  while  they  were  ecstatic  over  the  modesty  of  the  Tsar  in  declining 
the  chief  command  of  the  army,  deplored  that  excess  of  modesty,  and 
desired  and  urged  one  thing  only,  that  their  adored  Tsar,  conquering 
his  excessive  diffidence,  would  openly  proclaim  that  he  put  himself  at 
the  head  of  the  army,  would  gather  the  staff  of  the  commander-in-chief 
about  him,  and,  consulting  experienced  theorists  and  practical  men  where 
necessary,  would  himself  lead  his  forces,  who  would  be  excited  to  the  high¬ 
est  pitch  of  enthusiasm  by  this  step. 

The  eighth  and  largest  group,  numbering  ninety-nine  to  every  one  of 
the  others,  consisted  of  people  who  were  eager  neither  for  peace  nor  for 
war,  neither  for  offensive  operations  nor  defensive  camps,  neither  at 
Drissa  nor  anywhere  else;  who  did  not  take  the  side  of  Barclay,  nor  of 
the  Tsar,  nor  of  Pfuhl,  nor  of  Bennigsen,  but  cared  only  for  the  one  thing 
most  essential — their  own  greatest  gain  and  enjoyment.  In  the  troubled 
waters  of  those  cross-currents  of  intrigue,  eddying  about  the  Tsar’s 
headquarters,  success  could  be  attained  in  very  many  ways  that  would 
have  been  inconceivable  at  other  times.  One  courtier,  with  the  single- 
hearted  motive  of  retaining  a  lucrative  position,  would  agree  to-day 
with  Pfuhl,  and  to-morrow  with  his  opponents,  and  the  day  after  to¬ 
morrow  would  declare  that  he  had  no  opinion  on  the  subject  in  question, 
simply  to  avoid  responsibility  and  to  gratify  the  Tsar.  Another,  in  the 
hope  of  bettering  his  position,  would  seek  to  attract  the  Tsar’s  attention 
by  loudly  clamouring  a  suggestion  hinted  at  by  the  Tsar  on  the  previous 
day,  by  quarrelling  noisily  at  the  council,  striking  himself  on  the  chest 
and  challenging  opponents  to  a  duel  to  prove  his  readiness  to  sacrifice 
himself  for  the  common  good.  A  third  simply  took  advantage  of  the 
absence  of  enemies  between  two  councils  to  beg  a  grant  from  the  Single 
Assistance  Fund  for  his  faithful  service,  knowing  there  would  be  no 
time  now  for  a  refusal.  A  fourth  took  care  to  place  himself  where  the 
Tsar  might  quite  casually  find  him  deeply  engrossed  in  work.  A  fifth 


WARANDPEACE  599 

tried  to  reach  the  long-desired  goal  of  his  ambition — a  dinner  at  the 
Tsar's  table— by  violently  espousing  one  side  or  another  and  collecting 
more  or  less  true  and  valid  arguments  in  support  of  it. 

All  the  members  of  this  party  were  on  the  hunt  after  roubles,  crosses, 
and  promotions;  and  in  that  chase  they  simply  followed  the  scent  given 
them  by  the  fluctuations  of  imperial  favour.  As  soon  as  they  saw  the 
imperial  weather-cock  shifting  to  one  quarter  the  whole  swarm  of  these 
drones  began  buzzing  away  in  that  direction,  making  it  more  difficult 
for  the  Tsar  to  shift  his  course  back  again.  In  the  uncertainty  of  the 
position,  with  the  menace  of  serious  danger,  which  gave  a  peculiarly 
intense  character  to  everything,  in  this  whirlpool  of  ambitions,  of  conflict¬ 
ing  vanities,  and  views,  and  feelings,  and  different  nationalities,  this 
eighth  and  largest  party,  absorbed  only  in  the  pursuit  of  personal  interests, 
greatly  increased  the  complexity  and  confusion.  Whatever  question  arose, 
the  swarm  of  drones,  still  humming  over  the  last  subject,  flew  to  the  new 
one,  and  by  their  buzzing  drowned  and  confused  the  voices  of  sincere 
disputants. 

At  the  time  when  Prince  Andrey  reached  the  army  yet  another — a  ninth 
party — was  being  formed  out  of  all  the  rest,  and  was  just  making  its 
voice  heard.  It  consisted  of  sensible  men  of  age  and  political  experience, 
sharing  none  of  the  conflicting  opinions,  and  able  to  take  a  general  view 
of  all  that  was  being  done  at  headquarters,  and  to  consider  means  for 
escaping  from  the  vagueness,  uncertainty,  confusion,  and  feebleness. 

The  members  of  this  party  thought  and  said  that  the  whole  evil  was 
primarily  due  to  the  presence  of  the  Tsar  with  his  military  court  in  the 
army;  that  it  brought  into  the  army  that  indefinite,  conditional,  and 
fluctuating  uncertainty  of  relations  which  is  in  place  in  a  court,  but 
mischievous  in  an  army;  that  it  was  for  the  Tsar  to  govern  and  not  to 
lead  his  troops;  that  the  only  escape  from  the  position  was  the  departure 
of  the  Tsar  and  his  court  from  the  army;  that  the  simple  presence  of  the 
Tsar  paralysed  fifty  thousand  troops,  which  must  be  retained  to  secure 
his  personal  safety;  that  the  worst  commander-in-chief,  acting  inde¬ 
pendently,  would  be  better  than  the  best  commander-in-chief  with  his 
hands  tied  by  the  presence  and  authority  of  the  Tsar. 

While  Prince  Andrey  was  staying,  with  nothing  to  do,  at  Drissa, 
Sishkov,  the  secretary  of  state,  one  of  the  leading  representatives  of  this 
last  group,  wrote  to  the  Tsar  a  letter  to  which  Balashov  and  Araktcheev 
agreed  to  add  their  signatures.  In  this  letter  he  took  advantage  of  the 
Tsar’s  permitting  him  to  offer  his  opinion  on  the  general  question,  and 
respectfully  suggested  the  sovereign’s  leaving  the  army,  urging  as  a 
pretext  for  his  doing  so  the  absolute  necessity  of  his  presence  to  rouse 
public  feeling  in  the  capital. 

To  appeal  to  the  people,  and  to  rouse  them  in  defence  of  their  father- 
land,  was  represented  as  urgently  necessary  to  the  Tsar,  and  was  accepted 
by  him  as  a  sufficient  reason  for  leaving.  The  outburst  of  patriotism  that 
followed  that  appeal  (so  far  indeed  as  it  can  be  said  to  have  been  pro- 


6oo 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

duced  by  the  Tsar’s  visit  to  Moscow)  was  the  principal  cause  of  the 
subsequent  triumph  of  Russia. 


X 

This  letter  had  not  yet  been  given  to  the  Tsar,  when  Barclay,  at  dinner 
one  day,  informed  Bolkonsky  that  his  Majesty  would  be  graciously 
pleased  to  see  Prince  Andrey  in  person,  to  ask  him  some  questions  about 
Turkey,  and  that  Prince  Andrey  was  to  present  himself  at  Bennigsen’s 
quarters  at  six  o’clock  in  the  evening. 

That  day  news  had  reached  the  Tsar’s  quarters  of  a  fresh  advance  on 
Napoleon’s  part  that  might  be  regarded  as  menacing  the  army- — news 
that  turned  out  in  the  sequel  to  be  false.  And  that  morning  Colonel 
Michaud  had  accompanied  the  Tsar  on  a  tour  of  inspection  about  the 
Drissa  fortifications;  and  had  tried  to  convince  the  Tsar  that  the  fortified 
camp,  constructed  on  Pfuhl’s  theory,  and  hitherto  regarded  as  the  chef 
d’ccuvre  of  tactical  science,  destined  to  overthrow  Napoleon — that  that 
camp  was  a  senseless  absurdity  that  would  lead  to  the  destruction  of  the 
Russian  army. 

Prince  Andrey  arrived  at  Bennigsen’s  quarters,  a  small  manor-house 
on  the  very  bank  of  the  river.  Neither  Bennigsen  nor  the  Tsar  was 
there;  but  Tchernishev,  the  Tsar’s  aid-de-camp,  received  Bolkonsky, 
and  informed  him  that  the  Tsar  had  set  off  with  General  Bennigsen  and 
Marchese  Paulucci  to  make  his  second  inspection  that  day  of  the  forti¬ 
fications  of  the  Drissa  camp,  of  the  utility  of  which  they  were  begin¬ 
ning  to  entertain  grave  doubts. 

Tchernishev  sat  in  the  window  of  the  outer  room  with  a  French 
novel.  This  room  had  once  probably  been  the  main  hall;  there  was  still 
an  organ  in  it,  on  which  were  piled  rugs  of  some  sort,  and  in  the  corner 
of  the  room  was  a  folding  bedstead  belonging  to  Bennigsen’s  adjutant. 
The  owner  of  the  bedstead,  too,  was  there.  Apparently  exhausted  by 
work  or  festivities,  he  sat  dozing  on  the  folded  bed.  Two  doors  led 
from  the  room:  one  straight  in  front  opening  into  the  drawing-room, 
another  on  the  right  opening  into  the  study.  From  the  first  door  came 
the  sound  of  voices  speaking  German  and  occasionally  French.  In  the 
drawing-room  there  was  being  held,  by  the  Tsar’s  desire,  not  a  military 
council — the  Tsar  loved  to  have  things  vague — but  a  meeting  of  a  few 
persons,  whose  opinions  he  wished  to  hear  in  the  present  difficult  posi¬ 
tion.  It  was  not  a  military  council,  but  a  sort  of  council  for  the  eluci¬ 
dation  of  certain  questions  for  the  benefit  of  the  Tsar  personally.  To 
this  sort  of  semi-council  had  been  bidden  the  Swedish  general,  Armfeldt, 
the  general  on  the  staff  Woltzogen,  Wintzengerode  (whom  Napoleon 
had  called  a  renegade  French  subject),  Michaud,  Toll,  Count  Stein — 
by  no  means  a  military  man — and  finally  Pfuhl,  who  was,  so  Prince 
Andrey  had  heard,  la  cheville  ouvriere  of  everything.  Prince  Andrey 
had  the  opportunity  of  getting  a  good  view  of  him,  as  Pfuhl  came  ir. 


WAR  AND  PEACE  6ox 

shortly  after  his  arrival  and  stopped  for  a  minute  to  say  a  few  words 
to  Tchernishev  before  going  on  into  the  drawing-room. 

At  the  first  glance  Pfuhl,  in  his  badly  cut  uniform  of  a  Russian 
general,  which  looked  out  of  keeping,  like  some  fancy  dress  costume 
on  him,  seemed  to  Prince  Andrey  like  a  familiar  figure,  though  he  had 
never  seen  him  before.  He  was  of  the  same  order  as  Weierother,  and 
Mack,  and  Schmidt,  and  many  other  German  generals,  men  of  theory, 
whom  Prince  Andrey  had  seen  in  the  war  of  1808;  but  he  was  a  more 
perfect  type  of  the  class  than  any  of  them.  Such  a  typical  German 
theorist,  combining  in  himself  all  the  characteristics  of  those  other  Ger¬ 
mans,  Prince  Andrey  had  never  seen  before. 

Pfuhl  was  short  and  very  thin,  but  broad-boned,  of  a  coarsely  robust 
build,  with  broad  hips  and  projecting  shoulder-blades.  His  face  was 
wrinkled;  he  had  deep-set  eyes;  his  hair  had  obviously  been  hastily 
brushed  smooth  in  front,  but  stuck  out  behind  in  quaint  wisps.  Looking 
nervously  and  irritably  about  him,  he  walked  in  as  though  he  were 
afraid  of  everything  in  the  great  room  he  -had  entered.  With  a  clumsy 
gesture,  holding  his  sword,  he  turned  to  Tchernishev,  asking  him  where 
the  Tsar  was.  He  was  unmistakably  eager  to  get  through  the  rooms,  to 
get  the  bows  and  greetings  over  as  quickly  as  possible,  and  to  sit 
down  to  work  at  a  map,  where  he  would  feel  at  home.  He  gave  a  hurried 
nod  in  response  to  Tchernishev’s  words,  and  smiled  ironically  on  hear¬ 
ing  that  the  Tsar  was  inspecting  the  fortifications  that  he,  Pfuhl,  had 
planned  in  accordance  with  his  theory.  He  muttered  something  in  the 
jerky  bass,  in  which  conceited  Germans  often  speak,  ‘silly  fool  .  . 
or  ‘damn  the  whole  business  .  .  .’  or  ‘some  idiocy’s  sure  to  come  of 
that.’  Prince  Andrey  did  not  catch  his  words,  and  would  have  passed 
on,  but  Tchernishev  introduced  him  to  Pfuhl,  observing  that  he  had 
just  come  from  Turkey,  where  the  war  had  been  so  successfully  con¬ 
cluded.  Pfuhl  barely  glanced,  not  at,  but  across  Prince  Andrey,  and 
commented,  laughing:  ‘A  model  that  war  must  have  been  of  every 
principle  of  tactics!’  And,  laughing  contemptuously,  he  went  on  into 
the  room,  from  which  the  sound  of  voices  came. 

It  was  evident  that  Pfuhl — disposed  at  all  times  to  be  irritable  and 
sarcastic — was  that  day  particularly  irritated  at  their  having  dared  to 
inspect  his  camp  and  to  criticise  it  without  him.  Thanks  to  his  Auster- 
litz  experiences,  Trince  Andrey  could  from  this  one  brief  interview 
form  a  clear  idea  of  the  man’s  character.  Tfuhl  was  one  of  those  hope¬ 
lessly,  immutably  conceited  men,  ready  to  face  martyrdom  for  their 
own  ideas,  conceited  as  only  Germans  can  be,  just  because  it  is  only 
a  German’s  conceit  that  is  based  on  an  abstract  idea — science,  that  is, 
the  supposed  possession  of  absolute  truth.  The  Frenchman  is  conceited 
from  supposing  himself  mentally  and  physically  to  be  inordinately 
fascinating  both  to  men  and  to  women.  An  Englishman  is  conceited 
on  the  ground  of  being  a  citizen  of  the  best-constituted  state  in  the 
world,  ana  also  because  he  as  an  Englishman  always  knows  what  is 
the  correct  thing  to  do,  and  knows  that  everything  that  he,  as  an  Eng- 


602  WARANDPEACE 

lishman,  does  do  is  indisputably  the  correct  thing.  An  Italian  is  con¬ 
ceited  from  being  excitable  and  easily  forgetting  himself  and  other 
people.  A  Russian  is  conceited  precisely  because  he  knows  nothing  and 
cares  to  know  nothing,  since  he  does  not  believe  it  possible  to  know 
anything  fully.  A  conceited  German  is  the  worst  of  them  all,  and  the 
most  hardened  of  all,  and  the  most  repulsive  of  all;  for  he  imagines 
that  he  possesses  the  truth  in  a  science  of  his  own  invention,  which  is 
to  him  absolute  truth. 

Pfuhl  was  evidently  one  of  these  men.  He  had  a  science — the  theory 
of  the  oblique  attack — which  he  had  deduced  from  the  wars  of  Fred¬ 
erick  the  Great;  and  everything  he  came  across  in  more  recent  military 
history  seemed  to  him  imbecility,  barbarism,  crude  struggles  in  which 
so  many  blunders  were  committed  on  both  sides  that  those  wars  could 
not  be  called  war  at  all.  They  had  no  place  in  his  theory  and  could  not 
be  made  a  subject  for  science  at  all. 

In  1806  Pfuhl  had  been  one  of  those  responsible  for  the  plan  of  cam¬ 
paign  that  ended  in  Jena  and  Auerstadt.  But  in  the  failure  of  that  war 
he  did  not  see  the  slightest  evidence  of  the  weakness  of  his  theory.  On  j 
the  contrary,  the  whole  failure  was  to  his  thinking  entirely  due  to  the  i 
departures  that  had  been  made  from  his  theory,  and  he  used  to  say 
with  his  characteristic  gleeful  sarcasm:  ‘Didn’t  I  always  say  the  whole 
thing  was  going  to  the  devil?’  Pfuhl  was  one  of  those  theorists  who 
so  love  their  theory  that  they  lose  sight  of  the  object  of  the  theory — 
its  application  to  practice.  His  love  for  his  theory  led  him  to  hate  all 
practical  considerations,  and  he  would  not  hear  of  them.  He  positively 
rejoiced  in  failure,  for  failure,  being  due  to  some  departure  in  practice 
from  the  purity  of  the  abstract  theory,  only  convinced  him  of  the  cor¬ 
rectness  of  his  theory. 

He  said  a  few  words  about  the  present  war  to  Prince  Andrey  and 
Tchernishev  with  the  expression  of  a  man  who  knows  beforehand  that 
everything  will  go  wrong,  and  is  not,  indeed,  displeased  at  this  being  | 
so.  The  uncombed  wisps  of  hairs  sticking  out  straight  from  his  head 
behind,  and  the  hurriedly  brushed  locks  in  front,  seemed  to  suggest  1 
this  with  a  peculiar  eloquence. 

He  went  on  into  the  next  room,  and  the  querulous  bass  notes  of  his 
voice  were  at  once  audible  there. 


XI 

Prince  Andrey  had  hardly  seen  the  last  of  Pfuhl  when  Count  Ben- 
nigsen  came  hurrying  into  the  room,  and  bestowing  a  nod  on  Bolkon¬ 
sky,  went  straight  through  to  the  study,  giving  some  instruction  to  his  I 
adjutant.  The  Tsar  was  following  him,  and  Bennigsen  had  hurried  on 
to  prepare  something,  and  to  be  in  readiness  to  meet  him.  Tchernishev  1 
and  Prince  Andrey  went  out  into  the  porch.  The  Tsar,  looking  tired 
out,  was  dismounting  from  his  horse.  Marchese  Paulucci  was  saying 


WARANDPEACE  603 

something  to  him.  Turning  his  head  to  the  left,  the  Tsar  was  listening 
with  a  look  of  displeasure  to  Paulucci,  who  was  speaking  with  peculiar 
warmth.  The  Tsar  moved,  evidently  anxious  to  end  the  conversation; 
but  the  Italian,  flushed  and  excited,  followed  him,  still  talking,  and 
oblivious  of  etiquette. 

‘As  for  the  man  who  has  counselled  the  camp  at  Drissa,’  Paulucci 
was  saying  just  as  the  Tsar,  mounting  the  steps  and  noticing  Prince 
Andrey,  was  looking  more  intently  at  his  unfamiliar  face.  ‘As  for  him, 
sire,’  Paulucci  persisted  desperately,  as  though  unable  to  restrain  him¬ 
self,  ‘I  see  no  alternative  but  the  madhouse  or  the  gallows.’ 

Not  attending,  and  appearing  not  to  hear  the  Italian,  the  Tsar  recog¬ 
nised  Bolkonsky  and  addressed  him  graciously: 

‘I  am  very  glad  to  see  you.  Go  in  where  they  are  meeting  and  wait 
for  me.’ 

The  Tsar  passed  on  into  the  study.  He  was  followed  by  Prince  Pyotr 
Mihalovitch  Volkonsky  and  Baron  Stein,  and  the  study  door  was  closed 
after  them.  Prince  Andrey,  taking  advantage  of  the  Tsar’s  permission 
to  do  so,  accompanied  Paulucci,  whom  he  had  met  in  Turkey,  into  the 
drawing-room  where  the  council  had  assembled. 

Prince  Pyotr  Mihalovitch  Volkonsky  was  performing  the  duties  of  a 
sort  of  informed  head  of  the  Tsar’s  staff.  Volkonsky  came  out  of  the 
study  and  bringing  out  maps  laid  them  on  the  table,  and  mentioned  the 
questions  on  which  he  wished  to  hear  the  opinion  of  the  gentlemen 
present.  The  important  fact  was  that  news  (which  afterwards  proved 
to  be  false)  had  been  received  in  the  night  of  movements  of  the  French 
with  the  object  of  making  a  circuit  round  the  camp  at  Drissa. 

The  first  to  begin  speaking  was  General  Armfeldt,  who  unexpectedly 
proposed,  as  a  means  of  avoiding  the  present  difficulty,  a  quite  new 
project,  inexplicable  except  as  a  proof  of  his  desire  to  show  that  he, 
too,  had  a  suggestion  of  his  own.  His  idea  was  that  the  army  should 
move  into  a  position  away  from  the  Petersburg  and  Moscow  roads, 
and,  united  there,  await  the  enemy.  It  was  evident  that  this  project 
had  been  formed  by  Armfeldt  long  before,  and  that  he  brought  it 
forward  now  not  so  much  with  the  object  of  meeting  the  present  prob¬ 
lem,  to  which  it  presented  no  solution,  as  of  seizing  the  opportunity  of 
explaining  its  merits.  It  was  one  of  the  millions  of  suggestions  which 
might  be  made,  one  as  reasonable  as  another,  so  long  as  no  one  had 
any  idea  what  form  the  war  would  take.  Some  of  those  present  attacked 
his  idea,  others  supported  it.  The  young  Colonel  Toll  criticised  the 
Swedish  general’s  project  with  more  heat  than  any  one;  and  in  the 
course  of  his  remarks  upon  it  drew  out  of  a  side  pocket  a  manuscript, 
which  he  asked  leave  to  read  aloud.  In  this  somewhat  diffuse  note,  Toll 
proposed  another  plan  of  campaign — entirely  opposed  to  Armfeldt’s, 
and  also  to  Pfuhl’s  plan.  Paulucci,  in  raising  objections  to  Toll’s  scheme, 
proposed  a  plan  of  direct  advance  and  attack,  which  he  declared  to  be 
the  only  means  of  extricating  us  from  our  present  precarious  position, 
and  from  the  trap  (so  he  called  the  Drissa  camp)  in  which  we  were 


604  WAR  AND  PEACE 

placed.  During  all  this  discussion,  Pfuhl  and  his  interpreter  Woltzogen 
(who  was  his  mouthpiece  in  the  court  world)  were  silent.  Pfuhl  merely 
snorted  contemptuously  and  turned  his  back  to  indicate  that  he  would  • 
never  stoop  to  reply  to  the  rubbish  he  was  hearing.  But  when  Prince 
Volkonsky,  who  presided  over  the  debate,  called  upon  him  to  give  his 
•opinion,  he  simply  said:  ‘Why  ask  me?  General  Armfeldt  has  proposed 
an  excellent  position  with  the  rear  exposed  to  the  enemy.  Or  why  not 
the  attack-  suggested  by  this  Italian  gentleman?  A  fine  idea!  Or  a  re¬ 
treat?  Excellent,  too.  Why  ask  me?’  said  he.  ‘You  all  know  better  than 
I  do,  it  appears.’ 

But  when  Volkonsky,  frowning,  said  that  it  was  in  the  Tsar’s  name 
that  he  asked  his  opinion,  Pfuhl  rose,  and  growing  suddenly  excited, 
began  to  speak: 

‘You  have  muddled  and  spoilt  it  all.  You  would  all  know  better  than 
I,  and  now  you  come  to  me  to  ask  how  to  set  things  right.  There  is 
nothing  that  needs  setting  right.  The  only  thing  is  to  carry  out  in  exact 
detail  the  plan  laid  down  by  me,’  he  said,  rapping  his  bony  fingers  on 
the  table.  ‘Where’s  the  difficulty?  It’s  nonsense;  child’s  play!’  He  went 
up  to  the  map,  and  began  talking  rapidly,  pointing  with  his  wrinkled 
finger  about  the  map,  and  proving  that  no  sort  of  contingency  could 
affect  the  adaptability  of  the  Drissa  camp  to  every  emergency,  that 
every  chance  had  been  foreseen,  and  that  if  the  enemy  actually  did 
make  a  circuit  round  it,  then  the  enemy  would  infallibly  be  annihilated. 

Paulucci,  who  did  not  know  German,  began  to  ask  him  questions  in 
French.  Woltzogen  came  to  the  assistance  of  his  leader,  who  spoke 
French  very  badly,  and  began  translating  his  utterances,  hardly  able 
to  keep  pace  with  Pfuhl,  who  was  proceeding  at  a  great  rate  to  prove 
that  everything,  everything,  not  only  what  was  happening,  but  every¬ 
thing  that  possibly  could  happen,  had  been  provided  for  in  his  plan, 
and  that  if  difficulties  had  arisen  now,  they  were  due  simply  to  the 
failure  to  carry  out  that  plan  with  perfect  exactitude.  He  was  continu¬ 
ally  giving  vent  to  a  sarcastic  laugh  as  he  went  on  proving,  and  at 
last  scornfully  abandoned  all  attempt  to  prove,  his  position,  as  a  mathe¬ 
matician  will  refuse  to  establish  by  various  different  methods  a  problem 
he  has  once  for  all  proved  to  be  correctly  solved.  Woltzogen  took  his 
place,  continuing  to  explain  his  views  in  French,  and  occasionally  re¬ 
ferring  to  Pfuhl  himself:  ‘Is  that  not  true,  your  excellency?’  But  Pfuhl, 
as  a  man  in  the  heat  of  the  fray  will  belabour  those  of  his  own  side, 
shouted  angrily  at  his  own  follower — at  Woltzogen,  too. 

‘To  be  sure,  what  is  there  to  explain  in  that?’ 

Paulucci  and  Michaud  fell  simultaneously  on  Woltzogen  in  French. 
Armfeldt  addressed  Pfuhl  himself  in  German.  Toll  was  interpreting  to 
Prince  Volkonsky  in  Russian.  Prince  Andrey  listened  and  watched  them  in 
silence. 

Of  all  these  men  the  one  for  whom  Prince  Andrey  felt  most  sympathy 
was  the  exasperated,  determined,  insanely  conceited  Pfuhl.  He  was 
the  only  one  of  all  the  persons  present  who  was  unmistakably  seeking 

i 

II 


WAR  AND  PEACE  605 

nothing  for  himself,  and  harbouring  no  personal  grudge  against  any¬ 
body  else.  He  desired  one  thing  only — the  adoption  of  his  plan,  in 
accordance  with  the  theory  that  was  the  fruit  of  years  of  toil.  He  was 
ludicrous;  he  was  disagreeable  with  his  sarcasm,  but  yet  he  roused  an 
involuntary  feeling  of  respect  from  his  boundless  devotion  to  an  idea. 

Apart  from  this,  with  the  single  exception  of  Pfuhl,  every  speech  of 
every  person  present  had  one  common  feature,  which  Prince  Andrey 
had  not  seen  at  the  council  of  war  in  1805 — that  was,  a  panic  dread 
of  the  genius  of  Napoleon,  a  dread  which  was  involuntarily  betrayed 
in  every  utterance  now,  in  spite  of  all  efforts  to  conceal  it.  Anything 
was  assumed  possible  for  Napoleon;  he  was  expected  from  every  quar¬ 
ter  at  once,  and  to  invoke  his  terrible  name  was  enough  for  them  to 
condemn  each  other’s  suggestions.  Pfuhl  alone  seemed  to  look  on  him 
too,  even  Napoleon,  as  a  barbarian,  like  every  other  opponent  of  his 
theory;  and  Pfuhl  roused  a  feeling  of  pity,  too,  as  well  as  respect,  in 
Prince  Andrey.  From  the  tone  with  which  the  courtiers  addressed  him, 
from  what  Paulucci  had  ventured  to  say  to  the  Tsar,  and  above  all 
from  a  certain  despairing  expression  in  Pfuhl  himself,  it  was  clear  that 
others  knew,  and  he  himself  felt,  that  his  downfall  was  at  hand.  And 
for  all  his  conceit  and  his*  German  grumpy  irony,  he  was  pitiful  with 
his  flattened  locks  on  his  forehead  and  his  wisps  of  uncombed  hair  stick¬ 
ing  out  behind.  Though  he  tried  to  conceal  it  under  a  semblance  of 
anger  and  contempt,  he  was  visibly  in  despair  that  the  sole  chance  left 
him  of  testing  his  theory  on  a  vast  scale  and  proving  its  infallibility 
to  the  whole  world  was  slipping  away  from  him. 

The  debate  lasted  a  long  while,  and  the  longer  it  continued  the 
hotter  it  became,  passing  into  clamour  and  personalities,  and  the  less 
possible  it  was  to  draw  any  sort  of  general  conclusion  from  what  was 
uttered.  Prince  Andrey  simply  wondered  at  what  they  were  all  saying 
as  he  listened  to  the  confusion  of  different  tongues,  and  the  proposi¬ 
tions,  the  plans,  the  shouts,  and  the  objections.  The  idea  which  had"A 
long  ago  and  often  occurred  to  him  during  the  period  of  his  active 
service,  that  there  was  and  could  be  no  sort  of  military  science,  and 
that  therefore  there  could  not  be  such  a  thing  as  military  genius,  seemed 
to  him  now  to  be  an  absolutely  obvious  truth.  ‘What  theory  and  science 
can  there  be  of  a  subject  of  which  the  conditions  and  circumstances  are 
uncertain  and  can  never  be  definitely  known,  in  which  the  strength  of 
the  active  forces  engaged  can  be  even  less  definitely  measured?  No 
one  can,  or  possibly  could,  know  the  relative  positions  of  our  army 
and  the  enemy’s  in  another  twenty-four  hours,  and  no  one  can  gauge 
the  force  of  this  or  the  other  detachment.  Sometimes  when  there  is  no 
coward  in  front  to  cry,  “We  are  cut  off!”  and  to  run,  but  a  brave, 
spirited  fellow  leads  the  way,  shouting  “Hurrah!”  a  detachment  of 
five  thousand  is  as  good  as  thirty  thousand,  as  it  was  at  Schongraben, 
while  at  times  fifty  thousand  will  run  from  eight  thousand,  as  they  did 
at  Austerlitz.  How  can  there  be  a  science  of  war  in  which,  as  in  every 
practical  matter,  nothing  can  be  definite,  and  everything  depends  on 


6o6 


WAR  AND  PEACE 
countless  conditions,  the  influence  of  which  becomes  manifest  all  in  a 
moment,  and  no  one  can  know  when  that  moment  is  coming.  Armfeldt 
declares  that  our  army  is  cut  off,  while  Paulucci  maintains  that  we 
have  caught  the  French  army  between  two  fires;  Michaud  asserts  that  1 
the  defect  of  the  Drissa  camp  is  having  the  river  in  its  rear,  while 
Pfuhl  protests  that  that  is  what  constitutes  its  strength;  Toll  proposes 
one  plan,  Armfeldt  suggests  another;  and  all  are  good  and  all  are  : 
bad,  and  the  suitability  of  any  proposition  can  only  be  seen  at  the 
moment  of  trial.  And  why  do  they  all  talk  of  military  genius?  Is  a  man 
to  be  called  a  genius  because  he  knows  when  to  order  biscuits  to  be 
given  out,  and  when  to  march  his  troops  to  the  right  and  when  to  the 
left?  He  is  only  called  a  genius  because  of  the  glamour  and  authority  r 
with  which  the  military  are  invested,  and  because  masses  of  sycophants  i: 
are  always  ready  to  flatter  power,  and  to  ascribe  to  it  qualities  quite  ij 
alien  to  it.  The  best  generals  I  have  known  are,  on  the  contrary,  stupid 
or  absent-minded  men.  The  best  of  them  is  Bagration — Napoleon  him¬ 
self  admitted  it.  And  Bonaparte  himself!  I  remember  his  fatuous  and 
limited  face  on  the  field  of  Austerlitz.  A  good  general  has  no  need  of 
genius,  nor  of  any  great  qualities;  on  the  contrary,  he  is  the  better  for 
the  absence  of  the  finest  and  highest  of  human  qualities — love,  poetry,  ■ 
tenderness,  philosophic  and  inquiring  doubt.  He  should  be  limited, 
firmly  convinced  that  what  he  is  doing  is  of  great  importance  (or  he 
would  never  have  patience  to  go  through  with  it),  and  only  then  will 
he  be  a  gallant  general.  God  forbid  he  should  be  humane,  should  feel 
love  and  compassion,  should  pause  to  think  what  is  right  and  wrong.  ) 
~It  is  perfectly  comprehensible  that  the  theory  of  their  genius  should 
have  been  elaborated  long,  long  ago,  for  the  simple  reason  that  they  : 
are  the  representatives  of  power.  The  credit  of  success  in  battle  is  not 
by  right  theirs;  for  victory  or  defeat  depends  in  reality  on  the  soldier 
in  the  ranks  who  first  shouts  “Hurrah!”  or  “We  are  lost!”  And  it  is 
only  in  the  ranks  that  one  can  serve  with  perfect  conviction,  that  one 
is  of  use! ’ 

Such  were  Prince  Andrey’s  reflections  as  he  heard  the  discussion 
going  on  around  him,  and  he  was  only  roused  from  his  musing  when 
Paulucci  called  to  him  and  the  meeting  was  breaking  up. 

Next  day  at  the  review  the  Tsar  asked  Prince  Andrey  where  he  de¬ 
sired  to  serve;  and  Bolkonsky  ruined  his  chances  for  ever  in  the  court 
world  by  asking  to  be  sent  to  the  front,  instead  of  begging  for  a  post 
in  attendance  on  the  Tsar’s  person. 


XII 

Before  the  beginning  of  the  campaign  Rostov  had  received  a  letter 
from  his  parents,  in  which  they  informed  him  briefly  of  Natasha’s  ill¬ 
ness  and  the  breaking  off  of  her  engagement,  and  again  begged  him  to 
retire  from  the  army  and  cojne  home  to  them.  Natasha  had,  they  ex- 


WAR  AND  PEACE  607 

plained,  broken  off  the  engagement  by  her  own  wish.  On  receiving 
this  letter  Nikolay  did  not  even  attempt  to  retire  from  the  army  or  to 
obtain  leave,  but  wrote  to  his  parents  that  he  was  very  sorry  to  hear 
of  Natasha’s  illness  and  her  rupture  with  her  betrothed,  and  that  he 
would  do  everything  in  his  power  to  follow  their  wishes.  To  Sonya  he 
wrote  separately. 

‘Adored  friend  of  my  heart,’  he  wrote;  ‘nothing  but  honour  could 
avail  to  keep  me  from  returning  to  the  country.  But  now,  at  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  a  campaign,  I  should  feel  myself  dishonoured  in  my  com¬ 
rades’  eyes,  as  well  as  my  own,  if  I  put  my  own  happiness  before  my 
duty  and  my  love  for  my  country.  But  this  shall  be  our  last  separation. 
Believe  me,  immediately  after  the  war,  if  I  be  living  and  still  loved 
by  thee,  I  shall  throw  up  everything  and  fly  to  thee  to  press  thee  for 
ever  to  my  ardent  breast.’ 

It  was,  in  fact,  only  the  oubreak  of  the  war  that  detained  Rostov  and 
hindered  him  from  returning  home,  as  he  had  promised,  and  marrying 
Sonya.  The  autumn  at  Otradnoe  with  the  hunting,  and  the  winter  with 
the  Christmas  festivities  and  Sonya’s  love  had  opened  before  his  imagi¬ 
nation  a  vista  of  peace  and  quiet  country  delights  unknown  to  him 
before,  and  this  prospect  now  lured  him  back.  ‘A  charming  wife,  chil¬ 
dren,  a  good  pack  of  hounds,  ten  to  twelve  leashes  of  swift  harriers, 
the  estate  to  look  after,  the  neighbours,  election  to  offices,  perhaps, 
by  the  provincial  nobility,’  he  mused.  But  now  war  was  breaking  out, 
and  he  had  to  remain  with  his  regiment.  And  since  this  had  to  be, 
Nikolay  Rostov  was  characteristically  able  to  be  content  too  with  the 
life  he  led  in  the  regiment,  and  to  make  that  life  a  pleasant  one. 

On  his  return  from  his  leave,  Nikolay  had  been  joyfully  welcomed 
by  his  comrades  and  sent  off  for  remounts.  He  succeeded  in  bringing 
back  from  Little  Russia  some  first-rate  horses  that  gave  him  great 
satisfaction,  and  won  him  the  commendation  of  his  superior  officers. 
In  his  absence  he  had  been  promoted  to  be  captain,  and  when  the 
regiment  was  being  made  realy  with  reinforcements  for  active  service, 
he  was  again  put  in  command  of  his  old  squadron. 

The  campaign  was  begin7  mg,  pay  was  doubled,  the  regiment  was  re¬ 
inforced  with  new  officers,  new  men,  and  fresh  horses,  and  had  moved 
into  Poland.  The  temper  of  eager  cheerfulness,  always  common  at  the 
beginning  of  a  war,  was  general  in  the  army,  and  Rostov,  fully  con¬ 
scious  of  his  improved  position  in  the  regiment,  gave  himself  up  heart 
and  soul  to  the  pleasures  and  interests  of  the  army,  though  he  knew 
that  sooner  or  later  he  would  have  to  leave  it. 

The  army  had  been  compelled  to  retreat  from  Vilna  owing  to  various 
complex  considerations  of  state,  of  policy,  and  tactics.  Every  step  of 
that  retreat  had  been  accompanied  by  a  complicated  play  of  interests, 
arguments,  and  passions  at  headquarters.  For  the  hussars  of  the  Pavlo- 
grad  regiment,  however,  this  whole  march  in  the  finest  part  of  the 


60S  WAR  AND  PEACE 

summer,  with  ample  supplies  of  provisions,  was  a  most  simple  and 
agreeable  business.  Depression,  uneasiness,  and  intrigue  were  possible 
only  at  headquarters;  the  rank  and  file  of  the  army  never  even  won¬ 
dered  where  and  why  they  were  going.  If  the  retreat  was  a  subject  of 
regret,  it  was  simply  owing  to  the  necessity  of  leaving  quarters  one  had 
grown  used  to  or  a  pretty  Polish  hostess.  If  the  idea  did  occur  to  any 
one  that  things  were  amiss,  he  tried,  as  a  good  soldier  should,  to  put 
a  cheerful  face  on  it;  and  to  keep  his  thoughts  fixed  on  the  duty  that 
lay  nearest,  and  not  on  the  general  progress  of  the  war.  At  first  they 
had  been  very  pleasantly  stationed  near  Vilna,  where  they  made  ac¬ 
quaintance  with  the  Polish  gentry  of  the  neighbourhood,  prepared  for 
reviews,  and  were  reviewed  by  the  Tsar  and  various  commanders  of 
high  authority.  Then  came  the  command  to  retreat  to  Sventsyany,  and 
to  destroy  all  the  stores  that  could  not  be  carried  away.  Sventsyany  was 
memorable  to  the  hussars  simply  as  the  drunken  camp,  the  name  given 
to  the  encampment  there  by  the  whole  army,  and  as  the  scene  of  many 
complaints  against  the  troops,  who  had  taken  advantage  of  orders  to 
collect  stores,  and  under  the  head  of  stores  had  carried  off  horses  and 
carriages  and  carpets  from  the  Polish  landowners.  Rostov  remembered 
Sventsyany,  because  on  the  very  day  of  his  arrival  there  he  had  dis¬ 
missed  his  quartermaster  and  did  not  know  how  to  manage  the  men 
of  his  squadron,  who  had,  without  his  knowledge,  carried  off  five  bar¬ 
rels  of  strong  old  ale  and  were  all  drunk.  From  Sventsyany  they  had 
fallen  further  back,  and  then  further  again,  till  they  reached  Drissa; 
and  from  Drissa  they  retreated  again,  till  they  were  getting  near  the 
frontiers  of  Russia  proper. 

On  the  13th  of  July  the  Pavlograd  hussars  took  part  in  their  first 
serious  action. 

On  the  previous  evening  there  had  been  a  violent  storm  of  rain  and 
hail.  The  summer  of  1812  was  remarkably  stormy  throughout. 

The  two  Pavlograd  squadrons  were  bivouacking  in  the  middle  of  a 
field  of  rye,  which  was  already  in  ear,  L  ut  had  been  completely  trodden 
down  by  the  cattle  and  horses.  The  rain  was  falling  in  torrents,  and 
Rostov  was  sitting  with  a  young  officer,  Ilyin,  a  protege  of  his,  under 
a  shanty,  that  had  been  hastily  rigged  up  for  them.  An  officer  of  their 
regiment,  adorned  with  long  moustaches,  that  hung  down  from  his 
cheeks,  was  caught  in  the  rain  on  his  way  back  from  visiting  the  staff, 
and  he  went  into  Rostov’s  shanty  for  shelter. 

‘I’m  on  my  way  from  the  staff,  count.  Have  you  heard  of  Raevsky’s 
exploit?’  And  the  officer  proceeded  to  relate  to  them  details  of  the  Sal- 
tanov  battle  that  had  been  told  him  at  the  staff. 

Rostov  smoked  his  pipe,  and  wriggled  his  ne  Jr,  down  which  the 
water  was  trickling.  He  listened  with  little  interest,  looking  from  time 
to  time  at  the  young  officer  Ilyin,  who  was  squatting, beside  him.  Ilyin, 
a  lad  of  sixteen,  who  had  lately  joined  the  regiment,  took  now  with 
Nikolay  the  place  Nikolay  had  taken  seven  years  before  with  Denisov. 


WARANDPEACE  609 

Ilyin  tried  to  imitate  Rostov  in  everything  and  adored  him,  as  a  girl 
might  have  done. 

The  officer  with  the  double  moustaches,  Zdrzhinsky,  in  a  very  high- 
flown  manner,  described  the  dike  at  Saltanov  as  the  Russian  Ther¬ 
mopylae,  and  the  heroic  deed  of  General  Raevsky  on  that  dike  as 
worthy  of  antiquity.  Zdrzhinsky  told  then  how  Raevsky  had  thrust  his 
two  sons  forward  on  the  dike  under  a  terrific  fire,  and  had  charged 
at  their  side.  Rostov  listened  to  the  tale,  and  said  nothing  betokening 
sympathy  with  Zdrzhinsky’s  enthusiasm.  He  looked,  indeed,  as  though 
ashamed  of  what  he  was  told,  but  not  intending  to  gainsay  it.  After 
Austerlitz  and  the  campaign  of  1807,  Rostov  knew  from  his  own  ex¬ 
perience  that  men  always  lie  when  they  describe  deeds  of  battle,  as 
he  did  himself  indeed.  He  had  had  too  sufficient  experience  to  know 
that  everything  in  battle  happens  utterly  differently  from  our  imagina¬ 
tion  and  description  of  it.  And  so  he  did  not  like  Zdrzhinsky’s  story, 
and  did  not,  indeed,  like  Zdrzhinsky  himself,  who  had,  besides  his  un¬ 
prepossessing  moustaches,  a  habit  of  bending  right  over  into  the  face 
of  the  person  he  was  speaking  to.  He  was  in  their  way  in  the  cramped 
little  shanty.  Rostov  looked  at  him  without  speaking.  ‘In  the  first  place, 
on  the  dike  they  were  charging  there  must  have  been  such  a  crowd 
and  confusion  that,  if  Raevsky  really  thrust  his  sons  forward,  it  would 
have  had  no  effect  except  on  the  dozen  men  closest  to  him,’  thought 
Rostov;  ‘the  rest  could  not  have  even  seen  who  were  with  Raevsky 
on  the  dike.  And  those  who  did  see  it  were  not  likely  to  be  greatly 
affected  by  it,  for  what  thought  had  they  to  spare  for  Raevsky’s  ten¬ 
der,  parental  feelings,  when  they  had  their  own  skins  to  think  of  saving? 
And  besides  the  fate  of  the  country  did  not  depend  on  whether  that 
dike  was  taken  or  not,  as  we  are  told  the  fate  of  Greece  did  depend 
on  Thermopylae.  And  then  what  was  the  object  of  such  a  sacrifice? 
Why  do  your  own  children  a  mischief  in  war?  I  wouldn’t  put  Petya, 
my  brother,  in  a  place  of  danger;  no,  even  Ilyin  here,  who’s  nothing 
to  me  but  a  good-natured  lad,  I  would  do  my  best  to  keep  safe  and 
sheltered,’  Rostov  mused,  as  he  listened  to  Zdrzhinsky.  But  he  did  not 
give  utterance  to  his  thoughts,  he  had  experience  of  that  too.  He  knew 
that  this  tale  redounded  to  the  glory  of  our  arms,  and  therefore  one 
must  appear  not  to  doubt  its  truth:  and  he  acted  accordingly. 

‘I  can’t  stand  this,  though,’  said  Ilyin,  noticing  that  Rostov  did  not 
care  for  Zdrzhinsky’s  story:  ‘stockings  and  shirt,  and  all — I’m  wet 
through.  I’m  going  to  look  for  shelter.  I  fancy  the  rain’s  not  so  heavy.’ 
Ilyin  ran  out  and  Zdrzhinsky  rode  away. 

Five  minutes  later  Ilyin  came  splashing  through  the  mud  to  the 
shanty. 

‘Hurrah!  Rostov,  make  haste  and  come  along.  I  have  found  an  inn, 
two  hundred  paces  or  so  from  here;  a  lot  of  our  fellows  are  there  al¬ 
ready.  We  can  get  dry  anyway,  and  Marya  Hendrihovna’s  there.’ 

Marya  Hendrihovna  was  the  wife  of  the  regimental  doctor;  a  pretty 
young  German  woman,  whom  he  had  married  in  Poland.  Either  from 


6io 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

lack  of  means  or  disinclination  to  part  from  his  young  wife  in  the  early 
days  of  their  marriage,  the  doctor  had  brought  her  with  him  in  the 
regiment,  and  his  jealousy  was  a  favourite  subject  for  the  jibes  of  the 
hussars. 

Rostov  flung  on  a  cape,  shouted  to  Lavrushka  to  follow  them  with 
their  things,  and  went  off  with  Ilyin,  slipping  in  the  mud,  and  splashing 
through  the  pools  in  the  drizzling  rain  and  the  darkness,  which  was 
rent  at  intervals  by  distant  lightning. 

‘Rostov,  where  are  you?’ 

‘Here.  What  a  flash!’  they  called  to  one  another  as  they  went. 


XIII 

In  the  inn,  before  which  was  standing  the  doctor’s  covered  cart,  there 
were  already  some  half-dozen  officers.  Marya  Hendrihovna,  a  plump, 
flaxen-headed  little  German  in  a  dressing-jacket  and  nightcap,  was 
sitting  on  a  board  bench  in  the  foremost  corner.  Her  husband,  the 
doctor,  lay  asleep  behind  her.  Rostov  and  Ilyin  entered  the  room,  wel¬ 
comed  with  merry  shouts  and  laughter. 

‘I  say!  You  are  having  a  jolly  time  here!’  said  Rostov,  laughing. 

‘And  what  are  you  yawning  over?’ 

‘Pretty  figures  you  look!  There’s  a  perfect  waterfall  from  them! 
Don’t  swamp  our  drawing-room.’ 

‘Mind  you  don’t  spatter  Marya  Hendrihovna’s  dress,’  chimed  in 
voices. 

Rostov  and  Ilyin  made  haste  to  look  for  a  retreat  where,  without 
offence  to  the  modesty  of  Marya  Plendrihovna,  they  might  change 
their  wet  clothes.  They  went  behind  a  partition  wall  to  change;  but 
in  the  little  recess  were  three  officers,  who  completely  filled  it  up.  They 
were  sitting  playing  cards  by  the  light  of  a  single  candle  on  an  empty 
box,  and  nothing  would  induce  them  to  budge  from  their  places.  Marya 
Hendrihovna  lent  them  her  petticoat  to  be  hung  by  way  of  a  curtain; 
and  screened  by  it,  Rostov  and  Ilyin  took  off  their  wet  things  and 
put  on  dry  clothes,  with  the  aid  of  Lavrushka,  who  had  brought  their 
packages. 

They  made  up  a  fire  in  the  broken-down  stove.  They  got  hold  of  a 
board,  propped  it  on  two  saddles,  and  covered  it  with  a  horse-cloth; 
then  brought  out  a  little  samovar,  a  case  of  wine,  and  half  a  bottle 
of  rum.  All  crowded  round  Marya  Hendrihovna,  begging  her  to  pre¬ 
side.  One  offered  her  a  clean  handkerchief,  to  wipe  her  charming  hands; 
another  put  his  tunic  under  her  little  feet,  to  keep  them  from  the 
damp  floor;  a  third  hung  a  cape  over  the  window,  to  screen  her  from 
the  draught;  while  a  fourth  brushed  the  flies  off  her  husband’s  face, 
to  prevent  their  waking  him. 

‘Let  him  alone,’  said  Marya  Hendrihovna,  with  a  timid,  and  happy 
smile;  ‘he  will  sleep  well  anyhow  after  being  up  all  night.’ 


6n 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Oh  no,  Marya  Hendrihovna,’  answered  the  officer,  ‘one  must  look 
after  the  doctor  well!  Anything  may  happen;  and  he  will  be  kind  to 
me,  I  dare  say,  when  he  has  to  cut  off  my  leg  or  my  arm.’ 

There  were  only  three  glasses;  the  water  was  so  dirty  that  there 
was  no  telling  whether  the  tea  were  strong  or  weak,  and  the  samovar 
would  only  hold  water  enough  for  six  glasses.  But  that  made  it  all  the 
more  fun  to  take  turns  in  order  of  seniority  to  receive  a  glass  from 
the  plump,  short-nailed,  and  not  over  clean  fingers  of  Marya  Hendri¬ 
hovna.  All  the  officers  seemed  indeed  to  be  genuinely  in  love  for  that 
evening  with  Marya  Hendrihovna.  Plven  the  officers  who  had  been 
playing  cards  behind  the  screen  soon  threw  up  their  game,  and  gathered 
round  the  samovar,  catching  the  general  mood,  and  joining  in  the  hom¬ 
age  paid  to  Marya  Hendrihovna.  The  latter,  seeing  herself  surrounded 
by  these  splendid  and  devoted  young  men,  beamed  with  delight,  which 
she  sought  in  vain  to  conceal,  though  she  was  unmistakably  alarmed  at 
every  movement  made  by  her  husband,  who.was  slumbering  behind  her. 
There  was  only  one  spoon;  sugar  there  was  in  plenty,  but  it  took  so 
long  for  all  to  stir  their  glasses,  that  it  was  settled  that  Marya  Hen¬ 
drihovna  must  stir  the  sugar  for  each  in  turn.  Rostov  took  his  glass 
of  tea,  and  adding  rum  to  it,  begged  Marya  Hendrihovna  to  stir  it  for 
him. 

‘But  you  take  it  without  sugar?’  she  said,  smiling  all  the  while,  as 
though  whatever  she  said  or  the  others  said  had  a  quite  different  and 
very  amusing  meaning. 

‘I  don’t  care  about  sugar,  all  I  want  is  for  you  to  stir  it  with  your 
little  hand.’ 

Marya  Hendrihovna  began  looking  for  the  spoon,  which  some  one 
had  pounced  upon. 

‘Use  your  little  finger,  Marya  Hendrihovna,’  said  Rostov;  ‘it  will 
be  all  the  sweeter.’ 

‘It’s  hot,’  said  Marya  Hendrihovna,  blushing  with  pleasure. 

Ilyin  took  the  bucket  of  water,  and  pouring  a  few  drops  of  rum  in  it, 
went  up  to  Marya  Hendrihovna,  begging  her  to  stir  it  with  her  finger. 

‘This  is  my  cup,’  he  said.  ‘Only  dip  your  finger  in  and  I’ll  drink  it 
all  up.’ 

When  the  samovar  was  empty,  Rostov  took  up  the  cards  and  pro¬ 
posed  a  game  of  ‘Kings’  with  Alarya  Hendrihovna.  They  tossed  to  decide 
which  was  to  have  the  lady  for  a  partner.  Rostov  proposed  as  a  rule  of 
the  game  that  the  one  who  was  ‘king’  should  have  the  right  to  kiss 
Alarya  Hendrihovna’s  hand,  and  the  one  who  was  left  knave  should 
have  to  fetch  another  samovar  for  the  doctor,  when  he  waked. 

‘Well,  but  what  if  Alarya  Hendrihovna  is  king?’  asked  Ilyin. 

‘She  is  our  queen  already!  And  her  commands  are  law.’ 

The  game  was  just  beginning  when  the  doctor’s  dishevelled  head 
oopped  up  behind  his  wife.  He  had  been  awake  for  some  time  and 
listening  to  the  conversation,  and  apparently  he  saw  nothing  agreeable, 
tunny,  or  amusing  in  what  was  being  said  and  done.  His  face  looked 


6l2 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

depressed  and  weary.  He  did  not  greet  the  officers,  but  scratching 
himself,  he  asked  them  to  move  to  let  him  pass.  As  soon  as  he  had 
left  the  room,  all  the  officers  broke  into  loud  peals  of  laughter,  and 
Marya  Hendrihovna  blushed  till  the  tears  came,  making  her  even  more 
charming  in  the  eyes  of  the  officers.  Coming  in  again  from  the  yard, 
the  doctor  told  his  wife  (who  had  lost  her  radiant  smile,  and  looked 
at  him  in  dismay  in  expectation  of  the  sentence  in  store  for  her)  that 
the  rain  was  over  and  they  must  spend  the  night  in  their  covered  cart, 
or  they  would  have  all  their  things  stolen. 

‘But  I’ll  put  an  orderly  on  guard  .  .  .  two,  indeed!’  said  Rostov. 
‘That’s  nonsense,  doctor.’ 

‘I'll  be  sentinel  myself!’  said  Ilyin. 

‘No,  gentlemen,  you  have  had  plenty  of  sleep,  but  I  have  been  up 
these  two  nights,’  said  the  doctor,  and  he  sat  gloomily  by  his  wife’s 
side,  waiting  for  the  end  of  the  game. 

Looking  at  the  doctor’s  gloomy  face  and  sidelong  glances  at  his 
wife,  the  officers  grew  even  more  lively,  and  many  of  them  could  not 
suppress  their  laughter,  for  which  they  hastily  sought  presentable  pre¬ 
texts.  When  the  doctor  had  led  his  wife  away,  and  settled  himself  with 
her  in  their  cart,  the  officers  lay  down  in  the  inn,  covering  themselves 
with  their  wet  overcoats.  But  for  a  long  while  they  stayed  awake, 
chatting,  recalling  the  dismay  of  the  doctor,  and  the  delight  of  the 
doctor’s  wife,  or  running  out  on  to  the  steps  to  report  on  what  was 
going  on  in  the  cart.  Several  times  Rostov  muffled  his  head  up  and  i 
tried  to  go  to  sleep.  But  again  some  remark  roused  him,  again  a  con¬ 
versation  sprang  up,  and  again  there  were  peals  of  causeless,  merry, 
childish  laughter. 


XIV 

It  was  past  two  o’clock,  no  one  was  yet  asleep,  when  the  quartermaster 
appeared,  bringing  a  command  to  advance  upon  a  little  place  called 
Ostrovna.  Still  with  the  same  chatter  and  laughter  the  officers  began 
hurriedly  getting  ready;  again  the  samovar  was  filled  up  with  dirty 
water.  But  Rostov,  without  waiting  for  tea,  went  off  to  his  squadron. 
It  was  already  light;  the  rain  had  ceased,  and  the  clouds  were  parting. 
It  was  chill  and  damp,  especially  in  their  still  wet  clothes.  As  they  came 
out  of  the  inn,  in  the  twilight  of  the  dawn,  Rostov  and  Ilyin  both 
glanced  at  the  leather  cover  of  the  doctor’s  cart,  still  glistening  from 
the  rain.  The  doctor’s  feet  were  sticking  out  from  under  the  cover,  and 
in  the  middle  of  the  cart  they  caught  a  glimpse  of  his  wife’s  nightcap, 
and  heard  sleepy  breathing. 

‘She’s  really  very  charming,’  said  Rostov  to  Ilyin. 

‘An  exquisite  woman!’  responded  Ilyin,  with  all  the  gravity  of  a  boy 
of  sixteen. 

Half  an  hour  later  the  squadron  stood  drawn  up  on  the  road.  The 
word  of  command  was  heard.  ‘Mount!’  and  the  soldiers  crossed  them- 


WAR  AND  PEACE  613 

selves  and  got  on  their  horses.  Rostov,  riding  ahead  of  them,  gave  the 
word:  ‘Forward!’  and  drawing  out  four  abreast,  the  hussars  started 
with  a  sound  of  subdued  talk,  splashing  hoofs,  and  jingling  sabres.  They 
trotted  along  the  broad  high-road,  with  birch-trees  on  each  side  of  it, 
following  the  infantry  and  artillery,  who  had  gone  on  before. 

The  broken,  purplish-blue  clouds,  flushed  red  by  the  sunrise,  were 
scudding  before  the  wind.  It  grew  lighter  and  lighter.  They  could  see 
distinctly,  still  glistening  from  the  rain,  the  feathery  grass  which  always 
grows  beside  by-roads.  The  drooping  branches  of  the  birch-trees  swayed 
in  the  wind,  and  dripped  bright  drops  aslant  across  the  road.  The  faces  of 
the  soldiers  showed  more  and  more  distinctly.  Rostov,  with  Ilyin,  who 
would  not  drop  behind,  rode  on  one  side  of  the  road  between  the  two 
rows  of  birch-trees. 

On  active  service  Rostov  allowed  himself  the  indulgence  of  riding 
a  Cossack  horse  instead  of  the  regimental  horse,  broken  in  for  parade. 
He  was  a  connoisseur  and  lover  of  horses,  and  had  lately  obtained  a  big 
sorrel  horse  with  white  tail  and  mane,  a  fine  spirited  beast  of  the  Don 
breed,  on  whom  he  could  out-gallop  every  'one.  It  was  an  enjoyment  to 
Rostov  to  ride  this  horse.  He  rode  on,  thinking  of  the  horse,  of  the  morn¬ 
ing,  of  the  doctor’s  wife,  and  never  once  giving  a  thought  to  the  danger 
awaiting  him. 

In  former  days  Rostov  had  felt  fear  when  he  was  going  into  an  en- 
gagemefit;  now  he  had  not  the  slightest  feeling  of  fear.  He  had  not  lost 
his'mars  from  growing  used  to  being  under  fire  (one  can  never  get  ac¬ 
customed  to  danger)  but  from  gaining  control  of  his  feelings  in  face  of 
danger.  He  had  schooled  himself  when  going  into  action  to  think  of 
anything  except  what  one  would  have  supposed  to  be  more  interesting 
than  anything  else — the  danger  in  store  for  him.  Earnestly  as  he  strove 
to  do  this,  and  bitterly  as  he  reproached  himself  for  cowardice,  he  could 
not  at  first  succeed  in  this.  But  with  years  it  had  come  of  itself.  He  rode 
now  beside  Ilyin,  between  the  birch-trees,  stripping  leaves  off  the  twigs 
that  met  his  hand,  sometimes  touching  his  horse’s  side  with  his  foot, 
handing  the  pipe  he  had  finished  to  an  hussar  behind,  without  turning 
his  head,  all  with  as  calm  and  careless  an  air  as  though  he  were  out 
for  a  ride.  He  felt  sorry  to  see  the  excited  face  of  Ilyin,  who  talked  a 
great  deal  nervously.  He  knew  by  experience  the  agonising  state  of  antici¬ 
pation  of  terror  and  of  death,  in  which  the  cornet  was  plunged,  and  he 
knew  that  nothing  but  time  could  help  him  out  of  it. 

As  soon  as  the  sun  appeared  in  the  clear  strip  of  sky  under  the  storm- 
clouds,  the  wind  sank,  as  though  not  daring  to  spoil  the  beauty  of  the 
summer  morning  after  the  storm;  the  trees  still  dripped,  but  the  drops 
fell  vertically  now — and  all  was  hushed.  The  sun  rose  completely  above 
the  horizon,  and  vanished  in  a  long,  narrow  cloud  that  hung  over  it.  A 
few  minutes  later  the  sun  showed  even  more  brightly  on  the  upper  side 
of  the  cloud,  tearing  its  edge.  Everything  grew  bright  and  shining.  And 
with  the  bright  light,  as  though  in  response  to  it,  rang  out  shots  in  front 
of  them. 


614  WARANDPEACE 

Rostov  had  not  time  to  collect  his  thoughts  and  decide  how  far  off 
these  shots  were,  when  an  adjutant  of  Count  Osterman-Tolstoy  galloped 
up  from  Vitebsk,  bringing  the  order  to  advance  at  full-  speed  along  the 
road. 

The  squadron  overtook  and  passed  the  infantry  and  the  battery,  who 
were  also  quickening  their  pace.  Then  the  hussars  raced  downhill,  passed 
through  an  empty  and  deserted  village,  and  trotted  uphill  again.  The 
horses  were  beginning  to  get  in  a  lather  and  the  men  looked  flushed. 

‘Halt!  in  line!’  said  the  officer  in  command  of  the  division.  ‘Left  about 
face,  walking  pace!’  sounded  the  command  in  advance. 

And  the  hussars  passed  along  the  lines  of  the  other  troops  to  the  left 
flank  of  the  position,  and  halted  behind  our  Uhlans,  who  formed  the 
front  line.  On  the  right  was  a  dense  column  of  our  infantry — they  formed 
the  reserves;  on  the  hill  above  them,  in  the  pure,  clear  air,  in  the  brilliant, 
slanting,  morning  sunshine,  could  be  seen  our  cannons  on  the  very  hori¬ 
zon  line.  In  front,  beyond  a  hollow  dale,  could  be  seen  the  enemy’s 
columns  and  cannons.  In  the  dale  could  be  heard  our  advance  pickets, 
already  keeping  up  a  lively  interchange  of  shots  with  the  enemy. 

Rostov  felt  his  spirits  rise  at  those  sounds,  so  long  unheard,  as  though 
they  had  been  the  liveliest  music.  Trap-ta-ta-tap!  rang  out  several  shots, 
first  together,  then  in  rapid  succession.  All  sank  into  silence  again,  and 
again  there  was  a  sound  as  of  popping  squibs. 

The  hussars  remained  for  about  an  hour  in  the  same  spot.  The  cannons 
began  firing.  Count  Osterman,  with  his  suite  behind  the  squadron,  rode 
up;  he  stopped  to  say  a  word  to  the  colonel  of  the  regiment,  and  rode 
off  to  the  cannons  on  the  hill. 

After  Osterman  had  ridden  away,  the  command  rang  out  among  the 
Uhlans,  ‘Form  in  column;  make  ready  to  charge!’  The  infantry  in  front 
parted  in  two  to  let  the  cavalry  pass  through.  The  Uhlans  galloped  off, 
the  streamers  on  their  lances  waving,  and  trotted  downhill  towards  the 
French  cavalry,  who  came  into  sight  below  on  the  left. 

As  soon  as  the  Uhlans  had  started  downhill,  the  hussars  received  the 
order  to  ride  off  uphill  to  cover  the  battery.  Just  as  the  hussars  were 
moving  into  the  place  of  the  Uhlans,  there  came  flying  from  the  outposts 
some  cannon-balls,  hissing  and  whistling  out  of  the  distance,  and  hitting 
nothing. 

This  sound,  which  he  had  not  heard  for  so  long,  had  an  even  more 
inspiriting  and  cheering  effect  on  Rostov  than  the  report  of  the  muskets. 
Drawing  himself  up,  he  surveyed  the  field  of  battle,  as  it  opened  out 
before  him  riding  uphill,  and  his  whole  heart  went  with  the  movements 
of  the  Uhlans.  They  were  swooping  down  close  upon  the  French  dra¬ 
goons;  there  was  some  confusion  yonder  in  the  smoke,  and  five  minutes 
later  the  Uhlans  were  dashing  back,  not  towards  the  spot  where  they 
had  been  posted,  but  more  to  the  left.  Between  the  ranks  of  Uhlans  on 
the  chestnut  horses,  and  in  a  great  mass  behind  them,  could  be  seen 
blue  French  dragoons  on  grey  horses. 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


615 


XV 

Rostov,  with  his  keen  sportsman's  eye,  was  one  of  the  first  to  descry 
these  blue  dragoons  pursuing  our  Uhlans.  Nearer  and  nearer  flew  the 
disordered  crowds  of  the  Uhlans  and  the  French  dragoons  in  pursuit  of 
them.  He  could  see  now  separate  figures,  looking  small  at  the  bottom  of 
the  hill,  fighting,  overtaking  one  another,  and  waving  their  arms  and 
their  swords. 

Rostov  gazed  at  what  was  passing  before  him  as  at  a  hunt.  He  felt 
instinctively  that  if  he  were  to  charge  with  his  hussars  on  the  French 
dragoons  now,  they  could  not  stand  their  ground;  but  if  he  were  to 
charge  it  must  be  that  very  minute  or  it  would  be  too  late.  Fie  looked 
round.  The  captain  standing  beside  him  had  his  eyes  too  fixed  on  the 
cavalry  below. 

‘Andrey  Sevastianitch,’  said  Rostov,  ‘we  could  close  them  in, 
surely  .  .  .’ 

‘And  a  smart  job,  too,’  said  the  captain,  ‘and  indeed  .  .  .’ 

Rostov,  without  waiting  for  his  answer,  set  spurs  to  his  horse  and 
galloped  off  in  front  of  his  squadron.  Before  he  had  time  to  give  the 
command,  the  whole  squadron,  sharing  his  feeling,  flew  after  him.  Rostov 
himself  could  not  have  said  how  or  why  he  did  it.  He  did  it  all,  as  he 
did  everything  in  a  wolf  hunt,  without  thinking  or  considering.  He  saw 
that  the  dragoons  were  near,  that  they  were  galloping  in  no  order,  he 
knew  they  could  not  stand  their  ground;  he  knew  there  was  only  one 
minute  to  act  in,  which  would  not  return  if  he  let  it  slip.  The  cannon 
balls  were  hissing  and  whistling  so  inspiritingly  about  him,  his  horse 
pulled  so  eagerly  forward  that  he  could  not  resist  it.  He  spurred  his  horse, 
shouted  the  command,  and  the  same  instant  flew  full  trot  downhill  to¬ 
wards  the  dragoons,  hearing  the  tramp  of  his  squadron  behind  him.  As 
they  dashed  downhill,  the  trot  insensibly  passed  into  a  gallop  that  be¬ 
came  swifter  and  swifter,  as  they  drew  nearer  their  Uhlans  and  the 
French  dragoons  pursuing  them.  The  dragoons  were  close  now.  The  fore¬ 
most,  seeing  the  hussars,  began  turning  back;  the  hindmost  halted. 
With  the  same  feeling  with  which  he  had  dashed  off  to  cut  off  the  wolf’s 
escape,  Rostov,  letting  his  Don  horse  go  at  his  utmost  speed,  galloped  to 
cut  off  the  broken  ranks  of  the  dragoons.  One  Uhlan  halted;  another, 
on  foot,  flung  himself  to  the  ground  to  avoid  being  knocked  down;  a 
riderless  horse  was  carried  along  with  the  hussars.  Almost  all  the  dra¬ 
goons  were  galloping  back.  Rostov  picked  out  one  of  them  on  a  grey 
horse  and  flew  after  him.  On  the  way  he  rode  straight  at  a  bush;  his  gal¬ 
lant  horse  cleared  it;  and  Nickolay  was  hardly  straight  in  the  saddle 
again  when  he  saw  in  a  few  seconds  he  would  overtake  the  enemy  he  had 
pitched  upon  as  his  aim.  The  Frenchman,  probably  an  officer  from  his 
uniform,  sat  crouched  upon  his  grey  horse,  and  urging  it  on  with  his 
sword.  In  another  instant  Rostov’s  horse  dashed  up  against  the  grey 
horse’s  hindquarters,  almost  knocking  it  over,  and  at  the  same  second 


616  WAR  AND  PEACE 

Rostov,  not  knowing  why  he  did  so,  raised  his  sword,  and  aimed  a  blow 
at  the  Frenchman. 

The  instant  he  did  this  all  Rostov’s  eagerness  suddenly  vanished.  The 
officer  fell  to  the  ground,  not  so  much  from  the  sword  cut,  for  it  had 
only  just  grazed  his  arm  above  the  elbow,  as  from  fright  and  the  shock 
to  his  horse.  As  Rostov  pulled  his  horse  in,  his  eyes  sought  his  foe  to 
see  what  sort  of  man  he  had  vanquished.  The  French  officer  was  hopping 
along  on  the  ground,  with  one  foot  caught  in  the  stirrup.  Screwing  up 
his  eyes,  as  though  expecting  another  blow  every  instant,  he  glanced  up 
at  Rostov  frowning  with  an  expression  of  terror.  His  pale,  mud-stained 
face — fair  and  young,  with  a  dimple  on  the  chin  and  clear  blue  eyes — 
was  the  most  unwarlike,  most  gdod-natured  face,  more  in  place  by  a 
quiet  fireside  than  on  the  field  of  battle.  Before  Rostov  could  make  up 
his  mind  what  to  do  with  him,  the  officer  shouted,  ‘I  surrender.’  He 
tried  hurriedly  and  failed  to  extricate  his  foot  from  the  stirrup,  and  still 
gazed  with  his  frightened  blue  eyes  at  Rostov.  The  hussars,  galloping 
up,  freed  his  foot,  and  got  him  into  his  saddle.  The  hussars  were  busily 
engaged  on  all  sides  with  the  dragoons;  one  was  wounded,  but  though 
his  face  was  streaming  with  blood  he  would  not  let  go  of  his  horse;  an¬ 
other  put  his  arms  round  an  hussar  as  he  sat  perched  up  behind  on  his 
horse;  a  third  was  clambering  on  to  his  horse,  supported  by  an  hussar. 
The  French  infantry  were  in  front,  firing  as  they  ran.  The  hussars  gal¬ 
loped  hastily  back  with  their  prisoners.  Rostov  galloped  back  with  the 
rest,  conscious  of  some  disagreeable  sensation,  a  kind  of  ache  at  his  heart. 
A  glimpse  of  something  vague  and  confused,  of  which  he  could  not  get 
a  clear  view,  seemed  to  have  come  to  him  with  the  capture  of  that  French 
officer  and  the  blow  he  had  dealt  him. 

Count  Osterman-Tolstoy  met  the  hussars  on  their  return,  summoned 
Rostov,  thanked  him  and  told  him  he  would  report  his  gallant  action 
to  the  Tsar  and  would  recommend  him  for  the  cross  of  St.  George.  When 
Rostov  was  called  up  to  Count  Osterman,  bethinking  himself  that  he 
had  received  no  command  to  charge,  he  had  no  doubt  that  his  com¬ 
manding  officer  sent  for  him  to  reprimand  him  for  his  breach  of  dis¬ 
cipline.  Osterman’s  flattering  words  and  promise  of  a  reward  should, 
therefore,  have  been  a  pleasant  surprise  to  Rostov;  but  he  still  suffered 
from  that  unpleasant  vague  feeling  of  moral  nausea.  ‘Why,  what  on  earth 
is  it  that’s  worrying  me?’  he  wondered,  as  he  rode  away  from  the  general. 
‘Ilyin?  No,  he’s  all  right.  Did  I  do  anything  disgraceful?  No,  that’s  not 
it  either!’  Something  else  fretted  him  like  a  remorse.  ‘Yes,  yes,  that 
officer  with  the  dimple.  And  I  remember  clearly  how  my  hand  paused 
when  I  had  lifted  it.’ 

Rostov  saw  the  prisoners  being  led  away,  and  galloped  after  them  to 
look  at  his  Frenchman  with  the  dimple  in  his  chin.  He  was  sitting  in  his 
strange  uniform  on  one  of  the  spare  horses,  looking  uneasily  about  him. 
The  sword-cut  in  his  arm  could  hardly  be  called  a  wound.  He  looked  at 
Rostov  with  a  constrained  smile,  and  waved  his  hand  by  way  of  a 
greeting.  Rostov  still  felt  the  same  discomfort  and  vague  remorse. 


WARANDPEACE  617 

All  that  day  and  the  next  Rostov’s  friends  and  comrades  noticed  that, 
without  being  exactly  depressed  or  irritable,  he  was  silent,  dreamy,  and 
preoccupied.  He  did  not  care  to  drink,  tried  to  be  alone,  and  seemed 
absorbed  in  thought.  Rostov  was  still  pondering  on  his  brilliant  exploit, 
which,  to  his  amazement,  had  won  him  the  St.  George’s  Cross  and  made 
his  reputation  indeed  for  fearless  gallantry.  There  was  something  he 
could  not  fathom  in  it.  ‘So  they  are  even  more  frightened  than  we  are,’ 
he  thought.  ‘Why,  is  this  all  that’s  meant  by  heroism?  And  did  I  do  it 
for  the  sake  of  my  country?  And  was  he  to  blame  with  his  dimple  and 
his  blue  eyes?  How  frightened  he  was!  He  thought  I  was  going  to  kill 
him.  Why  should  I  kill  him?  My  hand  trembled.  And  they  have  given 
me  the  St.  George’s  Cross.  I  can’t  make  it  out,  I  can’t  make  it  out!’ 

But  while  Nikolay  was  worrying  over  these  questions  in  his  heart 
and  unable  to  find  any  clear  solution  of  the  doubts  that  troubled  him, 
the  wheel  of  fortune  was  turning  in  his  favour,  as  so  often  happens  in 
the  service.'  He  was  brought  forward  after  the  affair  at  Ostrovna,  re¬ 
ceived  the  command  of  a  battalion  of  hussars,  and  when  an  officer  of 
dauntless  courage  was  wanted  he  was  picked  out. 


XVI 

Countess  Rostov  had  not  recovered  her  strength  when  she  received  the 
news  of  Natasha’s  illness.  Weak  as  she  still  was,  she  set  out  at  once  for 
Moscow  with  Petya  and  the  whole  household,  and  the  Rostovs  moved 
from  Marya  Dmitryevna’s  into  their  own  house,  where  the  whole  family 
were  installed. 

Natasha’s  illness  was  so  serious  that,  luckily  for  herself  and  her 
parents,  all  thought  of  what  had  caused  it,  of  her  conduct  and  of  the 
breaking  off  of  her  engagement,  fell  into  the  background.  She  was  so 
ill  that  no  one  could  consider  how  far  she  was  to  blame  for  all  that  had 
happened,  while  she  could  not  eat  nor  sleep,  was  growing  visibly  thinner, 
coughed,  and  was,  as  the  doctors  gave  them  to  understand,  in  actual 
danger.  Nothing  could  be  thought  of  but  how  to  make  her  well  again. 
Doctors  came  to  see  Natasha,  both  separately  and  in  consultation.  They 
said  a  great  deal  in  French,  in  German,  and  in  Latin.  They  criticised 
one  another,  and  prescribed  the  most  diverse  remedies  for  all  the  diseases 
they  were  familiar  with.  But  it  never  occurred  to  one  of  them  to  make 
the  simple  reflection  that  they  could  not  understand  the  disease  from 
which  Natasha  was  suffering,  as  no  single  disease  can  be  fully  under¬ 
stood  in  a  living  person;  for  every  living  person  has  his  individual  pe¬ 
culiarities  and  always  has  his  own  peculiar,  new,  complex  complaints 
unknown  to  medicine — not  a  disease  of  the  lungs,  of  the  kidneys,  of  the 
skin,  of  the  heart,  and  so  on,  as  described  in  medical  books,  but  a  disease 
that  consists  of  one  out  of  the  innumerable  combinations  of  ailments  of 
those  organs.  This  simple  reflection  can  never  occur  to  doctors  (just  as 
a  sorcerer  cannot  entertain  the  idea  that  he  is  unable  to  work  magic 


6iS  WARANDPEACE 

spells)  because  it  is  the  work  of  their  life  to  undertake  the  cure  of 
disease.,  because  it  is  for  that  that  they  are  paid,  and  on  that  they  have 
wasted  the  best  years  of  their  life.  And  what  is  more,  that  reflection 
could  not  occur  to  the  doctors  because  they  saw  that  they  unquestion¬ 
ably  were  of  use;  and  they  certainly  were  of  use  to  all  the  Rostov  house¬ 
hold.  They  were  of  use,  not  because  they  made  the  patient  swallow  drugs, 
mostly  injurious  (the  injury  done  by  them  was  hardly  perceptible  be¬ 
cause  they  were  given  in  such  small  doses).  They  were  of  use,  were 
needed,  were  indispensable  in  fact  (for  the  same  reason  that  there  have 
always  been,  and  always  will  be,  reputed  healers,  witches,  homoeopaths, 
and  allopaths),  because  they  satisfied  the  moral  cravings  of  the  patient 
and  those  who  loved  her.  They  satisfied  that  eternal  human  need  of 
hope  for  -elief,  that  need  for  sympathetic  action  that  is  felt  in  the  pres¬ 
ence  of  suffering,  that  need  that  is  shown  in  its  simplest  form  in  the 
little  child,  who  must  have  the  place  rubbed  when  it  has  hurt  itself.  The 
child  is  hurt,  and  runs  at  once  to  the  arms  of  its  mother  or  nurse  for 
them  to  kiss  or  rub  the  tender  spot,  and  it  feels  better  for  the  kissing 
and  rubbing.  The  child  cannot  believe  that  these  stronger,  cleverer 
creatures  have  not  the  power  to  relieve  its  pain.  And  the  hope  of  relief 
and  the  expressions  of  sympathy  as  the  mother  rubs  it  comfort  it.  To 
Natasha  the  doctors  took  the  place  of  the  mother,  kissing  and  rubbing 
her  ‘bobo,’  when  they  declared  that  all  the  trouble  would  soon  be  over, 
if  the  coachman  were  to  drive  to  the  chemist’s  shop,  in  Arbatsky  Place, 
and  buy — for  a  rouble  and  seventy  copecks — those  powders  and  pills 
in  a  pretty  little  box,  and  if  those  powders  were  given  to  the  patient  in 
boiled  water  precisely  every  two  hours,  neither  more  nor  less. 

What  would  Sonya,  and  the  count,  and  the  countess  have  done,  how 
would  they  have  felt  if  they  had  taken  no  steps,  if  they  had  not  had 
those  pills  at  certain  hours,  and  the  warm  beverage,  and  the  chicken 
cutlets,  and  all  the  detailed  regime  laid  down  by  the  doctors,  which 
gave  occupation  and  consolation  to  all  of  them.  How  could  the  count 
have  borne  his  dearly  loved  daughter’s  illness  if  he  had  not  known  that 
it  was  costing  him  a  thousand  roubles,  and  that  he  would  not  grudge 
thousands  more,  if  that  would  do  her  any  good;  if  he  had  not  known 
that,  in  case  she  did  not  get  better,  he  would  spend  thousands  more  on 
taking  her  abroad  and  consulting  doctors  there;  if  he  had  not  been 
able  to  tell  people  how  Metivier  and  Feller  had  failed  to  diagnose  the 
complaint,  but  Friez  had  fathomed  it,  and  Mudrov  had  succeeded  even 
better  in  defining  it?  What  would  the  countess  have  done  if  she  had  not 
sometimes  been  able  to  scold  her  sick  Natasha  for  not  following  the 
doctor’s  orders  quite  faithfully? 

‘You  caq  never  get  well  like  this,’  she  would  say,  finding  a  refuge  from 
her  grief  in  anger,  ‘if  you  won’t  listen  to  the  doctors  and  take  your 
medicine  properly!  We  can’t  have  any  nonsense,  when  it  may  turn  to 
pneumonia,’  said  the  countess,  and  in  pronouncing  that — not  to  her 
only — mysterious  word,  she  found  great  comfort.  What  would  Sonya 
have  done,  had  she  not  had  the  glad  consciousness  that  at  first  she  had 


WAR  AND  PEACE  619 

not  had  her  clothes  off  for  three  nights  running,  so  as  to  be  in  readiness 
to  carry  out  the  doctor’s  orders,  and  that  now  she  did  not  sleep  at  night 
for  fear  of  missing  the  exact  hour  at  which  the  innocuous  pills  were  to 
be  given  out  of  the  gilt  pill-box?  Even  Natasha  herself,  though  she  did 
declare  that  no  medicines  could  do  her  any  good,  and  that  it  was  all 
nonsense,  was  glad  to  see  so  many  sacrifices  being  made  for  her,  and 
glad  to  have  to  take  medicines  at  certain  hours.  And  she  was  even  glad, 
indeed,  to  be  able  by  her  disregard  of  the  doctor’s  prescription  to  show- 
how  little  faith  she  put  in  them,  and  how  little  she  cared  for  life. 

The  doctor  came  every  day,  felt  her  pulse,  looked  at  her  tongue,  and 
made  jokes,  regardless  of  her  dejected  face.  But  then  when  he  had  gone 
into  the  next  room,  and  the  countess  had  hastily  followed  him,  he  as¬ 
sumed  a  serious  face,  and  shaking  his  head  gravely,  said  that  though 
there  was  indeed  danger,  he  had  hopes  from  the  effect  of  the  most  recent 
medicine,  and  that  they  could  only  wait  and  see;  that  the  illness  was 
more  due  to  moral  than  physical  causes,  but  .  .  .  The  countess  slipped 
some  gold  into  his  hand,  trying  to  conceal  the  action  from  herself  and 
from  him,  and  always  went  back  to  the  sick-room  with  a  lighter  heart. 

The  symptoms  of  Natasha’s  illness  were  loss  of  appetite,  sleeplessness, 
a  cough,  and  continual  depression.  The  doctors  declared  that  she  must 
have  medical  treatment,  and  therefore  kept  her  in  the  stifling  atmos¬ 
phere  of  the  town.  And  all  the  summer  of  1812  the  Rostovs  did  not  visit 
the  country. 

In  spite  of  the  numerous  little  bottles  and  boxes  of  pills,  drops,  and 
powders,  of  which  Madame  Schoss,  who  had  a  passion  for  them,  made 
a  complete  collection,  in  spite  of  the  loss  of  the  country  life  to  which  she 
was  accustomed,  youth  gained  the  upper  hand;  Natasha’s  grief  began  to 
be  covered  up  by  the  impressions  of  daily  life;  it  ceased  to  lie  like  an 
aching  load  on  her  heart;  it  began  to  fade  into  the  past;  and  Natasha 
began  to  return  to  physical  health  again. 


XVII 

Natasha  was  calmer,  but  no  happier.  She  did  not  merely  shun  every 
external  form  of  amusement — balls,  skating,  concerts,  and  theatres — but 
she  never  even  laughed  without  the  sound  of  tears  behind  her  laughter. 
She  could  not  sing.  As  soon  as  she  began  to  laugh  or  attempted  to  sing 
all  by  herself,  tears  choked  her:  tears  of  remorse;  tears  of  regret  for  that 
time  of  pure  happiness  that  could  never  return;  tears  of  vexation  that 
she  should  so  wantonly  have  ruined  her  young  life,  that  might  have 
been  so  happy.  Laughter  and  singing  especially  seemed  to  her  like  scoffing 
at  her  grief.  She  never  even  thought  of  desiring  admiration;  she  had  no 
impulse  of  vanity  to  restrain.  She  said  and  felt  at  that  time  that  all  men 
were  no  more  to  her  than  Nastasya  Ivanovna,  the  buffoon.  An  inner  sen¬ 
tinel  seemed  to  guard  against  every  sort  of  pleasure.  And,  indeed,  she 
seemed  to  have  lost  all  the  old  interests  of  her  girlish,  careless  life,  that 


620 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

had  been  so  full  of  hope.  Most  often,  and  with  most  pining,  she  brooded 
over  the  memory  of  those  autumn  months,  the  hunting,  the  old  uncle,  and 
the  Christmas  holidays  spent  with  Nikolay  at  Otradnoe.  What  would  she 
not  have  given  to  bring  back  one  single  day  of  that  time!  But  it  was  all 
over  for  ever.  Her  presentiment  at  the  time  had  not  deceived  her,  that 
such  a  time  of  freedom  and  readiness  for  every  enjoyment  would  never 
come  again.  But  yet  she  had  to  live. 

It  comforted  her  to  think,  not  that  she  was  better,  as  she  had  once 
fancied,  but  worse,  far  worse  than  any  one,  than  any  one  in  the  whole 
world.  But  that  meant  little  to  her.  She  believed  it;  but  then  she  asked: 
‘And  what  next?’  And  there  was  nothing  to  come.  There  was  no  gladness  in 
life,  but  life  was  passing.  All  Natasha  tried  after  was  plainly  to  be  no 
burden  to  others,  and  not  to  hinder  other  people’s  enjoyment;  but  for 
herself  she  wanted  nothing.  She  held  aloof  from  all  the  household.  It 
was  only  with  her  brother,  Petya,  that  she  felt  at  ease.  She  liked  being 
with  him  better  than  being  with  the  rest,  and  sometimes  even  laughed 
when  she  was  alone  with  him.  She  hardly  left  the  house  to  go  anywhere; 
and  of  the  guests  who  came  to  the  house  she  was  only  glad  to  see  one 
person — Pierre.  No  one  could  have  been  more  tender,  circumspect,  and  J 
at  the  same  time  serious,  than  Count  Bezuhov  in  his  manner  to  her. 
Natasha  was  unconsciously  aware  of  this  tenderness,  and  it  was  owing  to 
it  that  she  found  more  pleasure  in  his  society.  But  she  was  not  even  ' 
grateful  to  him  for  it.  Nothing  good  in  him  seemed  to  her  due  to  an 
effort  on  Pierre’s  part.  It  seemed  so  natural  to  Pierre  to  be  kind  that  there  ; 
was  no  merit  in  his  kindness.  Sometimes  Natasha  noticed  some  confusion 
or  awkwardness  in  Pierre  in  her  presence,  especially  when  he  was  trying 
to  do  something  for  her  pleasure  or  afraid  something  in  the  conversation 
might  suggest  to  her  painful  reminiscences.  She  observed  this,  and  put 
it  down  to  his  general  kindliness  and  shyness,  which  she  supposed  would  be 
the  same  with  every  one  else.  Ever  since  those  unforeseen  words — that 
if  he  had  been  free,  he  would  have  asked  on  his  knees  for  her  hand  and 
her  love — uttered  in  a  moment  full  of  violent  emotion  for  her,  Pierre  had 
said  nothing  of  his  feelings  to  Natasha;  and  it  seemed  to  her  clear  that 
those  words,  which  had  so  comforted  her,  had  been  uttered,  just  as  one 
says  any  meaningless  nonsense  to  console  a  weeping  child.  It  was  not 
because  Pierre  was  a  married  man,  but  because  Natasha  felt  between 
herself  and  him  the  force  of  that  moral  barrier — of  the  absence  of  which 
she  had  been  so  conscious  with  Kuragin — that  the  idea  never  occurred 
to  her  that  her  relations  with  Pierre  might  develop  into  love  on  her  side, 
and  still  less  on  his,  or  even  into  that  tender,  self-conscious,  romantic 
friendship  between  a  man  and  a  woman,  of  which  she  had  known  several 
instances. 

Towards  the  end  of  St.  Peter’s  fast,  Agrafena  Ivanovna  Byelov,  a 
country  neighbour  of  the  Rostovs,  came  to  Moscow  to  pay  her  devotions 
to  the  saints  there.  She  suggested  to  Natasha  that  she  should  prepare 
herself  for  the  Sacrament,  and  Natasha  caught  eagerly  at  the  suggestion. 
Although  the  doctors  forbade  her  going  out  early  in  the  morning,  Natasha 


621 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

insisted  on  keeping  the  fast,  and  not  simply  as  it  was  kept  in  the  Rostovs’ 
household,  by  taking  part  in  three  services  in  the  house,  but  keeping 
it  as  Agrafena  Ivanovna  was  doing,  that  is  to  say,  for  a  whole  week,  not 
missing  a  single  early  morning  service,  or  litany,  or  vesper. 

The  countess  was  pleased  at  these  signs  of  religious  fervour  in  Natasha. 
After  the  poor  results  of  medical  treatment,  at  the  bottom  of  her  heart 
she  hoped  that  prayer  would  do  more  for  her  than  medicine;  and  though 
she  concealed  it  from  the  doctors  and  had  some  inward  misgivings,  she 
fell  in  with  Natasha’s  wishes,  and  intrusted  her  to  Madame  Byelov. 

Agrafena  Ivanovna  went  in  to  wake  Natasha  at  three  o’clock  in  the 
night,  and  frequently  found  her  not  asleep.  Natasha  wras  afraid  of  sleeping 
too  late  for  the  early  morning  service.  Hurriedly  washing,  and  in  all 
humility  putting  on  her  shabbiest  dress  and  old  mantle,  Natasha,  shud¬ 
dering  at  the  chill  air,  went  out  into  the  deserted  streets,  in  the  limpid 
light  of  the  early  dawn.  By  the  advice  of  Agrafena  Ivanovna,  Natasha 
did  not  attend  the  services  of  her  own  parish  church,  but  went  to  a  church 
where  the  priest  was  esteemed  by  the  devout  Madame  Byelov  as  being 
of  a  particularly  severe  and  exemplary  life.  There  were  few  people  in  the 
church.  Natasha  and  Madame  Byelov  always  took  the  same  seat  before 
an  image  of  the  Mother  of  God,  carved  at  the  back  of  the  left  choir;  and 
a  new  feeling  of  humility  before  the  great  mystery  came  over  Natasha, 
as  at  that  unusual  hour  in  the  morning  she  gazed  at  the  black  outline 
of  the  Mother  of  God,  with  the  light  of  the  candles  burning  in  front 
of  it,  and  the  morning  light  falling  on  it  from  the  window.  She  listened 
to  the  words  of  the  service,  and  tried  to  follow  and  understand  them. 
When  she  did  understand  them,  all  the  shades  of  her  personal  feeling 
blended  with  her  prayer;  when  she  did  not  understand,  it  was  still  sweeter 
for  her  to  think  that  the  desire  to  understand  all  was  pride,  that  she 
could  not  comprehend  all;  that  she  had  but  to  believe  and  give  herself 
up  to  God,  Who  was,  she  felt,  at  those  moments  guiding  her  soul.  She 
crossed  herself,  bowed  to  the  ground,  and  when  she  did  not  follow,  simply 
prayed  to  God  to  forgive  her  everything,  everything,  and  to  have  mercy 
on  her,  in  horror  at  her  own  vileness.  The  prayer  into  which  she  threw 
herself  heart  and  soul  was  the  prayer  of  repentance.  On  the  way  home 
in  the  early  morning,  when  they  met  no  one  but  masons  going  to  their 
work,  or  porters  cleaning  the  streets,  and  every  one  was  asleep  in  the 
houses,  Natasha  had  a  new  sense  of  the  possibility  of  correcting  herself 
of  her  sins  and  leading  a  new  life  of  purity  and  happiness. 

During  the  week  she  spent  in  this  way,  that  feeling  grew  stronger  with 
every  day.  And  the  joy  of  ‘communication,’  as  Agrafena  Ivanovna  liked  to 
call  taking  the  Communion,  seemed  to  her  so  great  that  she  fancied  she 
could  not  live  till  that  blissful  Sunday. 

But  the  happy  day  did  come.  And  when  on  that  memorable  Sunday 
Natasha  returned  from  the  Sacrament  wearing  a  white  muslin  dress,  for 
the  first  time  for  many  months  she  felt  at  peace,  and  not  oppressed  by  the 
life  that  lay  before  her. 

The  doctor  came  that  day  to  see  Natasha,  and  gave  directions  for 


622 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

the  powders  to  be  continued  that  he  had  begun  prescribing  a  fortnight 
ago.  'She  must  certainly  go  on  taking  them  morning  and  evening,’  he  said, 
with  visible  and  simple-hearted  satisfaction  at  the  success  of  his  treat¬ 
ment.  ‘Please,  don't  forget  them.  You  may  set  your  mind  at  rest,  countess,’ 
the  doctor  said  playfully,  as  he  deftly  received  the  gold  in  the  hollow  of 
his  palm.  ‘She  will  soon  be  singing  and  dancing  again.  The  last  medicine 
has  done  her  great,  great  good.  She  is  very  much  better.’ 

The  countess  looked  at  her  finger-nails  and  spat,  to  avert  the  ill-omen 
of  such  words,  as  with  a  cheerful  face  she  went  back  to  the  drawing-room. 


XVIII 

At  the  beginning  of  July  the  rumours  as  to  the  progress  of  the  war  current 
in  Moscow  became  more  and  more  alarming;  and  there  was  talk  of  the 
Tsar’s  appeal  to  the  people,  and  the  Tsar  himself  was  said  to  be  coming 
from  the  army  to  Moscow.  And  as  up  to  the  nth  of  July  the  manifesto 
and  appeal  to  the  people  had  not  been  received,  the  most  exaggerated 
reports  about  them  and  the  position  of  Russia  were  common.  It  was  said 
that  the  Tsar  was  coming  away  because  the  army  was  in  danger;  it  was 
said  that  Smolensk  had  surrendered;  that  Napoleon  had  millions  of 
troops,  and  that  nothing  short  of  a  miracle  could  save  Russia. 

On  Saturday,  the  i  ith  of  July,  the  manifesto  was  received,  but  was  not 
yet  in  print;  and  Pierre,  who  happened  to  be  at  the  Rostovs’,  promised  to 
come  next  day,  Sunday,  to  dinner,  and  to  bring  the  manifesto,  which  he 
could  obtain  from  Count  Rastoptchin. 

That  Sunday  the  Rostovs  attended  service  as  usual  in  the  private 
chapel  of  the  Razumovskys.  It  was  a  hot  July  day.  Even  by  ten  o’clock, 
when  the  Rostovs  got  out  of  their  carriage  before  the  chapel,  the  sultry 
air,  the  shouts  of  the  street  hawkers,  the  gay,  light  summer  dresses  of  the 
crowd,  the  dusty  leaves  of  the  trees  on  the  boulevard,  the  martial  music 
and  white  trousers  of  the  battalion  marching  by  to  parade,  the  rattle 
of  the  pavements,  and  the  brilliant,  hot  sunshine,  were  all  full  of  that 
summer  languor,  that  content  and  discontent  with  the  present,  which 
is  felt  particularly  vividly  on  a  bright,  hot  day  in  town.  All  the  fashionable 
world  of  Moscow,  all  the  Rostovs’  acquaintances  were  in  the  chapel.  A 
great  number  of  wealthy  families,  who  usually  spent  the  summer  in  the 
country,  were  staying  on  in  Moscow  that  year,  as  though  in  vague  antici¬ 
pation  of  something. 

As  Natasha  walked  beside  her  mother,  behind  a  footman  in  livery, 
who  made  way  for  them  through  the  crowd,  she  heard  the  voice  of  some 
young  man  speaking  in  too  loud  a  whisper  about  her: 

‘That’s  the  young  Countess  Rostov,  the  very  girl!’ 

‘She’s  ever  so  much  thinner,  but  still  pretty!’  she  caught,  and  fancied 
that  the  names  of  Kuragin  and  Bolkonsky  were  mentioned.  But  that  was 
always  happening.  She  was  always  fancying  that  any  one  who  looked 
at  her  could  be  thinking  of  nothing  but  what  happened  to  her.  With  a 


WAR  AND  PEACE  623 

sinking  heart,  wretched  as  she  always  was  now  in  a  crowd,  Natasha,  in 
her  lilac  silk  dress,  trimmed  with  black  lace,  walked  on,  as  only  women 
know  how  to  do,  with  an  air  of  ease  and  dignity  all  the  greater  for  the 
pain  and  shame  in  her  heart.  She  knew  for  a  fact  that  she  was  pretty,  but 
that  did  not  give  her  pleasure  now,  as  once  it  had.  On  the  contrary,  it 
had  been  a  source  of  more  misery  than  anything  of  late,  and  especially 
so  on  this  bright,  hot  summer  day  in  town.  ‘Another  Sunday,  another 
week,’  she  said  to  herself,  recalling  how  she  had  been  here  on  that  mem¬ 
orable  Sunday;  ‘and  still  the  same  life  that  is  no  life,  and  still  the  same 
circumstances  in  which  life  used  to  seem  so  easy  once.  Young  and  pretty, 
and  I  know  that  now  I  am  good,  and  before  I  was  wicked!  But  now  I  am 
good,’  she  mused,  ‘but  yet  the  best  years,  the  best  of  my  life,  are  all 
being  wasted,  and  no  good  to  any  one.’  She  stood  by  her  mother’s  side, 
and  nodded  to  the  acquaintances  who  were  standing  near.  From  force 
of  habit  Natasha  scrutinised  the  dresses  of  the  ladies,  and  criticised  the 
tenue  of  a  lady  standing  near  her,  and  the  awkward  and  cramped  way 
in  which  she  was  crossing  herself.  Then  she  thought  with  vexation  that 
she  was  herself  being  criticised  again,  and  was  criticising  others;  and  at 
the  first  sounds  of  the  service  she  was  horrified  at  her  sinfulness,  horrified 
that  her  purity  of  heart  should  be  lost  again. 

A  handsome,  clean-looking  old  priest  read  the  service  with  the  mild 
solemnity  that  has  such  an  elevating  and  soothing  effect  on  the  souls 
of  those  who  pray.  The  sanctuary  doors  were  closed,  the  curtain  was 
slowly  drawn,  and  a  voice,  mysteriously  subdued,  uttered  some  word 
from  it.  Tears,  that  she  could  not  herself  have  explained,  rose  to  Natasha’s 
eyes,  and  a  feeling  of  joyful  agitation  came  upon  her. 

‘Teach  me  what  to  do,  how  to  live  my  life,  how  to  conquer  my  sins  for 
ever,  for  ever!  ’  .  .  .  she  prayed.  The  deacon  came  out  to  the  steps  before 
the  altar  screen;  with  his  thumb  held  out  apart  from  the  rest,  he  pulled 
his  long  hair  out  from  under  his  surplice,  and  laying  the  cross  on  his 
breast,  he  began  in  a  loud  voice  solemnly  reading  the  prayer: 

‘As  one  community  let  us  pray  to  the  Lord.’ 

‘As  one  community,  all  together  without  distinction  of  class,  free  from 
enmity,  all  united  in  brotherly  love,  let  us  pray,’  thought  Natasha. 

‘For  the  world  above  and  the  salvation  of  our  souls!’ 

‘For  the  world  of  angels  and  the  souls  of  all  spiritual  beings  who  live 
above  us,’  prayed  Natasha. 

When  they  prayed  for  the  army,  she  thought  of  her  brother  and 
Denisov.  When  they  prayed  for  all  travelling  by  sea  and  by  land,  she 
thought  of  Prince  Andrey,  and  prayed  for  him,  and  prayed  that  God 
would  forgive  her  the  wrong  she  had  done  him.  When  they  prayed  for 
all  who  love  us,  she  prayed  for  all  her  family,  her  father  and  mother,  and 
Sonya — for  the  first  time  feeling  all  the  shortcomings  in  her  behaviour 
to  them,  and  all  the  strength  of  her  own  love  for  them.  When  they  prayed 
for  those  who  hate  us,  she  tried  to  think  of  enemies,  to  pray  for  them. 
She  reckoned  as  enemies  all  her  father’s  creditors,  and  every  one  who 
had  business  relations  with  him;  and  always  at  the  thought  of  enemies 


624  WARANDPEACE 

who  hated  her  she  thought  of  Anatole,  who  had  done  her  so  cruel  an 
injury,  and  though  he  had  not  hated  her,  she  prayed  gladly  for  him,  as  an- 
enemy.  It  was  only  at  her  prayers  that  she  felt  able  to  think  calmly  and 
clearly  either  of  Prince  Andrey  or  of  Anatole,  with  a  sense  that  her  feelings 
for  them  were  as  nothing  compared  with  her  feeling  of  worship  and  awe 
of  God.  When  they  prayed  for  the  Imperial  family  and  the  Synod,  she 
bowed  and  crossed  herself  more  devoutly  than  ever,  telling  herself  that  if 
she  did  not  comprehend,  she  could  not  doubt,  and  anyway  loved  the 
Holy  Synod  and  prayed  for  it. 

When  the  litany  was  over,  the  deacon  crossed  his  stole  over  his  breast 
and  pronounced: 

‘Ourselves  and  our  life  we  offer  up  to  Christ  the  Lord!  ’ 

‘Ourselves  we  offer  up  to  God,’  Natasha  repeated  in  her  heart.  ‘My 
God,  I  give  myself  unto  Thy  keeping!’  she  thought.  ‘I  ask  for  nothing, 

I  desire  nothing;  teach  me  how  to  act,  how  to  do  Thy  will!  Yes,  take 
me;  take  me  to  Thee!’  Natasha  said,  with  devout  impatience  in  her 
heart.  She  did  not  cross  herself,  but  stood  with  her  thin  arms  hanging  : 
down,  as  though  in  expectation  every  moment  that  an  unseen  force  would 
come  and  carry  her  off  and  rescue  her  from  herself,  from  her  regrets 
and  desires  and  rt  morse  and  hopes  and  sins. 

Several  times  during  the  service  the  countess  looked  round  at  her 
daughter’s  devout  face  and  shining  eyes,  and  prayed  to  God  to  help  her. 

To  the  general  surprise,  in  the  middle  of  the  service,  which  Natasha 
knew  so  well,  the  deacon  brought  forward  the  little  bench,  from  which 
they  repeated  the  prayers,  kneeling,  on  Trinity  Day,  and  set  it  before 
the  sanctuary  doors.  The  priest  advanced  in  his  lilac  velvet  calotte,  threw 
back  his  hair,  and,  with  an  effort,  dropped  on  his  knees.  All  the  congrega¬ 
tion  did  the  same,  looking  at  one  another  in  surprise.  There  followed  the 
prayer,  which  had  just  been  received  from  the  Synod,  the  prayer  for  the 
delivery  of  Russia  out  of  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 

‘Lord  God  of  our  might,  God  of  our  salvation,’  began  the  priest  in  that 
clear,  mild,  unemphatic  voice,  that  is  only  used  by  the  Slavonic  priesthood, 
and  has  such  an  indescribable  effect  on  the  Russian  heart. 

‘Lord  God  of  might,  God  of  our  salvation!  Look  in  grace  and  blessing 
on  Thy  humble  people,  and  hear  with  loving-kindness,  and  spare  and  i 
have  mercy  on  us.  The  foe  is  confounding  Thy  land,  and  is  fain  to  rise 
up  against  all  the  earth  and  lay  it  waste.  These  lawless  men  are  gathered 
together  to  overwhelm  Thy  kingdom,  to  destroy  Thy  holy  Jerusalem,  Thy  I 
beloved  Russia:  to  defile  Thy  temples,  to  overturn  the  altars  and  violate 
our  holy  shrines.  How  long,  O  Lord,  how  long  shall  the  wicked  prevail? 
How  long  shall  they  wreak  their  sinful  will? 

‘Almighty  God!  Hear  us  when  we  pray  to  Thee,  strengthen  with  Thy 
might  our  most  gracious  and  supreme  sovereign,  Emperor  Alexander 
Pavlovitch.  Be  mindful  of  his  truth  and  mercy,  recompense  him  according 
to  his  good  deeds,  and  let  them  preserve  Thy  chosen  Israel.  Bless  his 
counsels,  his  undertakings,  and  his  deeds;  fortify  his  kingdom  with  Thy 
Almighty  hand,  and  vouchsafe  him  victory  over  the  enemy,  even  as 


WAR  AND  PEACE  625 

• 

Thou  gavest  Moses  victory  over  Amalek,  and  Gideon  over  Midian,  and 
David  over  Goliath.  Preserve  his  army;  put  weapons  of  brass  in  the 
hands  that  wage  war  in  Thy  name,  and  gird  them  about  with  strength 
for  the  battle.  Take  Thou  the  lance  and  shield,  and  rise  up  to  succour  us, 
and  put  to  shame  and  to  confusion  them  that  devise  evil  against  us,  and 
let  them  be  scattered  before  the  face  of  Thy  faithful  armament  like  dust 
before  the  wind;  and  may  Thy  mighty  angel  put  them  to  flight  and  to 
confusion.  And  let  the  net  ensnare  them  when  they  wot  not  of  it,  and 
their  plots  that  they  have  hatched  in  secret  be  turned  against  them.  And 
let  them  be  laid  low  before  the  feet  of  Thy  servants  and  vanquished  by 
our  hosts.  Lord!  it  is  nought  for  Thee  to  save  both  great  and  small.  Thou 
art  God,  and  man  can  do  nought  against  Thee! 

‘God  of  our  Fathers!  Remember  Thy  mercy  and  loving-kindness,  tha^ 
are  everlasting.  Turn  not  Thy  face  away  from  us;  be  gracious  to  our 
unworthiness;  but  in  the  greatness  of  Thy  mercy  and  the  infinity  of  Thy 
goodness,  overlook  our  transgressions  and  our  iniquities.  Purify  our 
hearts,  and  renew  the  true  spirit  within  us;  strengthen  us  all  by  faith  in 
Thee;  fortify  us  with  hope;  breathe  into  us  true  love  for  one  another; 
arm  us  with  unity  of  spirit  in  the  righteous  defence  of  the  heritage  Thou 
hast  given  us  and  our  fathers;  and  let  not  the  sceptre  of  the  unrighteous 
be  exalted  above  the  destinies  of  Thy  holy  people. 

‘O  Lord  our  God,  in  Whom  we  believe,  and  in  Whom  we  put  our  trust, 
let  us  not  be  confounded  in  our  faith  in  Thy  mercy,  and  give  us  a  sign 
for  our  blessing  that  they  that  hate  us  and  our  holy  faith  may  see  it  and 
be  put  to  shame  and  confusion,  and  that  all  lands  may  know  that  the 
Lord  is  Thy  Name,  and  we  are  Thy  people.  Show  Thy  mercy  upon  us 
this  day,  O  Lord,  and  grant  us  Thy  salvation.  Rejoice  the  hearts  of  Thy 
servants  with  Thy  mercy;  strike  down  our  enemies  and  trample  them 
swiftly  under  the  feet  of  Thy  faithful.  Thou  art  the  defence,  the  succour, 
and  the  victory  of  them  that  put  their  trust  in  Thee;  and  to  Thee  be  the 
glory,  to  Father,  and  to  Son,  and  to  Holy  Ghost,  now  and  ever  has  been, 
for  ever  and  ever.  Amen!  ’ 

In  Natasha’s  religiously  impressionable  state,  this  prayer  affected  her 
strongly.  She  heard  every  word  about  Moses's  victory  over  Amalek,  and 
Gideon’s  over  Midian,  and  David’s  over  Goliath,  and  about  the  destruc¬ 
tion  of  Thy  Jerusalem;  and  she  prayed  to  God  with  all  the  tenderness  and 
fervour  with  which  her  heart  was  overflowing,  but  she  had  no  distinct 
idea  what  she  was  asking  for  in  this  prayer.  With  all  her  soul  she  joined 
in  the  petition  for  the  true  spirit,  for  the  strengthening  of  hearts  with 
faith  and  hope,  and  the  breathing  into  them  of  love.  But  she  could  not  pray 
for  the  trampling  of  her  enemies  underfoot,  when  she  had  only  a  few 
minutes  before  been  wishing  she  had  more  of  them  to  forgive  and  pray 
for.  But  yet  she  could  have  no  doubts  of  the  righteousness  of  this  prayer 
that  had  been  read  by  the  priest  on  his  knees.  She  felt  in  her  heart  a  thrill 
of  awe  and  horror  at  the  punishment  in  store  for  men’s  sins,  and  especially 
for  her  sins,  and  prayed  to  God  to  forgive  them  all,  and  her  too,  and  give 


626  WAR  AND  PEACE 

them  all  and  her  peace  and  happiness.  And  it  seemed  to  her  that  God 
heard  her  prayer. 


XIX 

Ever  since  the  day  when  Pierre  had  looked  up  at  the  comet  in  the  sky, 
on  his  way  home  from  the  Rostovs’,  and  recalling  Natasha’s  grateful 
look,  had  felt  as  though  some  new  vista  was  opening  before  him,  the 
haunting  problem  of  the  vanity  and  senselessness  of  all  things  earthly 
had  ceased  to  torment  him.  That  terrible  question:  Why?  what  for? 
which  had  till  then  haunted  him  in  the  midst  of  every  occupation,  was 
not  now  replaced  by  any  other  question,  nor  by  an  answer  to  the  old 
question;  its  place  was  filled  by  the  image  of  her.  If  he  heard  or  talked 
of  trivialities,  or  read  or  was  told  of  some  instance  of  human  baseness 
or  folly,  he  was  not  cast  down  as  of  old;  he  did  not  ask  himself  why  people 
troubled,  when  all  was  so  brief  and  uncertain.  But  he  thought  of  her  as 
he  had  seen  her  last,  and  all  his  doubts  vanished;  not  because  she  had 
answered  the  questions  that  haunted  him,  but  because  her  image  lifted 
him  instantly  into  another  bright  realm  of  spiritual  activity,  in  which 
there  could  be  neither  right  nor  wrong,  into  a  region  of  beauty  and  love, 
which  was  worth  living  for.  Whatever  infamy  he  thought  of,  he  said 
to  himself,  ‘Well,  let  so  and  so  rob  the  state  and  the  Tsar,  while  the  state 
and  the  Tsar  heap  honours  on  him;  but  she  smiled  at  me  yesterday,  and 
begged  me  to  come,  and  I  love  her,  and  nobody  will  ever  know  it,’  he 
thought. 

Pierre  still  went  into  society,  drank  as  much,  and  led  the  same  idle 
and  aimless  life,  because,  apart  from  the  hours  he  spent  at  the  Rostovs’, 
he  had  to  get  through  the  rest  of  his  time  somehow,  and  the  habits  and 
the  acquaintances  he  had  made  in  Moscow  drew  him  irresistibly  into 
the  same  life.  But  of  late,  since  the  reports  from  the  seat  of  war  had 
become  more  and  more  disquieting,  and  Natasha’s  health  had  improved, 
and  she  had  ceased  to  call  for  the  same  tender  pity,  he  had  begun  to 
be  more  and  more  possessed  by  a  restlessness  that  he  could  not  explain. 
He  felt  that  the  position  he  was  in  could  not  go  on  for  long,  that  a 
catastrophe  was  coming  that  would  change  the  whole  course  of  his  life, 
and  he  sought  impatiently  for  signs  of  this  impending  catastrophe.  One 
of  his  brother  masons  had  revealed  to  Pierre  the  following  prophecy 
relating  to  Napoleon,  and  taken  from  the  Apocalypse  of  St.  John. 

In  the  Apocalypse,  chapter  thirteen,  verse  seventeen,  it  is  written:  ‘Here 
is  wisdom;  let  him  that  hath  understanding,  count  the  number  of  the 
beast;  for  it  is  the  number  of  a  man,  and  his  number  is  six  hundred  three¬ 
score  and  six.’ 

And  in  the  fifth  verse  of  the  same  chapter:  ‘And  there  was  given  unto 
him  a  mouth  speaking  great  things  and  blasphemies,  and  power  was 
given  unto  him  to  continue  forty  and  two  months.’ 

If  the  French  alphabet  is  treated  like  the  Hebrew  system  of  enumera- 


WARANDPEACE  627 

tion,  by  which  the  first  ten  letters  represent  the  units,  and  the  next  the 
tens,  and  so  on,  the  letters  have  the  following  value: — - 

abcdefghiklmnopqrst  u  vw  x  y  z 
1  23456789  10  2c  30  40  50  60  70  80  90  100  no  120130140  150  1 6c 

Turning  out  the  words  Vempereur  Napoleon  into  ciphers  on  this  system, 
it  happens  that  the  sum  of  these  numbers  equals  666,  and  Napoleon  is 
thereby  seen  to  be  the  beast  prophesied  in  the  Apocalypse.  Moreover, 
working  out  in  the  same  way  the  words  quarante-deux,  that  is,  the  term 
for  which  the  beast  was  permitted  to  continue,  the  sum  of  these  numbers 
again  equals  666,  from  which  it  is  deduced  that  the  terms  of  Napoleon’s 
power  had  come  in  1812,  when  the  French  Emperor  reached  his  forty- 
second  year.  This  prophecy  made  a  great  impression  on  Pierre.  He  fre¬ 
quently  asked  himself  what  would  put  an  end  to  the  power  of  the  beast, 
that  is,  of  Napoleon;  and  he  tried  by  the  same  system  of  turning  letters 
into  figures,  and  reckoning  them  up  to  find  an  answer  to  this  question. 
He  wrote  down  as  an  answer,  Vempereur  Alexandre?  La  nation  russe? 
He  reckoned  out  the  figures,  but  their  sum  was  far  more  or  less  than  666. 
Once  he  wrote  down  his  own  name  ‘Comte  Pierre  Bezuhov,’  but  the 
sum  of  the  figure  was  far  from  being  right.  He  changed  the  spelling,  put¬ 
ting  s  for  z,  added  ‘de,’  added  the  article  ‘le,’  and  still  could  not  obtain 
the  desired  result.  Then  it  occurred  to  him  that  if  the  answer  sought  for 
were  to  be  found  in  his  name,  his  nationality  ought  surely  to  find  a  place 
in  it  too.  He  tried  Le  russe  Besuhof,  and  adding  up  the  figure  made  the 
sum  671.  This  was  only  five  too  much;  the  5  was  denoted  by  the  letter 
‘e,’  the  letter  dropped  in  the  article  in  the  expression  Vempereur  Napoleon. 
Dropping  the  ‘e’  in  a  similar  wray,  though  of  course  incorrectly,  Pierre 
obtained  the  answer  he  sought  in  L’russc  Besuhof,  the  letters  of  which 
on  that  system  added  up  to  666.  This  discovery  greatly  excited  him.  How, 
by  what  connection,  he  was  associated  with  the  great  event  foretold  in 
the  Apocalypse,  he  could  not  tell.  But  he  did  not  for  a  moment  doubt 
of  that  connection.  His  love  for  Natasha,  Antichrist,  Napoleon’s  invasion, 
the  comet,  the  number  666,  Vempereur  Napoleon,  and  Vrusse  Besuhof — 
all  he  thought  were  to  develop,  and  come  to  some  crisis  together  to  ex¬ 
tricate  him  from  that  spellbound,  trivial  round  of  Moscow  habits,  to 
which  he  felt  himself  in  bondage,  and  to  lead  him  to  some  great  achieve¬ 
ment  and  great  happiness. 

The  day  before  that  Sunday  on  which  the  new  prayer  had  been  read 
in  the  churches,  Pierre  had  promised  the  Rostovs  to  call  on  Count 
Rastoptchin,  w'hom  he  knew  well,  and  to  get  from  him  the  Tsar’s  appeal 
to  the  country,  and  the  last  news  from  the  army.  On  going  to  Count 
Rastoptchin’s  in  the  morning,  Pierre  found  there  a  special  courier,  who 
had  only  just  arrived  from  the  army.  The  courier  was  a  man  whom 
Pierre  knew,  and  often  saw  at  the  Moscow  balls. 

‘For  mercy’s  sake,  couldn’t  you  relieve  me  of  some  of  my  burden,’  said 
the  courier;  ‘I  have  a  sack  full  of  letters  to  parents.’ 


628 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


Among  these  letters  was  a  letter  from  Nikolay  Rostov  to  his  father. 
Pierre  took  that ;  and  Count  Rastoptchin  gave  him  a  copy  of  the  Tsar’s 
appeal  to  Moscow,  which  had  just  been  printed,  the  last  announcements 
in  the  army,  and  his  own  last  placard.  Looking  through  the  army  an¬ 
nouncements,  Pierre  found  in  one  of  them,  among  lists  of  wounded,  killed 
and  promoted,  the  name  of  Nikolay  Rostov,  rewarded  with  the  order  of 
St.  George,  of  the  fourth  degree,  for  distinguished  bravery  in  the  Ostrovna 
affair,  and  in  the  same  announcement  the  appointment  of  Prince  Andrey 
Bolkonsky  to  the  command  of  a  regiment  of  light  cavalry.  Though  he 
did  not  wa’nt  to  remind  the  Rostovs  of  Bolkonsky’s  existence,  Pierre 
could  not  resist  the  inclination  to  rejoice  their  hearts  with  the  news  of 
their  son’s  decoration.  Keeping  the  Tsar’s  appeal,  Rastoptchin’s  placard, 
and  the  other  announcement  to  bring  with  him  at  dinner-time,  Pierre  sent 
the  printed  announcement  and  Nikolay’s  letter  to  the  Rostovs. 

The  conversation  with  Rastoptchin,  and  his  tone  of  anxiety  and  hurry, 
the  meeting  with  the  courier,  who  had  casually  alluded  to  the  disastrous 
state  of  affairs  in  the  army,  the  rumours  of  spies  being  caught  in  Moscow, 
of  a  sheet  circulating  in  the  town  stating  that  Napoleon  had  sworn  to  be  in 
both  capitals  before  autumn,  of  the  Tsar’s  expected  arrival  next  day — 
all  combined  to  revive  in  Pierre  with  fresh  intensity  that  feeling  of  excite¬ 
ment  and  expectation,  that  he  had  been  conscious  of  ever  since  the 
appearance  of  the  comet,  and  with  even  greater  force  since  the  beginning 
of  the  war. 

The  idea  of  entering  the  army  had  long  before  occurred  to  Pierre,  and 
he  would  have  acted  upon  it,  but  that,  in  the  first  place,  he  was  pledged 
by  his  vow  to  the  Masonic  brotherhood,  which  preached  universal  peace 
and  the  abolition  of  war;  and  secondly,  when  he  looked  at  the  great 
mass  of  Moscow  gentlemen,  who  put  on  uniforms,  and  professed  them¬ 
selves  patriots,  he  felt  somehow  ashamed  to  take  the  same  step.  A  cause  ; 
that  weighed  with  him  even  more  in  not  entering  the  army  was  the 
obscure  conception  that  he,  Vrusse  Besuhoj,  had  somehow  the  mystic 
value  of  the  number  of  the  beast,  666,  that  his  share  in  putting  a  limit 
to  the  power  of  the  beast,  ‘speaking  great  things  and  blasphemies,’  had 
been  ordained  from  all  eternity,  and  that  therefore  it  was  not  for  him  to 
take  any  step  whatever ;  it  was  for  him  to  wait  for  what  was  bound  to  come 
to  pass. 

XX 

A  few  intimate  friends  were,  as  usual  on  Sundays,  dining  with  the 
Rostovs. 

Pierre  came  early,  hoping  to  find  them  alone. 

Pierre  had  that  year  grown  so  stout,  that  he  would  have  been  grotesque, 
had  not  he  been  so  tall,  so  broad-shouldered,  and  so  powerfully  built  that 
he  carried  off  his  bulky  proportions  with  evident  ease. 

Puffing,  and  muttering  something  to  himself,  he  went  up  the  stairs. 
His  coachman  did  not  even  ask  whether  he  should  wait.  He  knew  that 


WAR  AND  PEACE  629 

when  the  count  was  at  the  Rostovs’,  it  was  till  midnight.  The  Rostovs’ 
i  footmen  ran  with  eager  welcome  to  take  off  his  cloak,  and  take  his  stick 
:  and  hat.  From  the  habit  of  the  club,  Pierre  always  left  his  stick  and  hat 
(  in  the  vestibule. 

The  first  person  he  saw  at  the  Rostovs’  was  Natasha.  Before  he  saw 
her,  while  taking  off  his  cloak,  he  heard  her.  She  was  practising  her  sol-fa 
exercises  in  the  hall.  He  knew  she  had  given  up  singing  since  her  illness, 
and  so  he  was  surprised  and  delighted  at  the  sound  of  her  voice.  He 
opened  the  door  softly,  and  sawr  Natasha,  in  the  lilac  dress  she  had 
worn  at  the  service,  walking  up  and  down  the  room  singing.  She  had  her 
back  turned  to  him  as  he  opened  the  door;  but  when  she  turned  sharply 
round  and  saw  his  broad,  surprised  face,  she  flushed  and  ran  quickly 
up  to  him. 

‘I  want  to  try  and  sing  again,’  she  said.  ‘It’s  something  to  do,  any  way,’ 
she  added  as  though  in  excuse. 

‘Quite  right  too! ’ 

‘How  glad  I  am  you  have  come!  I’m  so  happy  to-day,’  she  said  writh 
the  old  eagerness  that  Pierre  had  not  seen  for  so  long.  ‘You  know, 
Nikolenka  has  got  the  St.  George’s  Cross.  I’m  so  proud  of  him.’ 

‘Of  course,  I  sent  you  the  announcement.  Well,  I  won’t  interrupt  you,’ 
he  added,  and  would  have  gone  on  to  the  drawing-room. 

Natasha  stopped  him. 

‘Count,  is  it  wrong  of  me  to  sing?'  she  said,  blushing,  but  still  keeping 
her  eyes  fixed  inquiringly  on  Pierre. 

‘No.  .  .  .  W’hy  should  it  be?  On  the  contrary.  .  .  .  But  why  do  you 
ask  me?’ 

‘I  don’t  know  myself,’  Natasha  answered  quickly;  ‘but  I  shouldn’t  like 
to  do  anything  you  wouldn’t  like.  I  trust  you  in  everything.  You  don’t 
know  how  much  you  are  to  me,  and  what  a  great  deal  you  have  done 
for  me!’  .  .  .  She  spoke  quickly,  and  did  not  notice  how  Pierre  flushed 
at  these  words.  ‘I  saw  in  that  announcement,  he,  Bolkonsky’  (she  uttered 
the  word  in  a  rapid  whisper),  ‘he  is  in  Russia,  and  in  the  army  again. 
What  do  you  think,’  she  said  hurriedly,  evidently  in  haste  to  speak  be¬ 
cause  she  was  afraid  her  strength  would  fail  her,  ‘will  he  ever  forgive 
me?  Will  he  not  always  have  an  evil  feeling  for  me?  What  do  you  think? 
What  do  you  think?’ 

‘1  think  .  .  .’  said  Pierre.  ‘He  has  nothing  to  forgive  ...  If  I  were 
in  his  place  .  .  .’  From  association  of  ideas,  Pierre  was  instantly  carried 
back  in  imagination  to  the  time  when  he  had  comforted  her  by  saying 
that  if  he  were  not  himself,  but  the  best  man  in  the  world  and  free,  he 
would  beg  on  his  knees  for  her  hand,  and  the  same  feeling  of  pity,  tender¬ 
ness,  and  love  took  possession  of  him,  and  the  same  words  rose  to  his 
lips.  But  she  did  not  give  him  time  to  utter  them. 

‘Yes,  you — you,’  she  said,  uttering  that  word  you  with  enthusiasm, 
‘that’s  a  different  matter.  Any  one  kinder,  more  generous  than  you,  I 
have  never  known — no  one  could  be.  If  it  had  not  been  for  you  then,  and 
now  too  .  .  .  I  don’t  know  what  would  have  become  of  me,  because  .  .  .’ 


630  WARANDPEACE 

Tears  suddenly  came  into  her  eyes:  she  turned  away,  held  her  music 
before  her  eyes,  and  began  again  singing  and  walking  up  and  down  the 
room. 

At  that  moment  Petya  ran  in  from  the  drawing-room. 

Petya  was  by  now  a  handsome,  rosy  lad  of  fifteen,  with  full  red  lips,  ! 
very  like  Natasha.  Pie  was  being  prepared  for  the  university,  but  had 
lately  resolved  in  secret  with  his  comrade,  Obolensky,  to  go  into  the 
hussars. 

Petya  rushed  up  to  his  namesake,  Pierre,  to  talk  to  him  of  this  scheme. 

He  had  begged  him  to  find  out  whether  he  would  be  accepted  in  the  i 
hussars. 

Pierre  walked  about  the  drawing-room,  not  heeding  Petya. 

The  boy  pulled  him  by  the  arm  to  attract  his  attention. 

‘Come,  tell  me  about  my  plan,  Pyotr  Kirillitch,  for  mercy’s  sake!  You’re 
my  only  hope,’  said  Petya. 

‘Oh  yes,  your  plan.  To  be  an  hussar?  I’ll  speak  about  it;  to-day  I’ll 
tell  them  all  about  it.’ 

‘Well,  my  dear  fellow,  have  you  got  the  manifesto?’  asked  the  old 
count.  ‘My  little  countess  was  at  the  service  in  the  Razumovskys’  chapel; 
she  heard  the  new  prayer  there.  Very  fine  it  was,  she  tells  me.’ 

‘Yes,  I  have  got  it,’  answered  Pierre.  ‘The  Tsar  will  be  here  to¬ 
morrow.  „  .  .  There’s  to  be  an  extraordinary  meeting  of  the  nobility  and 
a  levy  they  say  of  ten  per  thousand.  Oh,  I  congratulate  you.’ 

‘Yes,  yes,  thank  God.  Well,  and  what  news  from  the  army?’ 

‘Our  soldiers  have  retreated  again.  They  are  before  Smolensk,  they 
say,’  answered  Pierre. 

‘Mercy  on  us,  mercy  on  us!’  said  the  count.  ‘Where’s  the  manifesto?’ 

‘The  Tsar’s  appeal?  Ah,  yes!’  Pierre  began  looking  for  the  papers  in 
his  pockets,  and  could  not  find  them.  Still  slapping  his  pockets,  he  kissed 
the  countess’s  hand  as  she  came  in,  and  looked  round  uneasily,  evidently 
expecting  Natasha,  who  had  left  off  singing  now,  but  had  not  come  into 
the  drawing-room.  ‘Good  Heavens,  I  don’t  know  where  I  have  put  it,’ 
he  said. 

‘To  be  sure,  he  always  mislays  everything,’  said  the  countess. 

Natasha  came  in  with  a  softened  and  agitated  face  and  sat  down,  ; 
looking  mutely  at  Pierre.  As  soon  as  she  came  into  the  room,  Pierre’s 
face,  which  had  been  overcast,  brightened,  and  while  still  seeking  for 
the  paper,  he  looked  several  times  intently  at  her. 

‘By  God,  I’ll  drive  round,  I  must  have  forgotten  them  at  home.  Of 
course  .  ...’ 

‘Why,  you  will  be  late  for  dinner.’ 

‘Oh!  and  the  coachman  has  not  waited.’ 

But  Sonya  had  gone  into  the  vestibule  to  look  for  the  papers,  and 
there  found  them  in  Pierre’s  hat,  where  he  had  carefully  put  them  under 
the  lining.  Pierre  would  have  read  them. 

‘No,  after  dinner,’  said  the  old  count,  who  was  obviously  looking 
forward  to  the  reading  of  them  as  a  great  treat. 


WARANDPEACE  631 

At  dinner  they  drank  champagne  to  the  health  of  the  new  cavalier  of 
St.  George,  and  Shinshin  told  them  of  the  news  of  the  town,  of  the  illness 
of  the  old  Georgian  princess,  and  of  the  disappearance  of  Metivier  from 
Moscow,  and  described  how  a  German  had  been  brought  before  Ras- 
toptchin  by  the  people,  who  declared  (so  Count  Rastoptchin  told  the 
story)  that  he  was  a  champignon,  and  how  Count  Rastoptchin  had  bade 
them  let  the  champignon  go,  as  he  was  really  nothing  but  an  old  German 
mushroom. 

‘They  keep  on  seizing  people,’  said  the  count.  ‘I  tell  the  countess  she 
ought  not  to  speak  French  so  much.  Now’s  not  the  time  to  do  it.’ 

‘And  did  you  hear,’  said  Shinshin,  ‘Prince  Galitzin  has  engaged  a 
Russian  teacher — he’s  learning  Russian.  It  begins  to  be  dangerous  to 
speak  French  in  the  streets.’ 

‘Well,  Count  Pyotr  Kirillitch,  now  if  they  raise  a  general  militia,  you 
will  have  to  mount  a  horse  too,  ah?’  said  the  old  count  addressing  Pierre. 

Pierre  was  dreamy  and  silent  all  dinner-time.  He  looked  at  the  count 
as  though  not  understanding. 

‘Yes,  yes,  for  the  war,’  he  said.  ‘No!  A  fine  soldier  I  should  make!  And 
yet  everything’s  so  strange;  so  strange!  Why,  I  don’t  understand  it  myself. 
I  don’t  know,  I  am  far  from  being  military  in  my  taste,  but  in  these  days 
no  one  can  answer  for  himself.’ 

After  dinner  the  count  settled  himself  comfortably  in  a  low  chair,  and 
with  a  serious  face  asked  Sonya,  who  enjoyed  the  reputation  of  a  good 
reader,  to  read  the  Tsar’s  appeal. 

‘To  our  metropolitan  capital  Moscow.  The  enemy  has  entered  our 
border  with  an  immense  host  and  comes  to  lay  waste  our  beloved  country,’ 
Sonya  read  conscientiously  in  her  thin  voice.  The  count  listened  with 
closed  eyes,  heaving  abrupt  sighs  at  certain  passages. 

Natasha  sat  erect,  looking  inquisitively  and  directly  from  her  father 
to  Pierre. 

Pierre  felt  her  eyes  on  him  and  tried  not  to  look  round.  The  countess 
shook  her  head  disapprovingly  and  wrath  fully  at  every  solemn  expression 
in  the  manifesto.  In  all  these  words  she  saw  nothing  but  that  the  danger 
menacing  her  son  would  not  soon  be  over.  Shinshin,  pursing  his  lips  up 
into  a  sarcastic  smile,  was  clearly  preparing  to  make  a  joke  at  the  first 
subject  that  presented  itself:  at  Sonya’s  reading,  the  count’s  next  remark, 
or  even  the  manifesto  itself,  if  no  better  pretext  should  be  found. 

After  reading  of  the  dangers  threatening  Russia,  the  hopes  the  Tsar 
rested  upon  Moscow,  and  particularly  on  its  illustrious  nobility,  Sonya, 
with  a  quiver  in  her  voice,  due  principally  to  the  attention  with  which 
they  were  listening  to  her,  read  the  last  words:  ‘We  shall  without  delay 
be  in  the  midst  of  our  people  in  the  capital,  and  in  other  parts  of  our 
empire,  for  deliberation,  and  for  the  guidance  of  all  our  militia  levies, 
both  those  which  are  already  barring  the  progress  of  the  foe,  and  those 
to  be  formed  for  conflict  with  him,  wherever  he  may  appear.  And  may 
the  ruin  with  which  he  threatens  us  recoil  on  his  own  head,  and  mav 
Europe,  delivered  from  bondage,  glorify  the  name  of  Russia!’ 


632  WARANDPEACE 

‘That’s  right!  ’  cried  the  count,  opening  his  wet  eyes,  and  several  times 
interrupted  by  a  sniff,  as  though  he  had  put  a  bottle  of  strong  smelling- 
salts  to  his  nose.  He  went  on,  ‘Only  let  our  sovereign  say  the  word,  we 
will  sacrifice  everything  without  grudging.’ 

Before  Shinshin  had  time  to  utter  the  joke  he  was  ready  to  make  on 
che  count’s  patriotism,  Natasha  had  jumped  up  from  her  seat  and  run  to 
her  father. 

‘What  a  darling  this  papa  is!’  she  cried,  kissing  him,  and  she  glanced 
again  at  Pierre  with  the  unconscious  coquetry  that  had  come  back  with 
her  fresh  interest  in  life. 

‘Oh,  what  a  patriot  she  is!’  said  Shinshin. 

‘Not  a  patriot  at  all,  but  simply  .  .  .’  Natasha  began,  nettled.  ‘You 
think  everything  funny,  but  this  isn’t  at  all  a  joke  .  .  .’ 

‘A  joke,’  repeated  the  count.  ‘Only  let  him  say  the  word,  we  will  all 
go  .  .  .  We’re  not  a  set  of  Germans!’ 

‘Did  you  notice,’  said  Pierre,  ‘the  words,  “for  deliberation  .  .  ’ 

‘Yes,  to  be  sure,  for  whatever  might  come  .  .  .’  • 

Meanwhile  Petya,  to  whom  no  one  was  paying  attention,  went  up  to 
his  father,  and  very  red,  said  in  a  voice  that  passed  abruptly  from  gruff - 
ness  to  shrillness,  ‘Well,  now,  papa,  I  tell  you  positively — and  mamma 
too,  say  what  you  will — I  tell  you  you  must  let  me  go  into  the  army, 
because  I  cannot  .  .  .  and  that’s  all  about  it.’ 

The  countess  in  dismay  turned  her  eyes  up  to  heaven,  clasped  her 
hands,  and  said  angrily  to  her  husband: 

‘See,  what  your  talk  has  brought  us  to!’ 

But  the  count  recovered  the  same  instant  from  the  excitement. 

‘Come,  come,’  he  said.  ‘A  fine  warrior  you’d  make!  Don’t  talk  non¬ 
sense;  you  have  your  studies  to  attend  to.’ 

‘It’s  not  nonsense,  papa.  Fedya  Obolensky’s  younger  than  I  am,  and 
he’s  going  too;  and  what’s  more,  I  can’t  anyhow  study  now,  when  .  .  .’ 
Petya  stopped,  flushed  till  his  face  was  perspiring,  yet  stoutly  went  on 
.  .  .  ‘when  the  country’s  in  danger.’ 

‘Hush,  hush,  nonsense!  .  .  .’ 

‘Why,  but  you  said  yourself  you  would  sacrifice  everything.’ 

‘Petya!  I  tell  you  be  quiet,’  cried  the  count,  looking  at  his  wife,  who 
was  gazing  with  a  white  face  and  fixed  eyes  at  her  younger  son. 

‘Let  me  say  .  .  .  Pyotr  Kirillovitch  here  will  tell  you  .  .  .’ 

‘I  tell  you,  it’s  nonsense;  the  milk’s  hardly  dry  on  his  lips,  and  he 
wants  to  go  into  the  army!  Come,  come,  I  tell  you,’  and  the  count,  taking 
the  papers  with  him,  was  going  out  of  the  room,  probably  to  read  them 
once  more  in  his  study  before  his  nap. 

‘Pyotr  Kirillovitch,  let  us  have  a  smoke.  .  .  .’ 

Pierre  felt  embarrassed  and  hesitating.  Natasha’s  unusually  brilliant 
and  eager  eyes,  continually  turned  upon  him  with  more  than  cordiality 
in  them,  had  reduced  him  to  this  condition. 

‘No;  I  think  I’ll  go  home.  .  . 

‘Go  home?  But  you  meant  to  spend  the  evening  with  us.  .  .  .  You 


WAR  AND  PEACE  633 

come  rarely  enough,  as  it  is.  And  this  girl  of  mine/  said  the  count  good- 
humouredly,  looking  towards  Natasha,  ‘is  never  in  spirits  but  when  you 
are  here.  .  . 

‘But  I  have  forgotten  something.  I  really  must  go  home.  .  .  .  Busi¬ 
ness.  .  .  .’  Pierre  said  hurriedly. 

‘Well,  good-bye  then,’  said  the  count  as  he  went  out  of  the  room. 

‘Why  are  you  going  away?  Why  are  you  so  upset?  What  for?’  Natasha 
asked  Pierre,  looking  with  challenging  eyes  into  his  face. 

‘Because  I  love  you!’  he  wanted  to  say,  but  he  did  not  say  it.  He 
crimsoned  till  the  tears  came,  and  dropped  his  eyes. 

‘Because  it  is  better  for  me  not  to  be  so  often  with  you.  .  .  .  Because 
.  .  .  no,  simply  I  have  business.  .  .  .’ 

‘What  for?  No,  do  tell  me,’  Natasha  was  beginning  resolutely,  and 
she  suddenly  stopped.  Both  in  dismay  and  embarrassment  looked  at  one 
another.  He  tried  to  laugh,  but  could  not;  his  smile  expressed  suffering, 
and  he  kissed  her  hand  and  went  out  without  a  word. 

Pierre  made  up  his  mind  not  to  visit  the  Rostovs  again. 


XXI 

After  the  uncompromising  refusal  he  had  received,  Petya  went  to  his 
own  room,  and  there  locking  himself  in,  he  wept  bitterly.  All  his  family 
behaved  as  though  they  noticed  nothing  when  he  came  in  to  tea,  silent 
and  depressed  with  tear-stained  eyes. 

Next  day,  the  Tsar  arrived  in  Moscow.  Several  of  the  Rostovs’  serv¬ 
ants  asked  permission  to  go  out  to  see  the  Tsar.  That  morning  Petya 
spent  a  long  time  dressing.  He  combed  his  hair  and  arranged  his  collar 
like  a  grown-up  man.  He  screwed  up  his  eyes  before  the  looking-glass, 
gesticulated,  shrugged  his  shoulders,  and  finally,  without  saying  any¬ 
thing  to  any  one,  he  put  on  his  cap  and  went  out  of  the  house  by  the 
back  way,  trying  to  escape  observation.  Petya  had  resolved  to  go  straight 
to  where  the  Tsar  was,  and  to  explain  frankly  to  some  gentleman-in¬ 
waiting  (Petya  fancied  that  the  Tsar  was  always  surrounded  by  gentle- 
men-in-waiting)  that  he,  Count  Rostov,  wished,  in  spite  of  his  youth, 
to  serve  his  country,  that  youth  could  be  no  hindrance  to  devotion,  and 
that  he  was  ready  .  .  .  Petya  had,  while  he  was  dressing,  prepared  a 
great  many  fine  speeches  to  make  to  the  gentleman-in-waiting. 

Petya  reckoned  on  the  success  of  his  presentation  to  the  Tsar  simply 
because  he  was  a  child  (Petya  dreamed,  indeed,  of  how  they  would 
wonder  at  his  youth),  and  yet  in  his  arrangement  of  his  collar,  and  his 
hair,  and  in  the  sedate,  deliberate  walk  he  adopted,  he  tried  to  act  the 
part  of  an  elderly  man.  But  the  further  he  went,  the  more  interested  he 
became  in  the  growing  crowds  about  the  Kremlin,  and  he  forgot  to  keep 
up  the  sedateness  and  deliberation  characteristic  of  grown-up  people.  As 
he  got  closer  to  the  Kremlin,  he  began  to  try  to  avoid  being  crushed,  and 
with  a  resolute  and  threatening  mien,  stuck  elbows  out  on  each  side  of 


634  WAR  AND  PEACE 

him.  But  in  spite  of  his  determined  air,  in  the  Toistsky  Gate  the  crowd, 
probably  unaware  of  his  patriotic  object  in  going  to  the  Kremlin,  so 
pushed  him  against  the  wall,  that  he  was  obliged  to  submit  and  stand 
still,  while  carriages  drove  in  with  a  rumbling  sound  under  the  archway. 
Near  Petya  stood  a  peasant  woman,  a  footman,  two  merchants,  and  a 
discharged  soldier.  After  standing  for  some  time  in  the  gateway,  Petya, 
not  caring  to  wait  for  all  the  carriages  to  pass,  tried  to  push  on  before 
the  rest,  and  began  resolutely  working  away  with  his  elbows,  but  the 
peasant  woman  standing  next  him,  who  was  the  first  person  he  poked,  ■ 
shouted  angrily  to  him: 

‘Why  are  you  shoving  away,  little  master?  You  see  everybody’s  stand-  , 
ing  still.  What  do  you  want  to  push  for?’ 

‘What,  if  every  one  were  to  push  then!’  said  the  footman;  and  he  too 
setting  to  work  with  his  elbows  shoved  Petya  into  the  stinking  corner 
of  the  gateway. 

Petya  rubbed  the  sweat  off  his  face  with  his  hands,  and  set  straight 
the  soaking  collar,  that  he  had  so  carefully  arranged  at  home  like  a 
grown-up  person’s. 

Petya  felt  that  he  looked  unpresentable,  and  was  afraid  that  if  he 
showed  himself  in  this  guise  to  the  gentlemen-in-waiting,  they  would 
not  admit  him  to  the  Tsar’s  presence.  But  the  crush  gave  him  no  pos¬ 
sibility  of  setting  himself  straight  or  getting  into  another  place.  One  of 
the  generals  who  rode  by  was  an  acquaintance  of  the  Rostovs.  Petya 
wanted  to  ask  him  for  help,  but  considered  this  would  be  below  his 
manly  dignity.  When  all  the  carriages  had  driven  by,  the  crowd  made  a 
rush,  and  swept  Petya  along  with  it  into  the  square,  which  was  already 
full  of  people.  Not  only  in  the  square,  but  on  the  slopes,  and  the  roofs,  I 
and  everywhere  there  were  crowds  of  people.  As  soon  as  Petya  got  into  1 
the  square,  he  heard  the  ringing  of  bells  and  the  joyous  hum  of  the  crowd  i 
filling  the  whole  Kremlin. 

For  a  while  the  crush  was  less  in  the  square,  but  all  at  once  all  heads  ; 
were  bared,  and  there  was  another  rush  forward.  Petya  was  so  crushed 
that  he  could  hardly  breathe,  and  there  was  a  continual  shouting:  ‘Hur¬ 
rah!  hurrah!  hurrah!’ 

Petya  tip-toed,  pushed,  and  pinched,  but  he  could  see  nothing  but  the 
crowd  around  him. 

All  the  faces  wore  the  same  expression  of  excitement  and  enthusiasm. 

A  shopkeeper’s  wife  standing  near  Petya  sobbed,  and  tears  flowed  down  j 
her  cheeks. 

‘Father,  angel!’  she  kept  saying,  wiping  her  tears  with  her  fingers. 

‘Hurrah!’  shouted  the  crowd  on  all  sides. 

For  a  minute  the  crowd  remained  stationary;  then  there  was  another  - 
rush  forward. 

Petya,  beside  himself  with  excitement,  clenched  his  teeth,  and  rolling 
his  eyes  savagely,  rushed  forward,  elbowing  his  way  and  shouting  ‘Hur¬ 
rah  !  ’  as  though  he  were  prepared  to  kill  himself  and  every  one  else  at 


WARANDPEACE  635 

that  moment,  but  just  as  savage  faces  pushed  on  each  side  of  him  with 
the  same  shouts  of  ‘hurrah!’ 

‘So  this  is  the  Tsar!’  thought  Petya.  ‘No,  I  could  never  give  him  the 
petition  myself,  it  would  be  too  bold !  ’ 

In  spite  of  that,  he  still  forced  his  way  forward  as  desperately,  and 
over  the  backs  of  those  in  front  of  him  caught  a  glimpse  of  open  space 
with  a  passage  covered  with  red  cloth  in  the  midst  of  it.  But  at  that 
moment  the  crowd  began  heaving  back;  the  police  in  front  were  forcing 
back  those  who  had  pressed  too  close  to  the  procession.  The  Tsar  was 
passing  from  the  palace  to  the  Uspensky  Sobor.  Petya  received  such  a 
sudden  blow  in  the  ribs,  and  was  so  squeezed,  that  all  at  once  a  mist 
passed  before  his  eyes,  and  he  lost  consciousness.  When  he  came  to 
himself,  a  clerical  personage,  with  a  mane  of  grey  hair  on  his  shoulders, 
in  a  shabbly  blue  cassock — probably  a  deacon — was  holding  him  up 
with  one  arm,  while  with  the  other  he  kept  off  the  crowd. 

‘A  young  gentleman’s  been  crushed!’  the  deacon  was  saying,  ‘Mind 
what  you’re  about!  .  .  .  easy  there!  .  .  .  you’re  crushing  him,  you’re 
crushing  him!’ 

The  Tsar  had  entered  the  Uspensky  Sobor.  The  crowd  spread  out 
again,  and  the  deacon  got  Petya  pale  and  breathless  on  to  the  big  can¬ 
non.  Several  persons  pitied  Petya;  and  suddenly  quite  a  crowd  noticed 
his  plight,  and  began  to  press  round  him.  Those  who  were  standing  near 
him  looked  after  him,  unbuttoned  his  coat,  sat  him  on  the  highest  part 
of  the  cannon,  and  scolded  those  who  were  squeezing  too  close  to  him. 

‘Any  one  may  be  crushed  to  death  like  that.  What  next!  Killing 
people!  Why,  the  poor  dear’s  as  white  as  a  sheet,’  said  voices. 

Petya  soon  recovered,  and  the  colour  came  back  into  his  face;  the 
pain  was  over,  and  by  this  temporary  inconvenience  he  had  gained  a 
seat  on  the  cannon,  from  which  he  hoped  to  see  the  Tsar,  who  was  to 
walk  back.  Petya  thought  no  more  now  of  presenting  his  petition.  If 
only  he  could  see  him,  he  would  think  himself  lucky!  During  the  service 
in  the  Uspensky  Sobor,  in  celebration  of  the  Tsar’s  arrival,  and  also 
in  thanksgiving  for  the  peace  with  the  Turks,  the  crowd  dispersed  about 
the  square,  and  hawkers  appeared  crying  kvass,  gingerbread,  and  poppy¬ 
seed  sweets — of  which  Petya  was  particularly  fond — and  he  could  hear 
the  usual  talk  among  the  people.  One  shopkeeper’s  wife  was  showing  her 
torn  shawl,  and  saying  how  much  she  had  paid  for  it;  while  another 
observed  that  all  silk  things  were  very  dear  nowadays.  The  deacon  who 
had  rescued  Petya  was  talking  to  a  clerk  of  the  different  priests  who 
were  taking  part  in  the  service  to-day  with  the  most  reverend  bishop. 
The  deacon  several  times  repeated  the  word  ‘soborne,’  which  Petya  did 
not  understand.  Two  young  artisans  were  joking  with  some  servant- 
girls,  cracking  nuts.  All  these  conversations,  especially  the  jokes  with 
the  servant-girls — which  would  have  seemed  particularly  attractive  at 
his  age  to  Petya — did  not  interest  him  now.  He  sat  on  his  high  perch  on 
the  cannon,  still  in  the  same  excitement  at  the  thought  of  the 'Tsar  and 
his  love  for  him.  The  blending  of  the  feeling  of  pain  and  fright  when 


636  WAR  AND  PEACE 

he  was  crushed  with  the  feeling  of  enthusiasm  intensified  his  sense  of  the 
gravity  of  the  occasion. 

Suddenly  cannon  shots  were  heard  from  the  embankment — the  firing 
was  in  celebration  of  the  peace  with  the  Turks — and  the  crowd  made  a 
dash  for  the  embankment  to  see  the  firing.  Petya,  too,  would  have  liked 
to  run  there,  but  the  deacon,  who  had  taken  the  young  gentleman  under 
his  protection,  would  not  let  him.  The  firing  still  continued,  when  officers, 
generals,  and  gentlemen-in-waiting  came  running  out  of  the  Uspensky 
Sobor.  Then  others  came  out  with  less  haste,  and  again  caps  were  lifted, 
and  those  who  had  run  to  look  at  the  cannons  ran  back.  At  last  four 
men  in  uniforms  and  decorations  came  out  from  the  doors  of  the  Sobor. 
‘Hurrah!  hurrah!’  the  crowd  shouted  again. 

‘Which?  which  one?’  Petya  asked  in  a  weeping  voice  of  those  around 
him,  but  no  one  answered  him.  Every  one  was  too  much  excited,  and 
Petya,  picking  out  one  of  the  four,  and  hardly  able  to  see  him  for  the 
tears  that  started  into  his  eyes,  concentrated  all  his  enthusiasm  on 
him,  though  it  happened  not  to  be  the  Tsar.  Pie  shouted  ‘Hurrah!’  in  a 
voice  of  frenzy,  and  resolved  that  to-morrow,  come  what  might  of  it, 
he  would  join  the  army.  The  crowd  ran  after  the  Tsar,  accompanied  him 
to  the  palace,  and  began  to  disperse.  It  was  late,  and  Petya  had  had 
nothing  to  eat,  and  the  sweat  was  dripping  from  his  face.  But  he  did  not 
go  home.  He  remained  with  a  smaller,  though  still  considerable,  crowd 
before  the  palace  during  the  Tsar’s  dinner-time.  He  gazed  up  at  the 
palace  windows,  expecting  something  to  happen,  and  envying  equally 
the  grand  personages  who  drove  up  to  the  entrance  to  dine  with  the  Tsar, 
and  the  footmen  waiting  at  table,  of  whom  he  caught  glimpses  at  the 
window. 

At  the  Tsar’s  dinner,  Valuev  said,  looking  out  of  the  window: 

‘The  people  are  still  hoping  to  get  a  sight  of  your  majesty.’ 

The  dinner  was  almost  over,  the  Tsar  got  up,  and  still  munching  a 
biscuit,  came  out  on  the  balcony.  The  crowd,  with  Petya  in  the  midst, 
rushed  towards  the  balcony. 

‘Angel,  father!  Hurrah!’  .  .  .  shouted  the  crowd,  and  with  it  Petya. 
And  again  women,  and,  in  a  less  degree  some  men — among  them  Petya 
- — shed  tears  of  happiness. 

A  good  sized  piece  of  the  biscuit  in  the  Tsar’s  hand  broke  off,  fell 
on  the  balcony  railing,  and  from  the  railing  to  the  ground.  A  coachman 
in  a  jerkin,  who  stood  nearest,  pounced  on  the  piece  of  biscuit  and 
snatched  it  up.  Several  persons  rushed  at  the  coachman.  Noticing  this 
the  Tsar  asked  for  a  plate  of  biscuits,  and  began  dropping  them  from 
the  balcony.  Petya’s  eyes  almost  started  out  of  his  head ;  the  danger  of 
being  crushed  excited  him  more  than  ever,  and  he  rushed  at  the  biscuits,  i 
He  did  not  know  why,  but  he  felt  he  must  have  a  biscuit  from  the  Tsar’s 
hands,  and  he  must  not  give  in.  He  made  a  dash  and  upset  an  old  woman, 
who  was  just  about  to  seize  a  biscuit.  But  the  old  woman  refused  to 
consider  herself  beaten,  though  she  was  on  the  ground;  she  snatched  at  ! 
the  biscuits  on  her  hands  and  knees.  Petya  pushed  her  hand  away  ; 


WARANDPEACE  63T 

with  his  knee,  snatched  up  a  biscuit,  and  as  though  afraid  of  being  late, 
hastily  shouted  again,  ‘Hurrah!’  in  a  hoarse  voice. 

The  Tsar  went  in,  and  after  that  the  greater  part  of  the  crowd  dis¬ 
persed. 

‘There,  I  said  if  only  we  waited — and  so  it  was,’  was  the  delighted 
comment  on  various  sides  in  the  crowd. 

Happy  as  Petya  was,  he  felt  sad  to  go  home,  and  to  feel  that  all  the 
enjoyment  of  that  day  was  over.  From  the  Kremlin,  Petya  went  not 
home,  but  to  his  comrade  Obolensky’s.  He  was  fifteen,  and  he,  too,  was 
going  into  the  army.  On  getting  home,  Petya  announced  with  decision 
and  firmness  that  if  they  would  not  let  him  do  so  too,  he  would  run  away. 
And  next  day,  though  Count  Ilya  Andreitch  had  not  quite  yielded,  he 
went  to  inquire  if  a  commission  could  be  obtained  for  Petya  somewhere 
where  there  would  be  little  danger. 


XXII 

On  the  morning  of  the  15th,  the  next  day  but  one,  a  great  number  of 
carriages  stood  outside  the  Slobodsky  palace. 

The  great  halls  were  full.  In  the  first  were  the  noblemen  in  their 
uniforms;  in  the  second  there  were  merchants  with  medals  and  long 
beards,  wearing  blue,  full-skirted  coats.  The  first  room  was  full  of  noise 
and  movement.  The  more  important  personages  were  sitting  on  high- 
backed  chairs  at  a  big  table  under  the  Tsar’s  portrait;  but  the  greater 
number  of  the  noblemen  were  walking  about  the  hall. 

The  noblemen,  whom  Pierre  saw  every  day  either  at  the  club  or  at 
their  houses,  were  all  in  uniforms;  some  in  those  of  Catherine’s  court, 
some  in  those  of  the  Emperor  Pavel,  and  some  in  the  new  uniforms  of 
Alexander’s  reign,  others  in  the  common  uniforms  of  the  nobility,  and 
the  general  character  of  their  dress  gave  a  strange  and  fantastic  look 
to  these  old  and  young,  most  diverse  and  familiar  faces.  Particularly 
striking  were  the  older  men,  dim-eyed,  toothless,  bald,  and  thin,  with 
faces  wrinkled  or  lost  in  yellow  fat.  They  sat  still  for  the  most  part  and 
were  silent,  or  if  they  walked  and  talked,  attached  themselves  to  some 
one  younger.  Just  like  the  faces  Petya  had  seen  in  the  crowd,  all  these 
faces,  in  their  universal  expectation  of  something  solemn,  presented  a 
striking  contrast  with  their  everyday,  yesterday’s  aspect,  when  talking 
over  their  game  of  boston,  Petrushka  the  cook,  the  health  of  Zinaida 
Dmitryevna,  etc.,  etc. 

Pierre,  who  had  been  since  early  morning  in  an  uncomfortable  uni¬ 
form,  that  had  become  too  tight  for  him,  was  in  the  room.  He  was  in  a 
state  of  excitement;  this  extraordinary  assembly,  not  only  of  the  nobility, 
but  of  the  merchant  class  too — the  estates,  etats  generaux — called  up  in 
him  a  whole  series  of  ideas  of  the  Contrat  Social  and  the  French  Revolu¬ 
tion,  ideas  imprinted  deeply  on  his  soul,  though  they  had  long  been  laid 
aside.  The  words  he  had  noticed  in  the  manifesto  that  the  Tsar  was  com- 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


638 

ing  to  the  capital  for  deliberation  with  his  people,  confirmed  him  in  this 
chain  of  thought.  And  supposing  that  something  of  importance  in  that 
direction  was  near  at  hand,  that  what  he  had  long  been  looking  for  was 
coming,  he  looked  and  listened  attentively,  but  he  saw  nowhere  any 
expression  of  the  ideas  that  engrossed  him. 

The  Tsar's  manifesto  was  read,  and  evoked  enthusiasm;  and  then  all 
moved  about,  talking.  Apart  from  their  everydaj'  interests,  Pierre  heard 
discussion  as  to  where  the  marshals  were  to  stand  when  the  Tsar  should 
come  in,  when  the  ball  was  to  be  given  for  the  Tsar,  whether  they  were 
to  be  divided  according  to  districts  or  the  whole  province  together  .  .  . 
and  so  on.  But  as  soon  as  the  war  and  the  whole  object  of  their  meeting 
together  was  touched  upon,  the  talk  was  uncertain  and  hesitating.  Every 
one  seemed  to  prefer  listening  to  speaking. 

A  manly  looking,  handsome,  middle-aged  man,  wearing  the  uniform 
of  a  retired  naval  officer,  was  speaking,  and  a  little  crowd  was  gathered 
about  him  in  one  of  the  rooms.  Pierre  went  up  to  the  circle  that  had 
formed  round  him,  and  began  to  listen.  Count  Ilya  Andreitch,  in  his 
uniform  of  Catherine’s  time,  was  walking  about  with  a  pleasant  smile 
among  the  crowd,  with  all  of  whom  he  was  acquainted.  He  too  apr- 
proached  this  group,  and  began  to  listen  with  a  good-humoured  smile, 
as  he  always  did  listen,  nodding  his  head  approvingly  in  token  of  his 
agreeing  with  the  speaker.  The  retired  naval  officer  was  speaking  very 
boldly  (that  could  be  seen  from  the  expression  on  the  faces  of  the  listen¬ 
ers  and  from  the  fact  that  some  persons,  known  to  Pierre  as  particularly 
submissive  and  timid,  drew  back  from  him  in  disapprobation  or  expressed 
dissent).  Pierre  pushed  his  way  into  the  middle  of  the  circle,  listened, 
and  gained  the  conviction  that  the  speaker  certainly  was  a  liberal,  but 
in  quite  a  different  sense  from  what  Pierre  was  looking  for.  The  naval 
officer  spoke  in  the  peculiarly  mellow,  sing-song  baritone  of  a  Russian 
nobleman,  with  peculiar  burring  of  the  r’s  and  suppression  of  the  con¬ 
sonants,  in  the  voice  in  which  men  shout:  ‘Waiter,  pipe!’  and  such 
phrases.  He  talked  with  the  habit  of  riotous  living  and  of  authority  in 
his  voice. 

‘What  if  the  Smolensk  people  have  offered  the  Emperor  a  levy  of 
militia.  Are  the  Smolensk  people  any  rule  for  us?  If  the  nobility  of  the 
Moscow  province  thinks  fit,  it  can  show  its  devotion  to  our  sovereign 
the  Emperor  by  other  means.  Have  we  forgotten  the  militia  in  the  year 
1 8c 7?  It  was  only  the  beggarly  priests’  sons  and  thieves  made  a  good 
thing  of  it.  .  . 

Count  Ilya  Andreitch,  smiling  blandly,  nodded  his  head  in  approval. 

‘And  were  our  militiamen  of  any  service  to  the  state?  Not  the  slight¬ 
est!  They  only  ruined  our  agriculture.  Even  conscription  is  better.  ...  As 
it  is,  a  man  comes  back  to  you  neither  soldier  nor  peasant,  nothing,  but 
only  demoralised.  The  nobility  don’t  grudge  their  lives.  We  will  go  our¬ 
selves  to  a  man ;  take  recruits,  too;  and  the  Tsar  has  but  to  say  the  word, 
and  we  will  all  die  for  him,’  added  the  orator,  warming  up. 

Ilya  Andreitch’s  mouth  was  watering  with  satisfaction,  and  he  nudged 


WAR  AND  PEACE  639 

Pierre,  but  Pierre  wanted  to  speak  too.  He  moved  forward,  feeling 
stirred,  though  he  did  not  yet  know  why  nor  what  he  would  say.  Pie 
was  just  opening  his  mouth  to  speak  when  he  was  interrupted  by  a  per¬ 
fectly  toothless  senator  with  a  shrewd  and  wrathful  face,  who  was  stand¬ 
ing  close  by  the  last  orator.  Evidently  accustomed  to  lead  debates  and 
bring  forward  motions,  he  began  speaking  in  a  low  but  audible  voice: 

‘I  imagine,  my  dear  sir,’  said  the  senator,  mumbling  with  his  toothless 
mouth,  ‘that  we  are  summoned  here  not  to  discuss  which  is  more  suitable 
for  the  country  at  the  present  moment — conscription  or  the  militia.  We 
are  summoned  to  reply  to  the  appeal  which  our  sovereign  the  Emperor 
graciously  deigns  to  make  to  us.  And  to  judge  which  is  the  fitter  means 
— recruiting  or  a  levy  for  militia — we  leave  to  a  higher  power.  .  .  .’ 

Pierre  suddenly  found  the  right  outlet  for  his  excitement.  He  felt  exas¬ 
perated  with  the  senator,  who  introduced  this  conventional  and  narrow 
view  of  the  duties  that  lay  before  the  nobility.  Pierre  stepped  forward 
and  cut  him  short.  He  did  not  know  himself  what  he  was  going  to  say, 
but  he  began  eagerly,  using  bookish  Russian,  and  occasionally  relapsing 
into  French. 

‘Excuse  me,  your  excellency,’  he  began  (Pierre  was  well  acquainted 
with  this  senator,  but  he  felt  it  necessary  on  this  occasion  to  address  him 
formally),  ‘though  I  differ  from  the  gentleman  .  .  (Pierre  hesitated; 
he  would  have  liked  to  say  Mon  tre  honorable  preophiante)  ‘with  the 
gentleman  .  .  .  whom  I  have  not  the  honour  of  knowing;  but  I  imagine 
the  estate  of  the  nobility,  apart  from  the  expression  of  its  sympathy  and 
enthusiasm,  has  been  convoked  also  to  deliberate  upon  the  measures 
by  which  we  can  assist  our  country.  I  imagine,’  said  Pierre,  growing 
warmer,  ‘that  the  Tsar  would  himself  be  displeased  if  he  should  find  in  us 
only  the  owners  of  peasants,  whom  we  give  up  to  him,  and  chair  a  canon, 
which  we  offer  in  ourselves — and  should  not  find  in  us  co  .  .  co  .  .  . 
counsel.  .  .  .’ 

Many  persons  moved  a  little  away  from  the  circle,  noticing  the  dis¬ 
dainful  smile  of  the  senator  and  the  freedom  of  Pierre’s  words.  Ilya  An- 
dreitch  was  the  only  person  pleased  at  what  Pierre  said,  just  as  he  had 
been  pleased  with  the  naval  officer’s  speech  and  the  senator’s,  as  he  al¬ 
ways  was  with  the  last  speech  he  had  heard. 

‘I  consider  that  before  discussing  these  questions,’  Pierre  continued, 
‘we  ought  to  ask  the  Emperor,  most  respectfully  to  ask  his  majesty,  to 
communicate  to  us  what  forces  we  have,  what  is  the  position  of  our  men 
and  our  army,  and  then  .  . 

Pierre  had  hardly  uttered  these  words  when  he  was  promptly  attacked 
on  three  sides  at  once.  The  most  violent  onslaught  was  made  upon  him 
by  an  old  acquaintance  and  partner  at  boston,  who  had  always  been  on 
the  friendliest  terms  with  him,  Stepan  Stepanovitch  Adraksin.  Stepan 
Stepanovitch  was,  of  course,  in  uniform,  and  whether  it  was  due  to  the 
uniform  or  to  other  causes,  Pierre  saw  before  him  quite  a  changed  man. 
Stepan  Stepanovitch,  with  an  old  man’s  anger  in  his  face,  screamed  at 
Pierre : 


640  WARANDPEACE 

‘In  the  first  place,  let  me  tell  you  that  we  have  no  right  to  ask  such 
questions  of  the  Emperor;  and  secondly,  if  the  nobility  had  any  such 
right,  the  Emperor  could  not  answer  such  questions.  The  movements  of 
the  troops  depend  on  the  movements  of  the  enemy;  the  troops  are  aug¬ 
mented  and  decreased  .  .  .’ 

Another  voice  interrupted  Adraksin.  The  speaker  was  a  man  of  forty, 
of  medium  height,  whom  Pierre  had  seen  in  former  days  at  the  gypsies’ 
entertainments,  and  knew  as  a  bad  card-player.  But  now  he,  too,  was 
quite  transformed  by  his  uniform,  as  he  moved  up  to  Pierre. 

‘Yes,  and  it’s  not  the  time  for  deliberation,’  said  this  nobleman.  ‘What’s 
needed  is  action;  there  is  war  in  Russia.  Our  foe  comes  to  ruin  Russia,  to 
desecrate  the  tombs  of  our  fathers,  to  carry  away  our  wives  and  children.’ 
The  gentleman  struck  himself  a  blow  on  the  chest.  ‘We  will  all  rise  up; 
we  will  all  go  to  a  man,  we  will  follow  our  father  the  Tsar!’  he  cried, 
rolling  his  bloodshot  eyes.  Several  approving  voices  could  be  heard  in  the 
crowd.  ‘We  are  Russians  and  we  do  not  grudge  our  blood  for  the  defence 
of  our  faith,  our  throne,  and  our  country.  But  we  must  put  a  stop  to 
idle  talk,  if  we  are  true  sons  of  our  fatherland.  We  will  show  Europe  how 
Russia  can  defend  Russia!’  shouted  this  gentleman. 

Pierre  tried  to  reply,  but  he  could  not  get  in  a  word.  He  felt  that  the 
sound  of  his  words,  apart  from  any  meaning  they  conveyed,  was  less 
audible  than  the  sound  of  his  excited  adversary’s  voice. 

In  the  rear  of  the  group,  Ilya  Andreitch  was  nodding  approval;  sev¬ 
eral  of  the  audience  turned  their  shoulders  briskly  to  the  orator  at  the 
conclusion  of  a  phrase  and  said: 

‘That’s  so,  that’s  so,  indeed!’ 

Pierre  wanted  to  say  that  he  was  by  no  means  averse  to  the  sacrifice 
of  his  money,  or  his  peasants,  or  himself,  but  that  one  ought  to  know  the 
true  position  of  affairs,  in  order  to  be  able  to  assist,  but  he  could  not 
speak. 

A  number  of  voices  were  speaking  and  shouting  together,  so  much  so 
that  Ilya  Andreitch  had  not  time  to  nod  approval  to  all  of  them.  And 
the  group  grew  larger  and  broke  up  into  knots,  re-formed  again,  and 
moved  all  together  with  a  hum  of  talk  to  the  big  table  in  the  big  room. 
Pierre  was  not  allowed  to  speak;  they  rudely  interrupted  him,  indeed 
hustled  him  and  turned  their  backs  on  him  as  though  he  were  the  common 
foe.  This  was  not  really  due  to  their  dislike  of  the  tenor  of  his  speech, 
which  they  had  forgotten,  indeed,  after  the  great  number  of  speeches  that 
followed  it.  But  a  crowd  is  always  pleased  to  have  a  concrete  object  for  its 
love  or  its  hatred.  Pierre  furnished  it  with  the  latter. 

Many  orators  spoke  after  the  eager  nobleman,  but  all  spoke  in  the 
same  tone.  Some  spoke  eloquently  and  originally. 

The  editor  of  the  Russian  Messenger,  Glinka,  who  was  recognised 
and  greeted  with  shouts  of  ‘the  author,  the  author!’  said  that  hell  must 
be  driven  back  by  hell,  that  he  had  seen  a  child  smiling  at  the  lightning 
flash  and  the  thunder  clap,  but  we  would  not  be  like  that  child. 


WARANDPEACE  641 

'Yes,  yes,  at  the  thunder  clap!  ’  was  repeated  with  approval  at  the  back 
of  the  crowd. 

The  crowd  approached  the  great  table,  where  grey  or  bald  old  noble¬ 
men  of  seventy  were  sitting,  wearing  uniforms  and  decorations.  Almost 
all  of  them  Pierre  had  seen  with  their  buffoons  in  their  own  homes  or 
playing  boston  at  the  club.  The  crowd  drew  near  the  table,  still  with  the 
same  buzz  of  talk.  The  orators,  squeezed  in  behind  the  high  chair  backs 
by  the  surging  crowd,  spoke  one  after  another  and  sometimes  two  at  once. 
Those  who  stood  further  back  noticed  what  the  speaker  had  left  unsaid 
and  hastened  to  supply  the  gap.  Others  were  busy  in  the  heat  and  crush, 
ransacking  their  brains  to  find  some  idea  and  hurriedly  uttering  it.  The 
old  grandees  at  the  table  sat  looking  from  one  to  another,  and  their  expres¬ 
sion  for  the  most  part  betrayed  nothing  but  that  they  were  very  hot. 
Pierre  however  felt  excited,  and  the  general  feeling  of  desire  to  show  that 
they  were  ready  for  anything,  expressed  for  the  most  part  more  in  tones 
and  looks  than  in  the  tenor  of  the  speeches,  infected  him  too.  He  did  not 
disavow  his  ideas,  but  felt  somehow  in  fault  and  tried  to  defend  himself. 

‘I  only  said  that  we  could  make  sacrifices  to  better  purpose  when  we 
know  what  is  needed,’  he  cried,  trying  to  shout  down  the  other  voices. 

One  old  man  close  by  him  looked  round,  but  his  attention  was  imme¬ 
diately  called  off  by  a  shout  at  the  other  end  of  the  table. 

‘Yes,  Moscow  will  be  surrendered!  She  will  be  the  expiation!’  one  man 
was  shouting. 

‘He  is  the  enemy  of  mankind!’  another  shouted. 

‘Allow  me  to  say  .  .  .’ 

‘Gentlemen,  you  are  crushing  me!  .  .  . 


XXIII 

At  that  moment  Count  Rastoptchin,  with  his  prominent  chin  and  alert 
eyes,  strode  in  rapidly  through  the  parting  crowd,  wearing  the  uniform 
of  a  general  and  a  ribbon  over  his  shoulder. 

‘Our  sovereign  the  Emperor  will  be  here  immediately,’  said  Rastop¬ 
tchin.  ‘I  have  just  come  from  him.  I  presume  that  in  the  position  in  which 
we  are  placed,  there  is  no  need  of  much  discussion.  The  Emperor  has 
graciously  seen  fit  to  summon  us  and  the  merchants,’  said  Count  Rastop¬ 
tchin.  ‘They  will  pour  out  their  millions’  (he  pointed  to  the  merchants’ 
hall);  ‘it  is  our  duty  to  raise  men  and  not  to  spare  ourselves.  ...  It 
is  the  least  we  can  do.’ 

A  consultation  took  place  between  the  great  noblemen  at  the  table  only. 
The  whole  consultation  was  more  than  subdued,  it  seemed  even  mourn¬ 
ful,  when,  after  all  the  hubbub  that  had  gone  before,  the  old  voices  could 
be  heard,  one  at  a  time,  saying  ‘agreed,’  or  for  the  sake  of  variety,  ‘I  am 
of  the  same  opinion.’ 

The  secretary  was  told  to  write  down  the  resolution  of  the  Moscow 
nobility:  that  the  nobles  of  Moscow,  like  those  of  Smolensk,  would  fur- 


64a  WAR  AND  PEACE 

nish  a  levy  of  ten  men  in  every  thousand,  with  their  complete  equipment. 

The  gentlemen,  who  had  been  sitting,  got  up  with  an  air  of  relief ;  there 
was  a  scraping  of  chairs  and  the  great  noblemen  walked  about  to  stretch 
their  legs,  taking  their  friends’  arms  and  chatting  together. 

‘The  Tsar!  the  Tsar!’  was  suddenly  heard  all  through  the  rooms,  and 
the  whole  crowd  rushed  towards  the  entrance. 

The  Tsar  walked  in  along  the  wide,  free  space  left  for  him,  between 
walls  of  noblemen  close  packed  on  each  side.  Every  face  expressed  rev¬ 
erent  and  awe-stricken  curiosity.  Pierre  was  at  some  distance,  and  could 
not  quite  catch  all  the  Tsar  said.  He  knew  from  what  he  did  hear  that 
the  Tsar  was  speaking  of  the  danger  in  which  the  empire  was  placed, 
and  the  hopes  he  rested  on  the  Moscow  nobility.  The  Tsar  was  answered 
by  a  voice  informing  him  of  the  resolution  just  passed  by  the  nobility. 

‘Gentlemen!’  said  the  trembling  voice  of  the  Tsar.  A  stir  passed 
through  the  crowd,  and  then  a  hush  fell  on  it  again,  and  Pierre  distinctly 
heard  the  voice  of  the  Tsar,  warmly  humane  and  deeply  touched:  ‘I 
have  never  doubted  of  the  devotion  of  the  Russian  nobility.  But  this  day 
it  has  surpassed  my  expectations.  I  thank  you  in  the  name  of  the  father- 
land.  Gentlemen,  let  us  act — time  is  more  precious  than  anything.  .  .  .’ 

The  Tsar  ceased  speaking;  the  crowd  began  pressing  round  him,  and 
cries  of  enthusiasm  were  heard  on  alksides. 

‘Yes,  more  precious  than  anything  ...  a  royal  saying,’  said  the 
voice  of  Ilya  Andreitch  with  a  sob.  He  had  heard  nothing,  but  understood 
everything  in  his  own  way. 

From  the  nobility’s  room  the  Tsar  went  into  the  merchants’  room.  He 
was  there  for  about  ten  minutes.  Pierre  amongst  the  rest  saw  the  Tsar 
coming  back  from  the  merchants’  room  with  tears  of  emotion  in  his  eyes. 
They  learned  afterwards  that  the  Tsar  had  hardly  begun  to  speak  to  the 
mechants  when  the  tears  gushed  from  his  eyes  and  he  continued  in  a 
trembling  voice.  When  Pierre  saw  the  Tsar  come  out,  he  was  accom¬ 
panied  by  two  merchants.  One  of  them  Pierre  knew,  a  stout  contractor; 
the  other  was  the  mayor,  with  a  thin,  yellow  face  and  narrow  beard.  Both 
were  weeping.  The  tears  stood  in  the  thin  man’s  eyes,  but  the  stout  con¬ 
tractor  was  sobbing  like  a  child  and  continually  repeating: 

‘Take  life  and  property  too,  your  majesty!’ 

Pierre  felt  nothing  at  that  moment  but  the  desire  to  show  that  nothing 
was  too  much  for  him  and  that  he  was  ready  to  sacrifice  everything.  The  P 
constitutional  tenor  of  his  speech  weighed  on  him  like  a  sin;  he  sought 
an  opportunity  of  glossing  it  over.  On  hearing  that  Count  Mamonov 
was  furnishing  a  regiment,  Bezuhov  at  once  told  Count  Rastoptchin  that 
he  would  furnish  one  thousand  men  and  their  equipment. 

Old  Rostov  could  not  tell  his  wife  what  had  passed  without  tears,  and 
he  agreed  at  once  to  Petya’s  wishes,  and  went  himself  to  enter  his  name.  i 

Next  day  the  Tsar  went  away.  All  the  assembled  noblemen  went  back 
to  their  homes  and  their  clubs,  took  off  their  uniforms,  and  with  some 
groans  gave  orders  to  their  stewards  to  raise  the  levy,  wondering  them¬ 
selves  at  what  they  had  done. 


PART  X 


I 

Napoleon  began  the  war  with  Russia  because  he  could  not  help  going 
to  Dresden,  being  dazzled  by  the  homage  paid  him  there,  putting  on 
the  Polish  uniform,  yielding  to  the  stimulating  influence  of  a  June 
morning,  and  giving  way  to  an  outburst  of  fury  in  the  presence  of 
Kurakin  and  afterwards  of  Balashev. 

Alexander  refused  all  negotiations  because  he  felt  himself  personalty 
insulted.  Barclay  de  Tolly  did  his  utmost  to  command  the  army  in  the 
best  way  possible,  so  as  to  do  his  duty  and  gain  the  reputation  of  a 
great  general.  Rostov  charged  the  French  because  he  could  not  resist 
the  temptation  to  gallop  across  the  level  plain.  And  all  the  innumerable 
persons  who  took  part  in  the  war  acted  similarly,  in  accordance  with 
their  personal  peculiarities,  habits,  circumstances,  and  aims.  They 
were  all  impelled  by  fear  or  vanity,  enjoyment,  indignation,  or  national 
consideration,  supposing  that  they  knew  what  they  were  about  and 
that  they  were  acting  independently,  while  they  were  all  the  involun¬ 
tary  tools  of  history  and  were  working  out  a  result  concealed  from 
themselves  but  comprehensible  to  us.  Such  is  the  invariable  fate  of  all 
practical  leaders,  and  the  higher  their  place  in  the  social  hierarchy, 
the  less  free  they  are. 

Now  the  leading  men  of  1812  have  long  left  their  places;  their  per¬ 
sonal  interests  have  vanished,  leaving  no  trace,  and  nothing  remains 
before  us  but  the  historical  results  of  the  time. 

But  once  let  us  admit  that  the  people  of  Europe  under  Napoleon’s 
leadership  had  to  make  their  way  into  the  heart  of  Russia  and  there 
to  perish,  and  all  the  self-contradictory,  meaningless,  cruel  actions 
of  the  men  who  took  part  in  this  war  become  intelligible  to  us. 

Providence  compelled  all  those  men  in  striving  for  the  attainment  of 
their  personal  aims  to  combine  in  accomplishing  one  immense  result, 
of  which  no  one  individual  man  (not  Napoleon,  not  Alexander,  still 
less  any  one  taking  practical  part  in  the  campaign)  had  the  slightest 
inkling. 

Now  it  is  clear  to  us  what  was  the  cause  of  the  destruction  of  the 
French  army  in  1812.  No  one  disputes  that  the  cause  of  the  loss  of 
Napuleon’s  French  forces  was,  on  one  hand,  their  entering  at  too  late 
a  season  upon  a  winter  march  in  the  heart  of  Russia  without  sufficient 
preparation;  and  on  the  other,  the  character  the  war  had  assumed 
from  the  burning  of  Russian  towns  and  the  hatred  the  enemy  aroused 
in  the  peasantry.  But  obvious  as  it  seems  now,  no  one  at  the  time  fore- 

643 


644  WAR  AND  PEACE 

saw  that  this  was  the  only  means  by  which  the  best  army  in  the  world, 
eight  hundred  thousand  strong,  led  by  the  best  of  generals,  could  br 
defeated  in  a  conflict  with  the  inexperienced  Russian  army  of  haF 
the  strength,  led  by  inexperienced  generals.  Not  only  was  this  utterly 
unforeseen,  but  every  effort  indeed  was  being  continually  made  on  the 
Russian  side  to  hinder  the  one  means  that  could  save  Russia;  and  in 
spite  of  the  experience  and  so-called  military  genius  of  Napoleon,  every 
effort  was  made  on  the  French  side  to  push  on  to  Moscow  at  the  end 
of  the  summer,  that  is  to  do  the  very  thing  bound  to  bring  about  their 
ruin. 

In  historical  works  on  the  year  1812,  the  French  writers  are  very 
fond  of  saying  that  Napoleon  was  aware  of  the  danger  of  lengthening 
out  his  line,  that  he  sought  a  decisive  engagement,  that  his  marshals 
advised  him  to  stay  at  Smolensk,  and  similar  statements  to  show  that  , 
even  at  the  time  the  real  danger  of  the  campaign  was  seen.  The  Rus¬ 
sian  historians  are  still  fonder  of  declaring  that  from  the  beginning  of  i 
the  campaign  there  existed  a  plan  of  Scythian  warfare  by  leading 
Napoleon  on  into  the  heart  of  Russia.  And  this  plan  is  ascribed  by 
some  writers  to  Pfuhl,  by  others  to  some  Frenchman,  and  by  others  j 
to  Barclay  de  Tolly;  while  other  writers  give  the  credit  of  this  sup¬ 
posed  scheme  to  the  Emperor  Alexander  himself,  supporting  their 
view  by  documents,  proclamations,  and  letters,  in  which  such  a 
course  of  action  certainly  is  hinted  at.  But  all  these  hints  at  foreseeing 
what  actually  did  happen  on  the  French  as  well  as  on  the  Russian  side  are 
only  conspicuous  now  because  the  event  justified  them.  If  the  event  had 
not  come  to  pass,  these  hints  would  have  been  forgotten,  as  thousands  and 
millions  of  suggestions  and  suppositions  are  now  forgotten  that  were 
current  at  the  period,  but  have  been  shown  by  time  to  be  unfounded 
and  so  have  been  consigned  to  oblivion.  There  are  always  so  many  pre¬ 
suppositions  as  to  the  cause  of  every  event  that,  however  the  matter 
ends,  there  are  always  people  who  will  say:  ‘I  said  at  the  time  that  it  ' 
would  be  so’:  quite  oblivious  of  the  fact  that  among  the  numerous 
suppositions  they  made  there  were  others  too  suggesting  just  the 
opposite  course  of  events. 

The  notion  that  Napoleon  was  aware  of  the  danger  of  extending 
his  line,  and  that  the  Russians  had  a  scheme  for  drawing  the  enemy 
into  the  heart  of  Russia,  obviously  belong  to  the  same  category;  and 
only  historians  with  a  great  bias  can  ascribe  such  reflections  to  Napo-  I 
leon  and  his  marshals,  or  such  plans  to  the  Russian  generals.  All  the  I 
facts  are  directly  opposed  to  such  a  view.  Far  from  desiring  to  lure  the  1 
French  into  the  heart  of  Russia,  the  Russians  did  their  utmost  to  arrest 
their  progress  throughout  the  war  from  the  time  they  crossed  the  I 
frontier.  And  far  from  dreading  the  extension  of  his  line  of  communi¬ 
cations,  Napoleon  rejoiced  at  every  step  forward  as  a  triumph,  and 
did  not  seek  pitched  battles  as  eagerly  as  he  had  done  in  his  previous 
campaigns. 

At  the  very  beginning  of  the  campaign,  our  armies  were  divided  up. 


WARANDPEACE  64s 

and  the  sole  aim  for  which  we  strove  was  to  unite  them;  though  there 
was  no  benefit  to  be  derived  from  uniting  them,  if  our  object  was  to 
retreat  and  draw  the  enemy  into  the  heart  of  the  country.  The  Em¬ 
peror  was  with  the  army  to  inspire  it  not  to  yield  an  inch  of  Russian 
soil  and  on  no  account  to  retreat.  An  immense  camp  was  fortified  at 
Drissa  in  accordance  with  Pfuhl’s  plan,  and  it  was  not  proposed  to  re¬ 
treat  further.  The  Tsar  reprimanded  the  commander-in-chief  for  every 
retreat.  The  Tsar  can  never  have  anticipated  the  burning  of  Moscow, 
or  even  the  enemy’s  presence  at  Smolensk,  and  when  the  armies  had 
been  reunited,  the  Tsar  was  indignant  at  the  taking  and  burning  of 
Smolensk  without  a  general  engagement  having  been  fought  before  its 
walls.  Such  was  the  Tsar’s  feeling,  but  the  Russian  generals,  and  the 
whole  Russian  people,  were  even  more  indignant  at  the  idea  of  our  men 
retreating. 

Napoleon,  after  dividing  up  the  army,  moved  on  into  the  heart  of 
the  country,  letting  slip  several  opportunities  of  an  engagement.  In 
August  he  was  in  Smolensk  and  thinking  of  nothing  but  advancing  fur¬ 
ther,  though,  as  we  see  now,  that  advance  meant  inevitable  ruin. 

The  facts  show  perfectly  clearly  that  Napoleon  foresaw  no  danger 
in  the  advance  on  Moscow,  and  that  Alexander  and  the  Russian  generals 
did  not  dream  at  the  time  of  luring  Napoleon  on,  but  aimed  at  the  very 
opposite.  Napoleon  was  drawn  on  into  Russia,  not  through  any  plans 
— no  one  dreamed  of  the  possibility  of  it — but  simply  through  the 
complex  play  of  intrigues  and  desires  and  motives  of  the  actors  in  the 
war,  who  had  no  conception  of  what  was  to  come  and  of  what  was  the 
sole  means  of  saving  Russia.  Everything  came  to  pass  by  chance.  The 
army  was  split  up  early  in  the  campaign.  We  tried  to  effect  a  junction 
between  the  parts  with  the  obvious  intention  of  fighting  a  battle  and 
checking  the  enemy’s  advance;  and  in  this  effort  to  effect  a  junction, 
avoiding  a  battle  with  a  far  stronger  enemy,  we  were  forced  to  retreat 
at  an  acute  angle,  and  so  drew  the  French  after  us  to  Smolensk. 
But  it  is  not  enough  to  say  that  both  parts  of  the  army  retreated  on 
lines  inclined  at  an  acute  angle,  because  the  French  were  advancing 
between  the  two  armies.  The  angle  was  made  the  more  acute  and  we 
retreated  further  because  Barclay  de  Tolly,  an  unpopular  German, 
was  detested  by  Bagration,  and  the  latter,  in  command  of  the  second 
half  of  the  army,  did  his  utmost  to  delay  a  junction  with  Barclay  de 
Tolly  in  order  to  avoid  being  under  his  command.  Bagration  delayed 
the  junction  of  the  armies,  though  this  was  the  chief  aim  of  all  the 
authorities,  because  he  believed  that  he  would  expose  his  army  to 
danger  on  the  march,  and  that  it  would  be  more  advantageous  for 
him  to  retreat  more  to  the  left  and  the  south,  annoying  the  enemy  on 
the  flank  and  rear,  and  reinforcing  his  army  in  Ukraine.  And  he  be¬ 
lieved  this,  because  he  did  not  want  to  put  himself  under  the  command 
of  the  German  Barclay,  who  was  his  junior  in  the  service,  and  per¬ 
sonally  disliked  by  him. 

The  Emperor  accompanied  the  army  in  order  to  excite  its  patriotic 


646  WARANDPEACE 

ardour;  but  his  presence  and  inability  to  decide  on  any  course  of  j 
action  and  the  immense  number  of  counsellors  and  plans  that  swarmed 
about  him,  nullified  all  action  on  the  part  of  the  first  army,  and  that 
army  too  had  to  retreat. 

At  the  camp  at  Drissa  it  was  proposed  to  take  a  stand.  But  the 
energy  of  Paulucci,  scheming  to  become  a  leading  general,  affected 
Alexander;  and  Pfuhl’s  whole  plan  was  abandoned,  and  the  scheme  of 
campaign  intrusted  to  Barclay.  But  as  the  latter  did  not  inspire  com¬ 
plete  confidence,  his  power  too  was  limited.  The  armies  were  split  up, 
there  was  no  unity,  no  supreme  command:  Barclay  was  unpopular. 
But  on  one  side  the  confusion  and  division  and  unpopularity  of  the 
German  commander-in-chief  led  to  vacillation  and  to  avoiding  a  bat¬ 
tle,  which  would  have  been  inevitable  had  the  armies  been  united  and 
any  one  but  Barclay  in  command  of  them.  And  on  the  other  hand,  it  all 
led  to  a  growing  indignation  with  the  Germans  and  a  growing  fervour 
of  patriotism. 

At  last  the  Tsar  left  the  army,  and,  as  the  only  suitable  excuse  to 
get  rid  of  him,  the  happy  suggestion  was  made  that  he  must  rouse  up 
the  people  in  the  capitals  to  wage  the  war  on  a  truly  national  scale. 
And  the  Tsar’s  visit  to  Moscow  did  in  fact  treble  the  forces  of  the 
Russian  army.  The  Tsar  left  the  army  in  the  hope  that  the  commander- 
in-chief  would  be  able  to  act  alone,  and  that  more  decisive  measures 
would  be  taken.  But  the  commander’s  position  became  weaker  and 
even  more  difficult.  Bennigsen,  the  Grand  Duke,  and  a  swarm  of  adju¬ 
tant  generals,  remained  with  the  army  to  watch  over  the  actions  of 
the  commander-in-chief,  and  to  urge  him  to  greater  activity;  and 
Barclay,  feeling  less  than  ever  free  to  act  under  the  watchful  gaze  of 
all  these  ‘eyes  of  the  Tsar,’  became  still  more  cautious  and  anxious 
to  avoid  a  pitched  battle,  and  clung  to  a  prudent  inaction.  The  Grand 
Duke  hinted  at  treachery,  and  demanded  a  general  engagement.  Lubo- 
mirsky,  Bronnitsky,  Vlotsky,  and  others  of  the  same  sort,  helped  to 
swell  the  clamour  to  such  a  point  that  Barclay,  on  the  pretext  of  send¬ 
ing  papers  to  the  Tsar  in  Petersburg,  got  rid  of  the  Polish  generals,  and 
entered  into  open  conflict  with  Bennigsen  and  the  Grand  Duke. 

In  Smolensk,  in  spite  of  Bagration’s  wishes  to  the  contrary,  the 
armies  were  at  last  united. 

Bagration  drove  up  in  his  carriage  to  the  house  occupied  by  Bar¬ 
clay.  Barclay  put  on  his  official  scarf,  and  came  out  to  greet  and  to 
present  his  report  to  his  senior  officer,  Bagration.  Bagration,  to  rival 
his  magnanimity,  acknowledged  Barclay  as  his  superior  officer,  in 
spite  of  his  own  seniority;  but  he  was  less  in  accord  with  him  than  ever. 
At  the  Tsar’s  command,  he  sent  reports  personally  to  him,  and  wrote 
to  Araktcheev:  ‘My  sovereign’s  will  is  law,  but  I  can  do  nothing  acting 
with  the  minister ’  (so  he  called  Barclay).  ‘For  God’s  sake,  send  me 
somewhere  else,  if  only  in  command  of  a  regiment,  for  here  I  can 
do  nothing.  The  headquarters  are  crammed  full  of  Germans,  there’s 
no  living  here  for  a  Russian,  and  no  making  head  or  tail  of  anything. 


WARANDPEACE  647 

I  supposed  I  was  serving  my  sovereign  and  my  country,  but  in  practice 
it  comes  to  serving  Barclay.  I  must  own  I  do  not  care  to.’ 

The  swarm  of  Bronnitskys,  Wintzengerodes,  and  others  like  them, 
embittered  the  feud  between  the  commanders  still  further,  and  there 
was  less  unity  than  ever.  Preparations  were  made  to  attack  the  French 
before  Smolensk.  A  general  was  sent  to  review  the  position.  This  gen¬ 
eral,  detesting  Barclay,  visits  a  friend  of  his  own,  a  commander  of  a 
corps,  and  after  spending  the  day  with  him,  returns  and  condemns 
on  every  point  the  proposed  field  of  battle  without  having  seen  it. 

While  disputes  and  intrigues  were  going  on  as  to  the  suitable  spot 
for  a  battle,  and  while  we  were  looking  for  the  French  and  mistaking 
their  line  of  advance,  the  French  fell  upon  Nevyerovsky’s  division, 
and  advanced  upon  the  walls  of  Smolensk  itself. 

W'e  were  surprised  into  having  to  fight  at  Smolensk  to  save  our  com¬ 
munications.  A  battle  was  fought.  Thousands  were  slain  on  both  sides. 

Smolensk  was  abandoned  against  the  will  of  the  Tsar  and  the  whole 
people.  But  Smolensk  was  burnt  by  its  own  inhabitants,  who  had  been 
deceived  by  their  governor.  And  those  ruined  inhabitants,  after  set¬ 
ting  an  example  to  the  rest  of  Russia,  full  of  their  losses,  and  burning 
with  hatred  of  the  enemy,  moved  on  to  Moscow.  Napoleon  advances; 
we  retreat;  and  so  the  very  result  is  attained  that  is  destined  to  over¬ 
throw  Napoleon. 


II 

The  day  after  his  son’s  departure,  Prince  Nikolay  Andrei tch  sent  for 
Princess  Marya. 

‘Well,  now  are  you  satisfied?’  he  said  to  her.  ‘You  have  made  me 
quarrel  with  my  son!  Are  you  satisfied?  That  was  all  you  wanted! 
Satisfied?  ...  It’s  a  grief  to  me,  a  grief.  I’m  old  and  weak,  and  it 
was  your  wish.  Well,  now,  rejoice  over  it.  .  .  .’  And  after  that,  Prin¬ 
cess  Marya  did  not  see  her  father  again  for  a  week.  He  was  ill  and 
did  not  leave  his  study. 

Princess  Marya  noticed  to  her  surprise  that  during  this  illness 
the  old  prince  excluded  Mademoiselle  Bourienne  too  from  his  room. 
Tihon  was  the  only  person  who  looked  after  him. 

A  week  later  the  prince  reappeared,  and  began  to  lead  the  same  life 
as  before,  showing  marked  energy  in  the  laying  out  of  farm  buildings 
and  gardens,  and  completely  breaking  off  all  relations  with  Mademoi¬ 
selle  Bourienne.  His  frigid  tone  and  air  with  Princess  Marya  seemed 
to  say:  ‘You  see,  you  plotted  against  me,  told  lies  to  Prince  Andrey 
of  my  relations  with  that  Frenchwoman,  and  made  me  quarrel  with 
him,  but  you  see  I  can  do  without  you,  and  without  the  Frenchwoman 
too.’ 

One  half  of  the  day  Princess  Marya  spent  with  Nikolushka,  giving 
him  his  Russian  lessons,  following  his  other  lessons,  and  talking  to 
Dessalle.  The  rest  of  the  day  she  spent  in  reading,  or  with  her  old 


645  WAR  AND  PEACE 

nurse  and  ‘God’s  folk,’  who  came  by  the  back  stairs  sometimes  to  visit 
her.  The  war  Princess  Marya  looked  on  as  women  do  look  on  war. 
She  was  apprehensive  for  her  brother  who  was  at  the  front,  and  was 
horrified,  without  understanding  it,  at  the  cruelty  of  men,  that  led 
them  to  kill  one  another.  But  she  had  no  notion  of  the  significance 
of  this  war,  which  seemed  to  her  exactly  like  all  the  preceding  wars. 
She  had  no  notion  of  the  meaning  of  this  war,  although  Dessalle,  who 
was  her  constant  companion,  was  passionately  interested  in  the  course 
of  the  war,  and  tried  to  explain  his  views  on  the  subject  to  her,  and 
although  ‘God’s  folk’  all,  with  terror,  told  her  in  their  own  way  of  the 
rumours  among  the  peasantry  of  the  coming  of  Antichrist,  and  al¬ 
though  Julie,  now  Princess  Drubetskoy,  who  had  renewed  her  corre¬ 
spondence  with  her,  was  continually  writing  her  patriotic  letters  from 
Moscow. 

‘I  write  to  you  in  Russian,  my  sweet  friend,’  Julie  wrote,  ‘because 
I  feel  a  hatred  for  all  the  French  and  for  their  language  too;  I  can’t 
bear  to  hear  it  spoken.  ...  In  Moscow  we  are  all  wild  with  en- 
enthusiasm  for  our  adored  Emperor. 

‘My  poor  husband  is  enduring  hardships  and  hunger  in  wretched 
Jewish  taverns,  but  the  news  I  get  from  him  only  increases  my  ardour. 

‘You  have  doubtless  heard  of  the  heroic  action  of  Raevsky,  who 
embraced  his  two  sons  and  said,  “We  will  die  together,  but  we  will 
not  flinch!”  And  though  the  enemy  were  twice  as  strong,  we  did  not  in 
fact  flinch.  We  kill  time  here  as  best  we  can;  but  in  war,  as  in  war. 
Princess  Alina  and  Sophie  spend  whole  days  with  me,  and  we,  un¬ 
happy  widows  of  living  husbands,  have  delightful  talks  over  scraping 
lint.  We  only  want  you,  my  darling,  to  make  us  complete,’  etc.,  etc. 

The  principal  reason  why  Princess  Marya  failed  to  grasp  the  signifi¬ 
cance  of  the  war  was  that  the  old  prince  never  spoke  of  it,  refused  to 
recognize  its  existence,  and  laughed  at  Dessalle  when  he  mentioned 
the  war  at  dinner-time.  The  prince’s  tone  was  so  calm  and  confident 
that  Princess  Marya  put  implicit  faith  in  him. 

During  the  whole  of  July  the  old  prince  was  excessively  active  and 
even  lively.  He  laid  out  another  new  garden  and  a  new  wing  for  the 
servants.  The  only  thing  that  made  Princess  Marya  anxious  about 
him  was  that  he  slept  badly,  and  gave  up  his  old  habit  of  sleeping  in 
his  study,  and  had  a  bed  made  up  for  him  in  a  new  place  every  day. 
One  night  he  would  have  his  travelling  bedstead  set  up  in  the  gallery, 
the  next  night  he  would  spend  dozing  dressed  on  the  sofa  or  in  the 
lounge-chair  in  the  drawing-room,  while  the  lad  Petrushka,  who  had 
replaced  Mademoiselle  Bourienne  in  attendance  on  him,  read  aloud 
to  him;  then  he  would  try  spending  a  night  in  the  dining-room. 

On  the  first  of  August  a  second  letter  came  from  Prince  Andrey. 
In  his  first  letter,  which  had  been  received  shortly  after  he  left  home, 
Prince  Andrey  had  humbly  asked  his  father’s  forgiveness  for  what 
he  had  permitted  himself  to  say  to  him,  and  had  begged  to  be  restored 
to  his  favour.  To  this  letter,  the  old  prince  had  sent  an  affectionate 


WARANDPEACE  649 

answer,  and  from  that  time  he  had  kept  the  Frenchwoman  at  a  distance. 
Prince  Andrey’s  second  letter  was  written  under  Vitebsk,  after  the 
French  had  taken  it.  It  consisted  of  a  brief  account  of  the  whole  cam¬ 
paign,  with  a  plan  sketched  to  illustrate  it,  and  of  reflections  on  the 
1  probable  course  it  would  take  in  the  future.  In  this  letter  Prince  Andrey 
pointed  out  to  his  father  the  inconvenience  of  his  position  close  to  the 
theatre  of  war,  and  in  the  direct  line  of  the  enemy’s  advance,  and  ad¬ 
vised  him  to  move  to  Moscow. 

At  dinner  that  day,  on  Dessalle’s  observing  that  he  had  heard  that 
the  French  had  already  entered  Vitebsk,  the  old  prince  recollected 
Prince  Andrey’s  letter. 

‘I  have  heard  from  Prince  Andrey  to-day,’  he  said  to  Princess  Marya; 
‘have  you  read  the  letter?’ 

‘No,  nion  pere,’  the  princess  answered  timidly.  She  could  not  possi¬ 
bly  have  read  the  letter,  of  which  indeed  she  had  not  heard  till  that 
instant. 

‘He  writes  about  this  war,’  said  the  prince,  with  the  contemptuous 
smile  that  had  become  habitual  with  him  in  speaking  of  the  present 
war. 

‘It  must  be  very  interesting,’  said  Dessalle.  ‘Prince  Andrey  is  in  a 
position  to  know.  .  . 

‘Ah,  very  interesting!’  said  Mademoiselle  Bourienne. 

‘Go  and  get  it  for  me,’  said  the  old  prince  to  Mademoiselle  Bourienne. 
‘You  know,  on  the  little  table  under  the  paper-weight.’ 

Mademoiselle  Bourienne  jumped  up  eagerly. 

‘Ah,  no,’  he  shouted,  frowning.  ‘You  run,  Mihail  Ivanitch!’  Mihail 
Ivanitch  got  up  and  went  to  the  study.  But  he  had  hardly  left  the 
room  when  the  old  prince,  looking  about  him  nervously,  threw  down 
his  dinner  napkin  and  went  himself. 

‘They  never  can  do  anything,  always  make  a  muddle.’ 

As  he  went  out,  Princess  Marya,  Dessalle,  Mademoiselle  Bourienne, 
and  even  little  Nikolushka,  looked  at  one  another  without  speaking. 
The  old  prince  accompanied  by  Mihail  Ivanitch  came  back  with  a  hur¬ 
ried  step,  bringing  the  letter  and  a  plan,  which  he  laid  beside  him,  and 
did  not  give  to  any  one  to  read  during  dinner. 

When  they  went  into  the  drawing-room,  he  handed  the  letter  to 
Princess  Marya,  and  spreading  out  before  him  the  plan  of  his  new 
buildings,  he  fixed  his  eyes  upon  it,  and  told  her  to  read  the  letter 
aloud. 

After  reading  the  letter,  Princess  Marya  looked  inquiringly  at  her 
father.  He  was  gazing  at  the  plan,  evidently  engrossed  in  his  own 
ideas. 

‘What  do  you  think  about  it,  prince?’  Dessalle  ventured  to  inquire. 

‘I?  eh?  .  .  .’  said  the  old  prince,  seeming  to  rouse  himself  with  a 
painful  effort,  and  not  taking  his  eyes  from  the  plan  of  the  building. 

‘It  is  very  possible  that  the  field  of  operations  may  be  brought  so 
close  to  us  .  .  .’ 


^5°  WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Ha-ha-ha!  The  field  of  operations  indeed!’  said  the  old  prince. 
‘I  have  always  said,  and  I  say  still,  that  the  field  of  operations  is  bound 
to  be  Poland,  and  the  enemy  will  never  advance  beyond  the  Niemen.’ 
Dessalle  looked  in  amazement  at  the  prince,  who  was  talking  of  the 
Niemen,  when  the  enemy  was  already  at  the  Dnieper.  But  Princess 
Marya,  forgetting  the  geographical  position  of  the  Niemen,  supposed 
that  what  her  father  said  was  true. 

‘When  the  snows  thaw  they’ll  drown  in  the  marshes  of  Poland.  It’s 
only  that  they  can’t  see  it,’  said  the  old  prince,  obviously  thinking  of 
the  campaign  of  1807,  which  seemed  to  him  so  recent.  ‘Bennigsen  ought 
to  have  entered  Prussia  earlier,  and  things  would  have  taken  quite  an¬ 
other  turn.  .  .  .’ 

‘But,  prince!’  said  Dessalle  timidly,  ‘the  letter  speaks  of 
Vitebsk.  .  .  .’  , 

‘Ah,  the  letter?  Yes,  .  .  .’  said  the  prince,  with  displeasure.  ‘Yes 
.  .  .  yes  .  .  .’  His  face  suddenly  assumed  a  gloomy  expression.  He 
paused.  ‘Yes,  he  writes,  the  French  have  been  beaten.  On  what  river 
was  it?’ 

Dessalle  dropped  his  eyes.  ‘The  prince  says  nothing  about  that,’  he 
said  gently. 

‘What,  doesn’t  he?  Why,  you  don’t  suppose  I  imagined  it.’ 

Every  one  was  for  a  long  time  silent. 

‘Yes  .  .  .  yes  .  .  .  Well,  Mihail  Ivanitch,’  he  said  suddenly,  rais¬ 
ing  his  head  and  pointing  to  the  plan  of  the  building,  ‘tell  me  how  you 
propose  to  make  that  alteration.  .  .  .’ 

Mihail  Ivanitch  went  up  to  the  plan,  and  the  old  prince,  talking 
to  him  about  it,  went  off  to  his  own  room,  casting  a  wrathful  glance  at 
Princess  Marya  and  Dessalle. 

Princess  Marya  saw  Dessalle ’s  embarrassed  and  amazed  expres¬ 
sion  as  he  looked  at  her  father.  She  noticed  his  silence  and  was  struck 
by  the  fact  that  her  father  had  left  his  son’s  letter  forgotten  on  the 
drawing-room  table.  But  she  was  afraid  to  speak  of  it,  to  ask  Dessalle 
the  reason  of  his  embarrassed  silence,  afraid  even  to  think  about  it. 

In  the  evening  Mihail  Ivanitch  was  sent  by  the  prince  to  Princess 
Marya  to  ask  for  the  letter  that  had  been  forgotten  on  the  table. 
Princess  Marya  gave  him  the  letter,  and  much  as  she  disliked  doing 
so,  she  ventured  to  ask  what  her  father  was  doing. 

‘Still  very  busy,’  said  Mihail  Ivanitch,  in  a  tone  of  deferential  irony, 
that  made  her  turn  pale.  ‘Worrying  very  much  over  the  new  wing. 
Been  reading  a  little:  but  now’ — Mihail  Ivanitch  dropped  his  voice — 
‘he’s  at  his  bureau  looking  after  his  will,  I  expect.’  One  of  the  old 
prince’s  favourite  occupations  of  late  had  been  going  over  the  papers 
which  he  meant  to  leave  at  his  death,  and  called  his  ‘will.’ 

‘And  is  Alpatitch  being  sent  to  Smolensk?’  asked  Princess  Marya. 

‘To  be  sure;  he’s  been  waiting  a  long  while  for  his  orders.’ 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


651 


III 

When  Mihail  Ivanitch  went  back  to  the  study  with  the  letter,  the  old 
prince  was  sitting  in  his  spectacles  with  a  shade  over  his  eyes  and 
shades  on  the  candles,  at  his  open  bureau,  surrounded  by  papers,  held 
a  long  distance  off.  He  was  in  a  rather  solemn  attitude,  reading  the 
papers  (the  ‘remarks,’  as  he  called  them)  which  were  to  be  given  to 
the  Tsar  after  his  death. 

When  Mihail  Ivanitch  went  in,  there  were  tears'  in  his  eyes,  called 
up  by  the  memory  of  the  time  when  he  had  written  what  he  was  now 
reading.  He  took  the  letter  out  of  Mihail  Ivanitch’s  hand,  put  it  in  his 
pocket,  folded  up  his  papers  and  called  in  Alpatitch,  who  had  been 
waiting  a  long  while  to  see  him. 

He  had  noted  down  on  a  sheet  of  paper  what  he  wanted  in  Smolensk, 
and  he  began  walking  up  and  down  the  room,  as  he  gave  his  instruc¬ 
tions  to  Alpatitch,  standing  at  the  door. 

‘First,  letter  paper,  do  you  hear,  eight  quires,  like  this  pattern,  you 
see;  gilt  edged  .  .  .  take  the  pattern,  so  as  to  be  sure  to  match  it; 
varnish,  sealing-wax — according  to  Mihail  Ivanitch’s  list.’ 

He  walked  up  and  down  the  room  and  glanced  at  the  memorandum. 

‘Then  deliver  the  letter  about  the  enrolment  to  the  governor  in  per¬ 
son.’ 

Then  bolts  for  the  doors  of  the  new  building  were  wanted,  and  must 
be  of  a  new  pattern,  which  the  old  prince  had  himself  designed.  Then 
an  iron-bound  box  was  to  be  ordered  for  keeping  his  will  in. 

Giving  Alpatitch  his  instructions  occupied  over  two  hours.  The  prince 
still  would  not  let  him  go.  He  sat  down,  sank  into  thought,  and  closing 
his  eyes,  dropped  into  a  doze.  Alpatitch  made  a  slight  movement. 

‘Well,  go  along,  go  along,’  said  the  old  prince;  ‘if  anything  is  wanted, 
I’ll  send.’ 

Alpatitch  went  away.  The  prince  went  back  again  to  the  bureau ;  glanc¬ 
ing  into  it,  he  passed  his  hand  over  his  papers,  closed  it  again,  and  sat 
down  to  the  table  to  write  to  the  governor. 

It  was  late  when  he  sealed  the  letter  and  got  up.  He  was  sleepy,  but 
he  knew  he  would  not  sleep,  and  that  he  would  be  haunted  by  most 
miserable  thoughts  in  bed.  He  called  Tihon,  and  went  through  the  rooms 
with  him,  to  tell  him  where  to  make  up  his  bed  for  that  night.  He  walked 
about,  measuring  every  corner. 

There  was  no  place  that  pleased  him,  but  worst  of  all  was  the  couch 
in  the  study  that  he  had  been  used  to.  That  couch  had  become  an  object 
of  dread  to  him,  probably  from  the  painful  thoughts  he  had  thought 
lying  on  it.  No  place  was  quite  right,  but  best  of  them  all  was  the  cor¬ 
ner  in  the  divan-room,  behind  the  piano;  he  had  never  slept  there  yet. 

Tihon  brought  the  bedstead  in  with  the  footmen,  and  began  putting 
it  up. 

‘That’s  not  right,  that’s  not  right!’  cried  the  old  prince.  With  his  own 


652  WARANDPEACE 

hands  he  moved  the  bed  an  inch  further  from  the  corner,  and  then  closer 
to  it  again. 

‘Well,  at  last,  I  have  done  everything;  now  I  shall  rest,’  thought  the 
prince,  and  he  left  it  to  Tihon  to  undress  him. 

Frowning  with  vexation  at  the  effort  he  had  to  make  to  take  off  his 
coat  and  trousers,  the  prince  undressed,  dropped  heavily  down  on  his 
bed,  and  seemed  to  sink  into  thought,  staring  contemptuously  at  his 
yellow,  withered  legs.  He  was  not  really  thinking,  but  simply  pausing 
before  the  effort  to  lift  his  legs  up  and  lay  them  in  the  bed.  ‘Ugh,  how 
hard  it  is!  Ugh,  if  these  toils  could  soon  be  over,  and  if  you  would  let  me 
go!’  he  mused.  Pinching  his  lips  tightly,  he  made  that  effort  for  the 
twenty  thousandth  time,  and  lay  down.  But  he  had  hardly  lain  down, 
when  all  at  once  the  bed  seemed  to  rock  regularly  to  and  fro  under  him, 
as  though  it  were  heaving  and  jolting.  He  had  this  sensation  almost  every 
night.  He  opened  his  eyes  that  were  closing  themselves. 

‘No  peace,  damn  them!’  he  grumbled,  with  inward  rage  at  some  per¬ 
sons  unknown.  ‘Yes,  yes,  there  was  something  else  of  importance — 
something  of  great  importance  I  was  saving  up  to  think  of  in  bed.  The 
bolts?  No,  I  did  speak  about  them.  No,  there  was  something,  something 
in  the  drawing-room.  Princess  Marya  talked  some  nonsense.  Dessalle— 
he’s  a  fool —  said  something,  something  in  my  pocket — I  don’t  remem¬ 
ber.’ 

‘Tishka!  what  were  we  talking  about  at  dinner?’ 

‘About  Prince  Mihail  .  .  .’ 

‘Stay,  stay’ — the  prince  slapped  his  hand  down  on  the  table.  ‘Yes,  I 
know,  Prince  Andrey’s  letter.  Princess  Marya  read  it.  Dessalle  said  some¬ 
thing  about  Vitebsk.  I’ll  read  it  now.’ 

He  told  Tihon  to  get  the  letter  out  of  his  pocket,  and  to  move  up  the 
little  table  with  the  lemonade  and  the  spiral  wax  candle  on  it,  and  put¬ 
ting  on  his  spectacles  he  began  reading.  Only  then  in  the  stillness  of  the 
night,  as  he  read  the  letter,  in  the  faint  light  under  the  green  shade, 
for  the  first  time  he  grasped  for  an  instant  its  meaning.  ‘The  French  are 
at  Vitebsk,  in  four  days’  march  they  may  be  at  Smolensk;  perhaps  they 
are  there  by  now.  Tishka!  ’  Tihon  jumped  up.  ‘No,  nothing,  nothing!  ’  he 
cried. 

He  put  the  letter  under  the  candlestick  and  closed  his  eyes.  And  there 
rose  before  his  mind  the  Danube,  bright  midday,  the  reeds,  the  Russian 
camp,  and  he,  a  young  general,  without  one  wrinkle  on  his  brow,  bold, 
gay,  ruddy,  entering  Potyomkin’s  gay-coloured  tent,  and  the  burning 
sensation  of  envy  of  the  favourite  stirs  within  him  as  keenly  as  at  the 
time.  And  he  recalls  every  word  uttered  at  that  first  interview  with 
Potyomkin.  And  then  he  sees  a  plump,  short  woman  with  a  sallow,  fat 
face,  the  mother  empress,  her  smiles  and  words  at  her  first  gracious  re¬ 
ception  of  him;  and  then  her  face  as  she  lay  on  the  bier,  and  the  quarrel 
with  Zubov  over  her  coffin  for  the  right  to  kiss  her  hand. 

‘Oh,  to  make  haste,  to  make  haste  back  to  that  time,  and  oh,  that  the 
present  might  soon  be  over  and  they  might  leave  me  in  peace!’ 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


653 


IV 

Bleak  Hills,  the  estate  of  Prince  Nikolay  Andreitch  Bolkonsky,  was 
sixty  versts  from  Smolensk,  a  little  to  the  rear  of  it,  and  three  versts  from 
the  main  road  to  Moscow. 

The  same  evening  on  which  the  old  prince  gave  Alpatitch  his  instruc¬ 
tions,  Dessalle  asked  for  a  few  words  with  Princess  Marya,  and  told  her 
that  since  the  prince  was  not  quite  well  and  was  taking  no  steps  to  secure 
his  own  safety,  though  from  Prince  Andrey’s  letter  it  was  plain  that  to 
stay  on  at  Bleak  Hills  was  not  free  from  danger,  he  respectfully  advised 
her  to  write  herself,  and  send  by  Alpatitch  a  letter  to  the  governor  at 
Smolensk,  and  to  ask  him  to  let  her  know  the  position  of  affairs  and  the 
degree  of  danger  they  were  running  at  Bleak  Hills.  Dessalle  wrote  the 
letter  to  the  governor  for  Princess  Marya  and  she  signed  it,  and  the 
letter  was  given  to  Alpatitch  with  instructions  to  give  it  to  the  governor, 
and  in  case  there  was  danger,  to  come  back  as  quickly  as  possible. 

When  he  had  received  all  his  orders,  Alpatitch  put  on  his  white  beaver 
hat — a  gift  from  the  prince — and  carrying  a  stick  in  his  hand,  like  the 
prince,  went  out,  accompanied  by  all  his  household,  to  get  into  the 
leather  gig  harnessed  to  three  sleek,  roan  horses. 

The  bells  were  tied  up  and  stuffed  with  paper.  The  prince  allowed  no 
one  at  Bleak  Hills  to  drive  with  bells.  But  Alpatitch  loved  to  have  bells 
ringing  when  he  went  a  long  journey.  All  Alpatitch ’s  satellites,  the  count¬ 
ing-house  clerk,  the  servants’  cook  and  the  head  cook,  two  old  women, 
a  foot-boy,  coachman,  and  various  other  servants  saw  him  off. 

His  daughter  put  chintz-covered,  down  pillows  under  him  and  behind 
his  back.  His  old  sister-in-law  slyly  popped  in  a  kerchief  full  of  things. 
One  of  the  coachmen  helped  him  to  get  in. 

‘There,  there,  women’s  fuss!  Women  folk,  women  folk!’  said  Alpa¬ 
titch,  puffing  and  talking  rapidly,  just  as  the  old  prince  used  to  talk. 
He  sat  down  in  the  gig,  giving  the  counting-house  clerk  his  last  direc¬ 
tions  about  the  work  to  be  done  in  the  fields;  and  then  dropping  his 
imitation  of  the  prince,  Alpatitch  took  his  hat  off  his  bald  head  and 
crossed  himself  three  times. 

‘If  there’s  anything  .  .  .  you  turn  back,  Yakov  Alpatitch;  for 
Christ’s  sake,  think  of  us,’  his  wife  called  to  him,  alluding  to  the  rumours 
of  war  and  of  the  enemy  near. 

‘Ah,  these  women  and  their  fuss!’  Alpatitch  muttered  to  himself  as 
he  drove  off,  looking  about  him  at  the  fields.  He  saw  rye  turning  yellow, 
thick  oats  still  green,  and  here  and  there  patches  still  black,  where  they 
were  only  just  beginning  the  second  ploughing.  Alpatitch  drove  on, 
admiring  the  crop  of  corn,  singularly  fine  that  season,  staring  at  the  rye 
fields,  in  some  of  which  reaping  was  already  beginning,  meditating  like 
a  true  husbandman  on  the  sowing  and  the  harvest,  and  wondering 
whether  he  had  forgotten  any  of  the  prince’s  instructions.  He  stopped 


654  WAR  AND  PEACE 

twice  to  feed  his  horses  on  the  way,  and  towards  the  evening  of  the  4th 
of  August  reached  the  town. 

All  the  way  Alpatitch  had  met  and  overtaken  waggons  and  troops,  and 
as  he  drove  into  Smolensk  he  heard  firing  in  the  distance,  but  he  scarcely 
heeded  the  sound.  What  struck  him  more  than  anything  was  that  close 
to  Smolensk  he  saw  a  splendid  field  of  oats  being  mown  down  by  some 
soldiers  evidently  for  forage;  there  was  a  camp,  too,  pitched  in  the  middle 
of  it.  This  did  make  an  impression  upon  Alpatitch,  but  he  soon  forgot 
it  in  thinking  over  his  own  affairs. 

All  the  interests  of  Alpatitch’s  life  had  been  for  over  thirty  years 
bounded  by  the  will  of  the  prince,  and  he  never  stepped  outside  that  limit. 
Anything  that  had  nothing  to  do  with  carrying  out  the  prince’s  orders 
had  no  interest,  had  in  fact  no  existence,  for  Alpatitch. 

On  reaching  Smolensk  on  the  evening  of  the  4th  of  August,  Alpatitch 
put  up  where  he  had  been  in  the  habit  of  putting  up  for  the  last  thirty 
years,  at  a  tavern  kept  by  a  former  house-porter,  Ferapontov,  beyond  the 
Dnieper  in  the  Gatchensky  quarter.  Twelve  years  before,  Ferapontov  had 
profited  by  Alpatitch’s  good  offices  to  buy  timber  from  the  old  prince, 
and  had  begun  going  into  trade;  and  by  now  he  had  a  house,  an  inn  and 
a  corn-dealer’s  shop  in  the  town.  Ferapontov  was  a  stout,  dark,  ruddy 
peasant  of  forty,  with  thick  lips,  a  thick,  knobby  nose,  similar  knobby 
bumps  over  his  black,  knitted  brows,  and  a  round  belly. 

He  was  standing  in  his  print  shirt  and  his  waistcoat  in  front  of  his 
shop,  which  looked  into  the  street.  He  saw  Alpatitch,  and  went  up  to  him. 

‘You’re  kindly  welcome,  Yakov  Alpatitch.  Folk  are  going  out  of  the 
town,  while  you  come  into  it,’  said  he. 

‘How’s  that?  Out  of  town?’  said  Alpatitch. 

‘To  be  sure,  I  always  say  folks  are  fools.  Always  frightened  of  the 
French.’ 

‘Women’s  nonsense,  women’s  nonsense!  ’  replied  Alpatitch. 

‘That’s  just  what  I  think,  Yakov  Alpatitch.  I  say  there’s  a  notice  put 
up  that  they  won’t  let  them  come  in,  so  to  be  sure  that’s  right.  But  the 
peasants  are  asking  as  much  as  three  roubles  for  a  cart  and  horse — they’ve 
no  conscience!  ’ 

Yakov  Alpatitch  heard  without  heeding.  He  asked  for  a  samovar,  and 
for  hay  for  his  horses;  and  after  drinking  tea  lay  down  to  sleep. 

All  night  long  the  troops  were  moving  along  the  street  by  the  tavern. 
Next  day  Alpatitch  put  on  a  tunic,  which  he  kept  for  wearing  in  town,  and 
went  out  to  execute  his  commissions.  It  was  a  sunny  morning,  and  by 
eight  o’clock  it  was  hot.  ‘A  precious  day  for  the  harvest,’  as  Alpatitch 
thought.  From  early  morning  firing  could  be  heard  from  beyond  the 
town. 

At  eight  o’clock  the  boom  of  cannon  mingled  with  the  rattle  of  mus¬ 
ketry.  The  streets  were  thronged  with  people,  hurrying  about,  and  also 
with  soldiers,  but  drivers  plied  for  hire,  the  shopkeepers  stood  at  their 
shops,  and  services  were  being  held  in  the  churches  just  as  usual.  Alpa¬ 
titch  went  to  the  shops,  to  the  government  offices,  to  the  post  and  to  the 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


655 

governor’s.  Everywhere  that  he  went  every  one  was  talking  of  the  war, 
and  of  the  enemy  who  was  attacking  the  town.  All  were  asking  one  an¬ 
other  what  was  to  be  done,  and  trying  to  calm  each  other’s  fears. 

At  the  governor’s  house,  Alpatitch  found  a  great  number  of  people,  and 
saw  Cossacks,  and  a  travelling  carriage  belonging  to  the  governor  at  the 
entrance.  On  the  steps  Yakov  Alpatitch  met  two  gentlemen,  one  of  whom 
he  knew.  This  gentleman,  a  former  police-captain,  was  speaking  with 
great  heat. 

‘Well,  this  is  no  jesting  matter,’  he  said.  ‘Good  luck  for  him  who  has 
only  himself  to  think  of.  It’s  bad  enough  for  one  alone,  but  when  one  has 
a  family  of  thirteen  and  a  whole  property.  .  .  .  Things  have  come  to  such 
a  pass  that  we  shall  all  be  ruined;  what’s  one  to  say  of  the  government 
after  that?  .  .  .  Ugh,  I’d  hang  the  brigands.  .  .  .’ 

‘Come,  come,  hush!  ’  said  the  other. 

‘What  do  I  care!  let  him  hear!  Why,  we’re  not  dogs!’  said  the  former 
police-captain,  and  looking  round,  he  caught  sight  of  Alpatitch. 

‘Ah,  Yakov  Alpatitch,  how  do  you  come  here?’ 

‘By  command  of  his  excellency  to  his  honour  the  governor,’  answered 
Alpatitch,  lifting  his  head  proudly  and  putting  his  hand  into  his  bosom, 
as  he  always  did  when  he  mentioned  the  old  prince.  .  .  .  ‘His  honour 
was  pleased  to  bid  me  inquire  into  the  position  of  affairs.’  he  said. 

‘Well,  you  may  as  well  know  then,’  cried  the  gentleman:  ‘they  have 
brought  matters  to  such  a  pass  that  there  are  no  carts  to  be  got,  nothing! 

.  .  .  That’s  it  again,  do  you  hear?’  he  said,  pointing  in  the  direction  from 
which  the  sounds  of  firing  came. 

‘They  have  brought  us  all  to  ruin  .  .  .  the  brigands!’  he  declared 
again,  and  he  went  down  the  steps. 

Alpatitch  shook  his  head  and  went  up.  The  waiting-room  was  full  of 
merchants,  women,  and  clerks,  looking  dumbly  at  one  another.  The  door 
of  the  governor’s  room  opened,  all  of  them  got  up  and  made  a  forward 
movement.  A  clerk  ran  out  of  the  room,  said  something  to  a  merchant, 
called  a  stout  official  with  a  cross  on  his  neck  to  follow  him,  and  vanished 
again,  obviously  trying  to  avoid  all  the  looks  and  the  questions  addressed 
to  him.  Alpatitch  moved  forward,  and  the  next  time  the  same  clerk 
emerged,  he  put  his  hand  into  his  buttoned  coat,  and  addressed  him,  hand¬ 
ing  him  the  two  letters. 

‘To  his  honour  the  Baron  Ash  from  the  general-in-chief  Prince  Bolkon¬ 
sky,’  he  boomed  out  with  so  much  pomposity  and  significance  that  the 
clerk  turned  to  him  and  took  the  letters.  A  few  minutes  afterwards  Alpa- 
titch  was  shown  into  the  presence  of  the  governor,  who  said  to  him  hur¬ 
riedly,  ‘Inform  the  prince  and  the  princess  that  I  knew  nothing  about  it. 
I  acted  on  the  highest  instructions — here.  .  .  .’ 

He  gave  Alpatitch  a  document. 

‘Still,  as  the  prince  is  not  well  my  advice  to  him  is  to  go  to  Moscow. 
I’m  setting  off  myself  immediately.  Tell  them  .  .  .’  But  the  governor 
did  not  finish ;  a  dusty  and  perspiring  officer  ran  into  the  room  and  began 


6=;6  WARANDPEACE 

saying  something  in  French.  A  look  of  horror  came  into  the  governor’s 
face. 

‘You  can  go,’  he  said,  nodding  to  Alpatitch,  and  he  put  some  questions 
to  the  officer.  Eager,  panic-stricken,  helpless  glances  were  turned  upon 
Alpatitch  when  he  came  out  of  the  governor’s  room.  Alpatitch  could  not 
help  listening  now  to  firing,  which  seemed  to  come  closer  and  to  be  getting 
hotter,  as  he  hurried  back  to  the  inn.  The  document  the  governor  had 
given  to  Alpatitch  ran  as  follows: 

‘I  guarantee  that  the  town  of  Smolensk  is  not  in  the  slightest  danger, 
and  it  is  improbable  that  it  should  be  threatened  in  any  way.  I  myself 
from  one  side,  and  Prince  Bagration  from  the  other,  will  effect  a  junction 
before  Smolensk  on  the  22nd  instant,  and  both  armies  will  proceed  with 
their  joint  forces  to  defend  their  compatriots  of  the  province  under  your 
government,  till  their  efforts  beat  back  the  enemies  of  our  country,  or 
till  their  gallant  ranks  are  cut  down  to  the  last  warrior.  You  will  see  from 
this  that  you  have  a  perfect  right  to  reassure  the  inhabitants  of  Smolensk, 
as  they  are  defended  by  two  such  valiant  armies  and  can  be  confident  of 
their  victory. 

(‘By  order  of  Barclay  de  Tolly  to  the  civil  governor  of  Smolensk,  Baron 
Ash.  1812.’) 

Crowds  of  people  were  moving  uneasily  about  the  streets.  Waggons, 
loaded  up  with  household  crockery,  chairs,  and  cupboards,  were  con¬ 
stantly  emerging  from  the  gates  of  houses,  and  moving  along  the  streets. 
Carts  were  standing  at  the  entrance  of  the  house  next  to  Ferapontov’s,  and 
women  were  wailing  and  exchanging  good-byes.  The  yard  dog  was  frisk¬ 
ing  about  the  horses,  barking. 

Alpatitch ’s  step  was  more  hurried  than  usual  as  he  entered  the  yard,  and 
went  straight  under  the  shed  to  his  horses  and  cart.  The  coachman  was 
asleep;  he  waked  him  up,  told  him  to  put  the  horses  in,  and  went  into  the 
outer  room  of  the  house.  In  the  private  room  of  the  family,  he  heard  the 
wailing  of  children,  the  heartrending  sobs  of  a  woman,  and  the  furious, 
husky  shouting  of  Ferapontov.  The  cook  came  fluttering  into  the  outer 
room  like  a  frightened  hen,  just  as  Alpatitch  walked  in. 

‘He’s  beating  her  to  death — beating  the  mistress!  .  .  .  He’s  beaten 
her  so,  thrashed  her  so!  .  .  .’ 

‘What  for?’  asked  Alpatitch. 

‘She  kept  begging  to  go  away.  A  woman’s  way!  Take  me  away,  says 
she;  don’t  bring  me  to  ruin  with  all  my  little  children;  folks  are  all  gone, 
says  she,  what  are  we  about?  So  he  fell  to  beating  her  .  .  .  beating  and 
thrashing  her!  ’ 

Alpatitch  nodded  his  head,  apparently  in  approval  at  those  words;  and 
not  caring  to  hear  more  he  went  towards  the  door  on  the  opposite  side  lead¬ 
ing  to  the  room  in  which  his  purchases  had  been  left. 

‘Wretch,  villain,’  screamed  a  thin,  pale  woman,  bursting  out  at  that 
moment  with  a  child  in  her  arms  and  her  kerchief  torn  off  her  head.  She 
ran  down  the  steps  into  the  yard.  Ferapontov  was  going  after  her,  but 


WARANDPEACE  657 

seeing  Alpatitch,  he  pulled  down  his  waistcoat,  smoothed  his  hair,  yawned 
and  followed  Alpatitch  into  the  room. 

‘Do  you  want  to  be  getting  off  already?’  he  asked.  Without  answering 
the  question  or  looking  round  at  him,  Alpatitch  collected  his  purchases 
and  asked  how  much  he  owed  him. 

‘We’ll  reckon  up!  Been  at  the  governor’s,  eh?’  asked  Ferapontov.  ‘What 
did  you  hear?’ 

Alpatitch  replied  that  the  governor  had  told  him  nothing  definite. 

‘How  are  we  to  pack  up  and  go  with  our  business?’  said  Ferapontov. 
‘Seven  roubles  to  pay  for  cartage  to  Dorogobuzh.  What  I  say  is:  they 
have  no  conscience!  ’  said  he.  ‘Selivanov,  he  did  a  good  turn  on  Friday,  sold 
flour  to  the  army  for  nine  roubles  the  sack.  What  do  you  say  to  some  tea?’ 
he  added.  While  the  horses  were  being  harnessed,  Alpatitch  and  Ferapon¬ 
tov  drank  tea  and  discussed  the  price  of  corn,  the  crops,  and  the  favourable 
weather  for  the  harvest. 

‘It’s  getting  quieter  though,’  said  Ferapontov,  getting  up  after  drinking 
three  cups  of  tea.  ‘I  suppose,  our  side  has  got  the  best  of  it.  It’s  been  said 
they  won’t  let  them  in.  So  we’re  in  force  it  seems.  .  .  .  The  other  day  they 
were  saying  Matvey  Ivanitch  Platov  drove  them  into  the  river  Marina: 
eighteen  thousand  of  them  he  drowned  in  one  day.’ 

Alpatitch  gathered  up  his  purchases,  handed  them  to  the  coachman,  and 
settled  his  accounts  with  Ferapontov.  There  was  the  sound  of  wheels  and 
hoofs  and  the  ringing  of  bells  as  the  gig  drove  out  of  the  gates. 

It  was  by  now  long  past  midday,  half  the  street  lay  in  shadow,  while 
half  was  in  brilliant  sunshine.  Alpatitch  glanced  out  of  the  window  and 
went  to  the  door.  All  of  a  sudden  there  came  a  strange  sound  of  a  far-away 
hiss  and  thump,  followed  by  the  boom  of  cannons,  mingling  into  a  dim 
roar  that  set  the  windows  rattling. 

Alpatitch  went  out  into  the  street;  two  men  were  running  along  the 
street  towards  the  bridge.  From  different  sides  came  the  hiss  and  thud  of 
cannon  balls  and  the  bursting  of  grenades,  as  they  fell  in  the  town.  But 
these  sounds  were  almost  unheard,  and  the  inhabitants  scarcely  noticed 
them,  in  comparison  with  the  boom  of  the  cannons  they  heard  beyond  the 
town.  It  was  the  bombardment,  which  Napoleon  had  ordered  to  be  opened 
upon  the  town  at  four  o’clock  from  one  hundred  and  thirty  cannons.  The 
people  did  not  at  first  grasp  the  meaning  of  this  bombardment. 

The  sounds  of  the  dropping  grenades  and  cannon  bads  at  first  only 
excited  the  curiosity  of  the  people.  Ferapontov’s  wife,  who  had  till  then 
been  wailing  in  the  shed,  ceased,  and  with  the  baby  in  her  arms  went  out 
to  the  gate,  staring  in  silence  at  the  people,  and  listening  to  the  sounds. 

The  cook  and  shopman  came  out  to  the  gate.  All  of  them  were  trying 
with  eager  curiosity  to  get  a  glimpse  of  the  projectiles  as  they  flew  over 
their  heads.  Several  persons  came  round  the  corner  in  eager  conversation. 

‘What  force!’  one  was  saying;  ‘roof  and  ceiling  were  smashed  up  to 
splinters.’ 

‘Like  a  pig  routing  into  the  earth,  it  went!  ’  said  another. 

‘Isn’t  it  first-rate?  Wakes  one  up!’  he  said  laughing. 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


658 

‘It’s  as  well  you  skipped  away  or  it  would  have  flattened  you  out.’ 

Others  joined  this  group.  They  stopped  and  described  how  a  cannon¬ 
ball  had  dropped  on  a  house  close  to  them.  Meanwhile  other  projectiles — 
now  a  cannon  ball,  with  rapid,  ominous  hiss,  and  now  a  grenade  with  a 
pleasant  whistle — flew  incessantly  over  the  people’s  heads:  but  not  one 
fell  close,  all  of  them  flew  over.  Alpatitch  got  into  his  gig.  Ferapontov  was 
standing  at  the  gate. 

‘Will  you  never  have  done  gaping!  ’  he  shouted  to  the  cook,  who  in  her 
red  petticoat,  with  her  sleeves  tucked  up  and  her  bare  elbows  swinging,  >; 
had  stepped  to  the  corner  to  listen  to  what  was  being  said. 

‘A  wonder  it  is!’  she  was  saying,  but  hearing  her  master’s  voice,  she  1 
came  back,  pulling  down  her  tucked-up  skirt. 

Again  something  hissed,  but  very  close  this  time,  like  a  bird  swooping 
down;  there  was  a  flash  of  fire  in  the  middle  of  the  street,  the  sound  of  a 
shot,  and  the  street  was  filled  with  smoke. 

‘Scoundrel,  what  are  you  about?’  shouted  Ferapontov,  running  up  to 
the  cook. 

At  the  same  instant  there  rose  a  piteous  wailing  from  the  women;  the 
baby  set  up  a  terrified  howling,  and  the  people  crowded  with  pale  faces 
round  the  cook.  Above  them  all  rose  out  of  the  crowd  the  moans  and  cries 
of  the  cook. 

‘O-o-oy,  good  kind  souls,  blessed  friends!  don’t  let  me  die!  Good  kind 
souls!  .  . 

Five  minutes  later  no  one  was  left  in  the  street.  The  cook,  with  her  leg  i 
broken  by  the  bursting  grenade,  had  been  carried  into  the  kitchen.  Al¬ 
patitch,  his  coachman,  Ferapontov’s  wife  and  children  and  the  porter  were 
sitting  in  the  cellar  listening.  The  thunder  of  the  cannon,  the  hiss  of  the 
balls,  and  the  piteous  moaning  of  the  cook,  which  rose  above  all  the  noise,  | 
never  ceased  for  an  instant.  Ferapontov’s  wife  alternately  dandled  and 
soothed  her  baby,  and  asked  in  a  frightened  whisper  of  every  one  who 
came  into  the  cellar  where  was  her  husband,  who  had  remained  in  the 
street.  The  shopman  told  her  the  master  had  gone  with  the  crowd  to  the 
cathedral,  where  they  were  raising  on  high  the  wonder-working,  hoi}' 
picture  of  Smolensk. 

Towards  dusk  the  cannonade  began  to  subside.  Alpatitch  came  out  of 
the  cellar  and  stood  in  the  doorway. 

The  clear  evening  sky  was  all  overcast  with  smoke.  And  a  new  crescent 
moon  looked  strange,  shining  high  up  in  the  sky,  through  that  smoke. 
After  the  terrible  thunder  of  the  cannons  had  ceased,  a  hush  seemed  to 
hang  over  the  town,  broken  only  by  the  footsteps,  which  seemed  all  over 
the  town,  the  sound  of  groans  and  distant  shouts,  and  the  crackle  of  fires. 
The  cook’s  moans  had  ceased  now.  On  two  sides  black  clouds  of  smoke 
from  fires  rose  up  and  drifted  away.  Soldiers  in  different  uniforms  walked 
and  ran  about  the  streets  in  different  directions,  not  in  ranks,  but  like  ants 
out  of  a  disturbed  ant  heap.  Several  of  them  ran  into  Ferapontov’s  yard 
before  Alpatitch ’s  eyes.  He  went  out  to  the  gate.  A  regiment,  crowded  and 
hurrying,  blocked  up  the  street,  going  back. 


WARANDPEACE  659 

‘The  town’s  surrendered;  get  away,  get  away,’  said  an  officer  noticing 
his  figure;  and  turning  immediately  to  the  soldiers,  he  shouted,  ‘I’ll  teach 
you  to  run  through  the  yards!  ’ 

Alpatitch  went  back  to  the  house,  and  calling  the  coachman  told  him 
to  set  off.  Alpatitch  and  the  coachman  were  followed  out  by  all  the  house¬ 
hold  of  Ferapontov.  When  they  saw  the  smoke  and  even  the  flames  of 
burning  houses,  which  began  to  be  visible  now  in  the  dusk,  the  women, 
who  had  been  silent  till  then,  broke  into  a  sudden  wail,  as  they  gazed  at 
the  fires.  As  though  seconding  them,  similar  wails  rose  up  in  other  parts 
of  the  street.  Alpatitch  and  the  coachman  with  trembling  hands  pulled  out 
the  tangled  reins  and  the  traces  of  the  horses  under  the  shed. 

As  Alpatitch  was  driving  out  of  the  gate,  he  saw  about  a  dozen  soldiers 
in  loud  conversation  in  Ferapontov’s  open  shop.  They  were  filling  their 
bags  and  knapsacks  with  wheaten  Hour  and  sunflower  seeds.  At  that  mo¬ 
ment  Ferapontov  returned  and  went  into  the  shop.  On  seeing  the  soldiers, 
he  was  about  to  shout  at  them,  but  all  at  once  he  stopped  short,  and  clutch¬ 
ing  at  his  hair  broke  into  a  sobbing  laugh. 

‘Carry  it  all  away,  lads!  Don’t  leave  it  for  the  devils,’  he  shouted, 
snatching  up  the  sacks  himself  and  pitching  them  into  the  street.  Some  of 
the  soldiers  ran  away  in  a  fright,  others  went  on  filling  up  their  bags.  See¬ 
ing  Alpatitch,  Ferapontov  turned  to  him. 

‘It’s  all  over  with  Russia!  ’  he  shouted.  ‘Alpatitch1  it’s  all  over!  I’ll  set 
fire  to  it  myself.  It’s  over  .  .  .’  Ferapontov  ran  into  the  house. 

An  unbroken  stream  of  soldiers  was  blocking  up  the  whole  street,  so 
that  Alpatitch  could  not  pass  and  was  obliged  to  wait.  Ferapontov’s  wife 
and  children  were  sitting  in  a  cart  too,  waiting  till  it  was  possible  to  start. 

It  was  by  now  quite  dark.  There  were  stars  in  the  sky,  and  from  time 
to  time  the  new  moon  shone  through  the  veil  of  smoke.  Alpatitch ’s  and 
his  hostess’s  vehicles  moved  slowly  along  in  the  rows  of  soldiers  and  of 
other  conveyances,  and  on  the  slope  down  to  the  Dnieper  they  had  to  halt 
altogether.  In  a  lane  not  far  from  the  cross-roads  where  the  traffic  had 
come  to  a  full  stop,  there  were  shops  and  a  house  on  fire.  The  fire  was  by 
now  burning  down.  The  flame  died  down  and  was  lost  in  black  smoke,  then 
flared  up  suddenly,  lighting  up  with  strange  distinctness  the  faces  of  the 
crowd  at  the  cross-roads.  Black  figures  were  flitting  about  before  the  fire, 
and  talk  and  shouts  could  be  heard  above  the  unceasing  crackling  of  the 
flames.  Alpatitch,  seeing  that  it  would  be  some  time  before  his  gig  could 
move  forward,  got  out  and  went  back  to  the  lane  to  look  at  the  fire.  Soldiers 
were  scurrying  to  and  fro  before  the  fire;  and  Alpatitch  saw  two  soldiers 
with  a  man  in  a  frieze  coat  dragging  burning  beams  from  the  fire  across  the 
street  to  a  house  near,  while  others  carried  armfuls  of  hay. 

Alpatitch  joined  a  great  crowd  of  people  standing  before  a  high  corn 
granary  in  full  blaze.  The  walls  were  all  in  flames;  the  back  wall  had 
fallen  in ;  the  plank  roof  was  breaking  down,  and  the  beams  were  glowing. 
The  crowd  were  evidently  watching  for  the  moment  when  the  roof  would 
fall  in.  Alpatitch  too  waited  to  see  it. 

‘Alpatitch !  ’  the  old  man  suddenly  heard  a  familiar  voice  calling  to  him. 


66o 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Mercy  on  us,  your  excellency,’  answered  Alpatitch,  instantly  recognis 
ing  the  voice  of  his  young  master. 

Prince  Andrey,  wearing  a  cape,  and  mounted  on  a  black  horse,  was  i  t 
the  crowd,  and  looking  at  Alpatitch. 

‘How  did  you  come  here?’  he  asked.  v 

‘Your  .  .  .  your  excellency!  ’  Alpatitch  articulated,  and  he  broke  into 
sobs.  .  .  .  ‘Your,  your  .  .  .  is  it  all  over  with  us,  really?  Master  .  .  .’ 

‘How  is  it  you  are  here?’  repeated  Prince  Andrey.  The  flames  flared  up 
at  that  instant,  and  Alpatitch  saw  in  the  bright  light  his  young  master’s 
pale  and  worn  face.  Alpatitch  told  him  how  he  had  been  sent  to  the  town 
and  had  difficulty  in  getting  away. 

‘What  do  you  say,  your  excellency,  is  it  all  over  with  us?’  he  asked 
again. 

Prince  Andrey,  making  no  reply,  took  out  his  note-book,  and  raising  his 
knee,  scribbled  in  pencil  on  a  leaf  he  had  torn  out.  He  wrote  to  his  sister: 

‘Smolensk  has  surrendered,’  he  wrote.  ‘Bleak  Hills  will  be  occupied  by 
the  enemy  within  a  week.  Set  off  at  once  for  Moscow.  Let  me  know  at  once 
when  you  start;  send  a  messenger  to  Usvyazh.’ 

Scribbling  these  words,  and  giving  Alpatitch  the  paper,  he  gave  him 
further  directions  about  sending  off  the  old  prince,  the  princess  and  his 
son  with  his  tutor,  and  how  and  where  to  let  him  hear,  as  soon  as  they 
had  gone.  Before  he  had  finished  giving  those  instructions,  a  staff  officer, 
followed  by  his  suite,  galloped  up  to  him. 

‘You  a  colonel,’  shouted  the  staff  officer,  in  a  voice  Prince  Andrey  knew, 
speaking  with  a  German  accent.  ‘Houses  are  being  set  on  fire  in  your 
presence  and  you  stand  still!  What’s  the  meaning  of  it?  You  will  answer 
for  it,’  shouted  Berg,  who  was  now  assistant  to  the  head  of  the  staff  of  the 
assistant  of  the  chief  officer  of  the  staff  of  the  commander  of  the  left  flank 
of  the  infantry  of  the  first  army,  a  very  agreeable  and  prominent  position, 
so  Berg  said. 

Prince  Andrey  stared  at  him,  and  without  making  any  reply  went  on 
addressing  Alpatitch: 

‘Tell  them  then  that  I  shall  wait  for  an  answer  till  the  ioth,  and  if  I 
don’t  receive  news  by  the  ioth,  that  they  have  all  gone  away,  I  shall  be 
obliged  to  throw  up  everything  and  go  myself  to  Bleak  Hills.’ 

‘Prince,’  said  Berg,  recognising  Prince  Andrey,  ‘I  only  speak  because 
it’s  my  duty  to  carry  out  my  instructions,  because  I  always  do  exactly 
carry  out  ...  You  must  please  excuse  me,’  Berg  tried  to  apologise. 

There  was  a  crash  in  the  fire.  The  flames  subsided  for  an  instant;  black 
clouds  of  smoke  rolled  under  the  roof.  There  was  another  fearful  crash, 
and  the  falling  of  some  enormous  weight. 

‘Ooo-roo!’  the  crowd  yelled,  as  the  ceiling  of  the  granary  fell  in,  and  a 
smell  of  baked  cakes  rose  from  the  burning  wheat.  The  flames  flared  up 
again,  and  lighted  up  the  delighted  and  careworn  faces  of  the  crowd 
around  it. 

The  man  in  the  frieze  coat,  brandishing  his  arms  in  the  air,  was 
shouting: 


66i 


WAR  AND  PEACE 
‘First-rate!  Now  she’s  started!  First-rate,  lads!  .  .  ‘That’s  the  owner 
himself,’  murmured  voices. 

‘So  you  tell  them  everything  I  have  told  you,’  said  Prince  Andrey,  ad¬ 
dressing  Alpatitch.  And  without  bestowing  a  word  on  Berg,  who  stood 
mute  beside  him,  he  put  spurs  to  his  horse  and  rode  down  the  lane. 


V 

From  Smolensk  the  troops  continued  to  retreat.  The  enemy  followed  them. 
On  the  ioth  of  August  the  regiment  of  which  Prince  Andrey  was  in  com¬ 
mand  was  marching  along  the  high-road  past  the  avenue  that  led  to  Bleak 
Hills.  The  heat  and  drought  had  lasted  more  than  three  weeks.  Every  day 
curly  clouds  passed  over  the  sky,  rarely  covering  the  sun;  but  towards 
evening  the  sky  cleared  again  and  the  sun  set  in  a  glowing,  red  mist.  But  a 
heavy  dew  refreshed  the  earth  at  night.  The  wheat  left  in  the  fields  was 
burnt  up  and  dropping  out  of  the  ear.  The  marshes  were  dry.  The  cattle 
lowed  from  hunger,  finding  nothing  to  graze  on  in  the  sun-baked  meadows. 
Only  at  night  and  in  the  woods,  as  long  as  the  dew  lasted,  it  was  cool.  But 
on  the  road,  on  the  high-road  along  which  the  troops  marched,  there  was 
no  coolness  even  at  night,  not  even  where  the  road  passed  through  the 
woods.  The  dew  was  imperceptible  on  the  sandy  dust  of  the  road,  more 
than  a  foot  deep.  As  soon  as  it  was  daylight,  the  soldiers  began  to  move 
The  transports  and  artillery  moved  noiselessly,  buried  up  to  their  axles, 
and  the  infantry  sank  to  their  ankles  in  the  soft,  stifling,  burning  dust, 
that  never  got  cool  even  at  night.  The  sandy  dust  clung  to  their  legs  and 
to  the  wheels,  rose  in  a  cloud  over  their  heads,  and  got  into  the  eyes  and 
hair  and  nostrils  and  lungs  of  the  men  and  beasts  that  moved  along  the 
road.  The  higher  the  sun  rose,  the  higher  rose  the  cloud  of  dust,  and 
through  the  fine,  burning  dust  the  sun  in  the  cloudless  sky  looked  like  a 
purple  ball,  at  which  one  could  gaze  with  undazzled  eyes.  There  was  no 
wind,  and  the  men  gasped  for  breath  in  the  stagnant  atmosphere.  They 
marched  with  handkerchiefs  tied  over  their  mouths  and  noses.  When  they 
reached  the  villages,  there  was  a  rush  for  the  wells.  They  fought  over  the 
water  and  drank  it  down  to  the  mud. 

Prince  Andrey  was  in  command  of  a  regiment;  and  the  management  of 
the  regiment,  the  welfare  of  his  men,  the  necessity  of  receiving  and  giving 
orders  occupied  his  mind.  The  burning  and  abandonment  of  Smolensk 
made  an  epoch  in  Prince  Andrey’s  life.  A  new  feeling  of  intense  hatred  of 
the  enemy  made  him  forget  his  own  sorrow.  He  was  devoted  heart  and  soul 
to  the  interests  of  his  regiment;  he  was  careful  of  the  welfare  of  his  men 
and  his  officers,  and  cordial  in  his  manner  with  them.  They  called  him  in 
the  regiment  ‘our  prince,’  were  proud  of  him,  and  loved  him.  But  he  was 
kind  and  gentle  only  with  his  own  men,  with  Timohin,  and  others  like 
him,  people  quite  new  to  him,  belonging  to  a  different  world,  people  who 
could  have  no  notion  of  his  past.  As  soon  as  he  was  brought  into  contact 
with  any  of  his  old  acquaintances,  any  of  the  staff  officers,  he  bristled  up 


662 


WAR  AND  PEACE 
again  at  once,  and  was  vindictive,  ironical,  and  contemptuous.  Everything 
associated  by  memories  with  the  past  was  repulsive  to  him,  and  so,  in  his 
relations  with  that  old  world,  he  confined  himself  to  trying  to  do  his  duty, 
and  not  to  be  unfair. 

Prince  Andrey,  in  fact,  saw  everything  in  the  darkest,  gloomiest  light, 
especially  after  Smolensk,  which  he  considered  could  and  should  have  been 
defended,  had  been  abandoned,  on  the  6th  of  August,  and  his  invalid 
father  had  been  forced,  as  he  supposed,  to  flee  to  Moscow,  leaving  Bleak 
Hills,  the  house  that  he  had  so  loved,  that  he  had  designed  and  settled 
with  his  peasants,  to  be  plundered.  But  in  spite  of  that,  thanks  to  his  posi¬ 
tion,  Prince  Andrey  had  another  subject  to  think  of,  quite  apart  from  all 
general  questions,  his  regiment.  On  the  ioth  of  August,  the  column  of 
which  his  regiment  formed  part  reached  the  turning  leading  off  to  Bleak 
Hills.  Two  days  before  Prince  Andrey  had  received  the  news  that  his 
father,  his  son,  and  his  sister  had  gone  away  to  Moscow.  Though  there 
was  nothing  for  Prince  Andrey  to  do  at  Bleak  Hills,  he  decided,  with 
characteristic  desire  to  aggravate  his  own  sufferings,  that  he  must  ride 
over  there. 

He  ordered  his  horse  to  be  saddled,  and  turned  off  from  the  main  line 
of  march  towards  his  father’s  house,  where  he  had  been  born  and  had 
spent  his  childhood.  As  he  rode  by  the  pond,  where  there  always  used  to 
be  dozens  of  peasant  women  gossiping,  rinsing  their  linen,  or  beating  it 
with  washing  bats,  Prince  Andrey  noticed  that  there  was  no  one  by  the 
pond,  and  that  the  platform  where  they  used  to  stand  had  been  torn  away, 
and  was  floating  sideways  in  the  middle  of  the  pond,  half  under  water. 
Prince  Andrey  rode  up  to  the  keeper’s  lodge.  There  was  no  one  to  be  seen 
at  the  stone  gates  and  the  door  was  open.  The  paths  of  the  garden  were 
already  overgrown  with  weeds,  and  cattle  and  horses  were  straying  about 
the  English  park.  Prince  Andrey  rode  up  to  the  conservatory:  the  panes  ; 
were  smashed,  and  some  of  the  trees  in  tubs  were  broken,  others  quite 
dried  up.  He  called  Taras,  the  gardener.  No  one  answered.  Going  round 
the  conservatory  on  the  terrace,  he  saw  that  the  paling-fence  was  all 
broken  down,  and  branches  of  the  plum-trees  had  been  pulled  off  with  the 
fruit.  An  old  peasant,  whom  Prince  Andrey  used  to  see  in  his  childhood 
at  the  gate,  was  sitting  on  the  green  garden  seat  plaiting  bast  shoes. 

He  was  deaf,  and  did  not  hear  Prince  Andrey’s  approach.  He  was  sitting 
on  the  seat  on  which  the  old  prince  liked  to  sit,  and  near  him  the  bast  was 
hanging  on  the  branches  of  a  broken  and  dried-up  magnolia. 

Prince  Andrey  rode  up  to  the  house.  Several  lime-trees  in  the  old  garden 
had  been  cut  down ;  a  piebald  mare  and  a  colt  were  among  the  rose-trees 
just  before  the  house.  The  shutters  were  all  up  in  the  house,  except  on  one 
open  window  downstairs.  A  servant  lad  caught  sight  of  Prince  Andrey  and 
ran  into  the  house. 

Alpatitch  had  sent  his  family  away,  and  was  staying  on  alone  at  Bleak 
Hills.  He  was  sitting  indoors,  reading  the  Lives  oj  the  Saints.  On  hearing 
that  Prince  Andrey  had  come,  he  ran  out,  spectacles  on  nose,  buttoning 


WAR  AND  PEACE  663 

himself  up,  hurried  up  to  the  prince,  and  without  uttering  a  word,  burst 
into  tears,  kissing  his  knee. 

Then  he  turned  away  in  anger  at  his  own  weakness,  and  began  giving 
him  an  account  of  the  position  of  affairs.  Everything  precious  and  valuable 
had  been  moved  to  Bogutcharovo.  Corn  to  the  amount  of  a  hundred 
measures  had  been  carried  away,  but  the  hay,  and  the  wheat — an  extraor¬ 
dinary  crop  that  season,  so  Alpatitch  said — had  been  cut  green  and  car¬ 
ried  off  by  the  troops.  The  peasants  were  ruined:  some  of  them,  too,  had 
gone  to  Bogutcharovo;  a  small  number  remained.  Prince  Andrey,  not 
heeding  his  words,  asked,  ‘When  did  my  father  and  sister  go?’  meaning 
when  had  they  set  off  for  Moscow.  Alpatitch,  assuming  he  was  asking 
about  the  removal  to  Bogutcharovo,  answered  that  they  had  set  off  on  the 
7th,  and  began  going  off  again  into  details  about  the  crops,  asking  for 
instructions. 

‘Is  it  your  honour’s  orders  that  I  let  the  oats  go  on  getting  a  receipt  from 
the  officers?’  asked  Alpatitch.  ‘We  have  still  six  hundred  measures  left.’ 

‘What  am  I  to  say  to  him?’  Prince  Andrey  wondered,  looking  at  the  old 
man’s  bald  head  shining  in  the  sun,  and  reading  in  his  face  the  conscious¬ 
ness  that  he  knew  himself  the  untimeliness  of  those  questions,  and  asked 
them  only  to  stifle  his  own  grief. 

‘Yes,  let  it  go,’  he  said. 

‘If  your  excellency  noticed  any  disorder  in  the  garden,’  said  Alpatitch, 
‘it  could  not  be  prevented;  three  regiments  have  been  here  and  spent  the 
night.  The  dragoons  were  the  worst;  I  noted  down  the  name  and  rank  of 
the  commanding  officer  to  lodge  a  complaint.’ 

‘Well,  and  what  are  you  going  to  do?  Shall  you  stay,  if  the  enemy  occu¬ 
pies  the  place?’  Prince  Andrey  asked  him. 

Alpatitch  turned  his  face  towards  Prince  Andrey  and  looked  at  him; 
then  all  at  once,  with  a  solemn  gesture,  he  lifted  his  hand  upwards:  ‘He  is 
my  protector,  and  His  will  be  done!’  he  said.  A  group  of  peasants  and 
house-serfs  were  coming  across  the  meadow,  uncovering  their  heads  as 
they  drew  near  Prince  Andrey. 

‘Well,  good-bye!’  said  Prince  Andrey,  bending  over  to  Alpatitch.  ‘Go 
away  yourself ;  take  what  you  can ;  and  tell  the  peasants  to  set  off  for  the 
Ryazan  estate  or  the  property  near  Moscow.’ 

Alpatitch  hugged  his  leg  and  broke  into  sobs.  Prince  Andrey  gently 
moved  him  away,  and  spurring  his  horse  galloped  down  the  garden  walk. 

On  the  terrace  the  old  man  was  still  sitting  as  before,  as  uninterested 
as  a  fly  on  some  beloved  dead  face,  knocking  on  the  sole  of  the  bast  shoe. 
And  two  little  girls  came  running  from  the  plum-trees  in  the  conservatories 
with  their  skirts  full  of  plums.  They  ran  almost  against  Prince  Andrey, 
and  seeing  their  young  master,  the  elder  one  clutched  her  younger  com¬ 
panion  by  the  hand,  with  a  panic-stricken  face,  and  hid  with  her  behind  a 
birch-tree  not  stopping  to  pick  up  the  green  plums  they  had  dropped. 

Prince  Andrey  turned  away  from  them  in  nervous  haste,  afraid  of 
letting  them  notice  that  he  had  seen  them.  He  was  sorry  to  have  fright- 


664  WARANDPEACE 

ened  the  pretty  child.  He  was  afraid  to  glance  at  her,  but  yet  he  felt  an 
irresistible  inclination  to  do  so.  A  new  soothing  and  consolatory  feeling 
came  upon  him,  as  gazing  at  the  little  girls,  he  became  aware  of  the 
existence  of  other  human  interests,  utterly  remote  from  him,  and  as 
legitimate  as  his  own.  Those  little  girls  were  evidently  possessed  by  one 
passionate  desire  to  carry  off  and  devour  those  green  plums  without  being 
caught,  and  Prince  Andrey  wished  them  success  in  their  enterprise.  He 
could  not  resist  glancing  at  them  once  more.  Fancying  themselves  already 
secure,  they  had  darted  out  of  their  hiding-place,  and  piping  something 
in  their  shrill,  little  voices,  and  holding  up  their  skirts,  they  ran  gaily  and 
swiftly  through  the  grass  with  their  bare,  sunburnt  little  feet. 

Prince  Andrey  was  somewhat  refreshed  by  his  ride  outside  the  region 
of  the  dust  of  the  high-road  along  which  the  troops  were  marching.  But 
he  rode  back  into  the  road  not  far  from  Bleak  Hills,  and  overtook  his 
regiment  at  the  halting-place  near  the  dike  of  a  small  pond.  It  was  about 
two  o’clock  in  the  afternoon.  The  sun,  a  red  ball  through  the  dust,  baked 
and  scorched  his  back  intolerably  in  his  black  coat.  The  dust  stood  as 
immovable  as  ever  over  the  buzzing,  halting  troops.  There  was  not  a 
breath  of  wind.  As  he  rode  towards  the  dike,  Prince  Andrey  smelt  the 
fresh,  muddy  smell  of  the  pond.  He  longed  to  be  in  the  water,  however 
muddy  it  might  be.  He  looked  round  at  the  pond,  from  which  he  heard 
shrieks  and  laughter.  The  small  pond,  thickly  covered  with  green  slime, 
was  visibly  half  a  yard  higher  and  overflowing  the  dam,  because  it  was 
full  of  white,  naked  human  bodies,  with  brick-red  hands  and  heads  and 
necks,  all  plunging  about  in  it.  All  that  bare,  white  human  flesh  was 
splashing  about  with  shrieks  and  laughter,  in  the  muddy  pool,  like  carp 
floundering  in  a  net.  There  was  a  ring  of  merriment  in  that  splashing, 
and  that  was  what  made  it  peculiarly  sad. 

One  fair-haired  young  soldier — Prince  Andrey  knew  him — of  the  third 
company,  with  a  strap  round  the  calf  of  his  leg,  stepped  back,  crossing 
himself,  to  get  a  good  run,  and  plunge  into  the  water.  Another  swarthy 
and  very  towzle-headed  sergeant  up  to  his  waist  in  the  water,  bending 
his  fine,  muscular  figure,  was  snorting  with  enjoyment,  as  he  poured  the 
water  over  his  head  with  his  blackened  hands.  There  was  a  sound  of  them 
slapping  each  other,  and  shrieks  and  cries. 

On  the  banks,  on  the  dike,  in  the  pond,  everywhere  there  was  white, 
healthy,  muscular  flesh.  Timohin,  the  officer  with  the  red  nose,  was 
rubbing  himself  with  a  towel  on  the  dike,  and  was  abashed  at  seeing 
Prince  Andrey,  but  made  up  his  mind  to  address  him. 

‘It’s  pleasant,  really,  your  excellency;  you  should  try  it!’  he  said. 

‘It’s  dirty,’  said  Prince  Andrey,  grimacing. 

‘We  will  clear  it  out  for  you  in  a  minute.’  And  undressed  as  he  was, 
Timohin  ran  to  clear  the  men  out.  ‘The  prince  wants  to  come.’ 

‘What  prince?  Our  prince?’  cried  voices,  and  all  of  them  were  in  such 
haste  to  make  way  for  him  that  Prince  Andrey  hardly  had  time  to  check 
them.  He  thought  it  would  be  better  for  him  to  have  a  bath  in  a  barn. 
‘Flesh,  meat,  chair  a  canon /  he  thought,  looking  too  at  his  own  naked 


WARANDPEACE  665 

body  and  shuddering,  not  so  much  from  cold  as  from  the  repulsion  and 
horror,  mysterious  to  himself,  that  he  had  felt  at  the  sight  of  that 
immense  multitude  of  naked  bodies  floundering  in  the  muddy  water. 

On  the  7th  of  August,  Prince  Bagration,  at  his,  halting-place  at 
Mihalovka  on  the  Smolensk  road,  had  written  a  letter  to  Araktcheev. 
Though  the  letter  was  addressed  to  Araktcheev,  he  knew  it  would  be 
read  to  the  Tsar,  and  therefore  he  weighed  every  word,  so  far  as  he  was 
capable  of  doing  so. 

‘Dear  Count  Alexey  Andreevitch, — I  presume  that  the  minister 
has  already  reported  the  abandonment  of  Smolensk  to  the  enemy.  It  is 
sad,  it  is  pitiable,  and  the  whole  army  is  in  despair  at  the  most  important 
place  having  been  wantonly  abandoned.  I  for  my  part  begged  him 
personally  in  the  most  urgent  manner,  and  finally  wrote  to  him;  but 
nothing  would  persuade  him.  I  swear  to  you  on  my  honour  that  Napoleon 
was  in  a  greater  fix  than  he  has  ever  been,  and  he  might  have  lost  half 
his  army,  but  could  not  have  taken  Smolensk.  Our  troops  have  fought  and 
are  fighting  as  never  before.  With  fifteen  thousand  men  I  have  held  the 
enemy  in  check  for  thirty-five  hours  and  beaten  them,  but  he  wouldn’t 
hold  his  ground  for  fourteen  hours.  It  is  a  shame  and  a  stain  on  our 
army,  and  as  for  himself,  I  consider  he  ought  not  to  be  alive.  If  he 
reports  that  our  losses  were  great,  it  is  false;  perhaps  about  four  thou¬ 
sand,  not  that,  but  that  is  nothing:  if  it  had  been  ten  thousand,  what  of 
it,  that’s  war.  But  on  the  other  hand  the  enemy’s  losses  were  immense. 

‘What  would  it  have  cost  him  to  hold  his  ground  for  a  couple  of  days? 
In  any  case  they  must  have  retired  of  their  own  accord;  for  they  had 
no  water  for  their  men  or  their  horses.  He  gave  me  his  word  he  would 
not  retreat,  but  all  of  a  sudden  sent  an  announcement  that  he  was  with¬ 
drawing  in  the  night.  We  cannot  fight  in  this  way,  and  we  may  soon 
bring  the  enemy  on  to  Moscow.  .  .  . 

‘There  is  a  rumour  afloat  that  you  are  thinking  of  peace.  To  make 
peace,  God  preserve  us!  After  all  the  sacrifices  that  have  been  made 
and  after  such  mad  retreats — to  make  peace,  you  will  set  all  Russia 
against  you,  and  every  one  of  us  will  feel  it  a  disgrace  to  wear  the  uniform. 
If  it  has  come  to  that,  we  ought  to  fight  as  long  as  Russia  can,  and  as 
long  as  there  are  men  able  to  stand.  .  .  . 

‘There  must  be  one  man  in  command,  not  two.  Your  minister,  may  be, 
is  very  well  in  the  ministry;  but  as  a  general,  he’s  not  simply  useless, 
but  contemptible,  and  the  fate  of  all  our  fatherland  has  been  put  in  his 
hands  ...  I  am  frantic,  truly,  with  rage;  forgive  me  for  writing 
abusively.  It  is  plain  that  the  man  does  not  love  his  sovereign,  and  desires 
the  ruin  of  us  all,  who  advises  peace  to  be  concluded  and  the  minister 
to  be  put  in  command  of  the  army.  And  so  I  write  to  you  plainly:  get 
the  militia  ready.  For  the  minister  is  leading  our  visitors  to  the  capital 
in  the  most  skilful  manner.  The  object  of  chief  suspicion  to  the  whole 
army  is  the  aide-de-camp  Woltzogen.  They  say  he’s  more  for  Napoleon 


666 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

than  for  us,  and  everything  the  minister  does  is  by  his  advice.  I  am 
not  merely  civil  to  him,  but  obey  him  like  a  corporal,  though  I  am  his 
senior.  It  is  hard:  but  loving  my  sovereign  and  benefactor,  I  obey.  And  I 
grieve  for  the  Tsar  that  he  intrusts  his  gallant  army  to  such  a  man. 
C  nsider  that  on  our  retreat  we  have  lost  more  than  fifteen  thousand 
men  from  fatigue,  or  left  sick  in  the  hospitals;  if  we  had  attacked,  that 
would  not  have  been  so.  Tell  me  for  God’s  sake  what  will  Russia — our 
mother — say  at  our  displaying  such  cowardice,  and  why  are  we  abandon¬ 
ing  our  good  and  gallant  country  to  the  rabble  and  rousing  the  hatred 
and  shame  of  every  Russian?  Why  are  we  in  a  panic?  what  are  we  afraid 
of?  It  is  not  my  fault  that  the  minister  is  vacillating,  cowardly,  un-J 
reasonable,  dilatory,  and  has  every  vice.  All  the  army  is  bewailing  it 
and  loading  him  with  abuse.  .  . 


VI 

Among  the  innumerable  categories  into  which  it  is  possible  to  classify  the 
phenomena  of  life,  one  may  classify  them  all  into  such  as  are  dominated 
by  matter  and  such  as  are  dominated  by  form.  To  the  latter  class  one 
may  refer  the  life  of  Petersburg,  especially  in  its  drawing-rooms,  as  dis¬ 
tinguished  from  the  life  of  the  country,  of  the  district,  of  the  province, 
or  even  of  Moscow.  That  life  of  the  drawing-rooms  is  unchanging. 

Between  the  years  1805  and  1812  we  had  made  peace  with  Bonaparte  ] 
and  quarrelled  with  him  again;  we  had  made  new  constitutions  and 
unmade  them  again,  but  the  salons  of  Anna  Pavlovna  and  of  Ellen  were  ; 
precisely  as  they  had  been — the  former  seven,  the  latter  five  years — 
before.  Anna  Pavlovna’s  circle  were  still  speaking  with  incredulous 
wonder  of  Bonaparte’s  successes;  and  saw  in  his  successes,  and  in  the  ] 
submissive  attitude  of  the  sovereigns  of  Europe,  a  malicious  conspiracy, 
the  sole  aim  of  which  was  to  give  annoyance  and  anxiety  to  the  court  : 
circle  of  which  Anna  Pavlovna  was  the  representative.  The  set  that  | 
gathered  about  Ellen,  whom  no  less  a  person  than  Rumyantsev  con¬ 
descended  to  visit,  and  looked  on  as  a  remarkably  intelligent  woman, 
talked  in  1812  with  the  same  enthusiasm  as  in  1808,  of  the  ‘great  nation,’ 1 
and  the  ‘great  man,’  and  regretted  the  breach  with  France,  which  must, 
they  believed,  shortly  end  in  peace. 

Of  late  after  the  Tsar’s  return  from  the  army,  some  increase  of  excite¬ 
ment  was  perceptible  in  these  antagonistic  salons,  and  they  made  some-  1 
thing  like  demonstrations  of  hostility  to  one  another,  but  the  bias  of 
each  circle  remained  unaffected.  Anna  Pavlovna’s  set  refused  to  admit 
any  French  people  but  the  most  unimpeachable  legitimists;  and  in  her  i 
drawing-room  the  patriotic  view  found  expression  that  the  French  theatre 
ought  not  to  be  patronised,  and  that  the  maintenance  of  the  French  com¬ 
pany  there  cost  as  much  as  the  maintenance  of  a  whole  army  corps.  The!  I 
progress  of  the  war  was  eagerly  followed,  and  rumours  greatly  to  the 
advantage  of  our  army  were  circulated.  In  the  circle  of  Ellen,  of  Rum- 


WAR  AND  PEACE  667 

yantsev,  the  French  circle,  the  reports  of  the  enemy’s  cruelty  and  bar¬ 
barous  methods  of  warfare  were  discredited;  and  all  sorts  of  conciliatory 
efforts  on  the  part  of  Napoleon  were  discussed.  This  set  discountenanced 
the  premature  counsels  of  those  who  advised  preparations  for  the  removal 
to  Kazan  of  the  court  and  the  girls’  schools,  that  were  under  the  pro¬ 
tection  of  the  empress  mother.  The  whole  war  was  in  fact  regarded  in 
Ellen’s  salon  as  a  series  of  merely  formal  demonstrations,  very  shortly 
to  be  terminated  by  peace;  and  the  view  prevailed,  expressed  by  Bilibin, 
who  was  now  in  Petersburg  and  constantly  seen  at  Ellen’s,  as  every  man 
of  wit  was  sure  to  be,  that  the  war  would  be  ended  not  by  gunpowder 
but  by  those  'who  had  invented  it.  The  patriotic  fervour  of  Moscow,  of 
which  tidings  reached  Petersburg  with  the  Tsar,  was  in  Ellen’s  salon 
a  subject  of  ironical,  and  very  witty,  though  circumspect,  raillery. 

In  Anna  Pavlovna’s  circle,  on  the  contrary,  these  patriotic  demonstra¬ 
tions  roused  the  greatest  enthusiasm,  and  were  spoken  of  as  Plutarch 
speaks  of  his  ancient  Romans.  Prince  Vassily,  who  still  filled  the  same 
important  positions,  constituted  the  connecting  link  between  the  two 
circles.  He  used  to  visit  ‘my  good  friend  Anna  Pavlovna,’  and  was  also 
seen  in  the  ‘diplomatic  salon  of  my  daughter’;  and  often  was  led  into 
blunders  from  his  frequent  transitions  from  one  to  the  other,  and  said 
in  one  drawing-room  what  should  have  been  reserved  for  the  other. 

Soon  after  the  Tsar’s  arrival,  Prince  Vassily,  in  conversation  about 
the  progress  of  the  war  at  Anna  Pavlovna’s,  severely  criticised  Barclay 
de  Tolly,  and  expressed  himself  unable  to  decide  who  should  be  appointed 
commander-in-chief.  One  of  the  guests,  usually  spoken  of  as  a  ‘man  of 
great  abilities,’  described  how  he  had  that  day  seen  the  newly  elected 
commander  of  the  Petersburg  militia,  Kutuzov,  presiding  over  the  enrol¬ 
ment  of  militiamen  in  the  Court  of  Exchequer,  and  ventured  discreetly 
to  suggest  that  Kutuzov  would  be  the  man  who  might  satisfy  all  re¬ 
quirements. 

Anna  Pavlovna  smiled  mournfully,  and  observed  that  Kutuzov  had 
done  nothing  but  cause  the  Tsar  annoyance. 

‘I  have  said  so  over  and  over  again  in  the  assembly  of  nobility,’  inter¬ 
posed  Prince  Vassily,  ‘but  they  wouldn’t  listen  to  me.  I  said  that  his  elec¬ 
tion  to  the  command  of  the  militia  would  not  be  pleasing  to  his  majesty. 
They  wouldn’t  listen  to  me.  It’s  all  this  mania  for  being  in  the  opposition,’ 
he  went  on.  ‘And  to  what  public  are  they  playing,  I  should  like  to  know. 
It’s  all  because  we  are  trying  to  ape  the  silly  enthusiasm  of  Moscow,’ 
said  Prince  Vassily,  forgetting  for  a  moment  that  it  was  at  Ellen’s  that 
that  enthusiasm  wras  jeered  at,  while  at  Anna  Pavlovna’s  it  was  as  well  to 
admire  it.  But  he  hastened  to  retrieve  his  mistake.  ‘Is  it  suitable  for 
Kutuzov,  the  oldest  general  in  Russia,  to  be  presiding  in  the  Court? 
Et  il  en  r  ester  a  pour  sa  peine!  Did  any  one  hear  of  such  a  thing  as  ap¬ 
pointing  a  man  commander-in-chief  who  cannot  sit  a  horse,  who  drops 
asleep  at  a  council — a  man,  too,  of  the  lowest  morals!  A  pretty  reputa¬ 
tion  he  gained  for  himself  in  Bucharest!  To  say  nothing  of  his  qualities 
as  a  general,  can  we  appoint,  at  such  a  moment,  a  man  decrepit  and 


668 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

blind — yes,  simply  blind!  A  fine  idea— a  blind  general!  He  sees  nothing. 
Playing  blind-man’s  buff— that’s  all  he’s  fit  for!’ 

No  one  opposed  that  view. 

On  the  24th  of  July  it  was  accepted  as  perfectly  correct.  But  on  the 
29th  Kutuzov  received  the  title  of  prince.  The  bestowal  of  this  title 
might  be  taken  to  indicate  a  desire  to  shelve  him,  and  therefore  Prince 
Vassily’s  dictum  still  remained  correct,  though  he  was  in  no  such  hurry 
now  to  express  it.  But  on  the  8th  of  August  a  committee,  consisting  of 
General  Field-Marshal  Saltykov,  Araktcheev,  Vyazmitinov,  Lopuhin, 
and  Kotchubey  was  held  to  consider  the  progress  of  the  war.  This  com¬ 
mittee  decided  that  the  disasters  were  due  to  divided  authority;  and 
although  the  members  of  the  committee  were  aware  of  the  Tsar’s  dislike 
of  Kutuzov,  after  a  deliberation  they  advised  the  appointment  of  Kutuzov 
as  commander-in-chief.  And  that  same  day  Kutuzov  was  appointed  com¬ 
mander-in-chief  of  the  army,  and  intrusted  with  unlimited  authority  over 
the  whole  region  occupied  by  the  troops. 

On  the  9th  of  August  Prince  Vassily  once  more  met  the  ‘man  of  great 
abilities’  at  Anna  Pavlovna’s.  The  latter  gentleman  was  assiduous  in  his 
attendance  at  Anna  Pavlovna’s,  in  the  hope  of  receiving’  through  her 
influence,  an  appointment  on  one  of  the  institutions  of  female  education. 
Prince  Vassily  strode  into  the  room  with  the  air  of  a  victorious  general, 
of  a  man  who  has  succeeded  in  attaining  the  object  of  his  desires. 

‘Well,  you  know  the  great  news!  Prince  Kutuzov  is  marshal!  All  dif¬ 
ferences  of  opinion  are  at  an  end.  I  am  so  glad,  so  delighted!  ’  said  Prince 
Vassily.  ‘At  last  here  is  a  man!’  he  declared,  looking  sternly  and  sig¬ 
nificantly  at  all  the  company.  In  spite  of  his  desire  to  secure  the  post 
he  coveted,  the  ‘man  of  great  abilities’  could  not  refrain  from  reminding 
Prince  Vassily  of  the  view  he  had  expressed  shortly  before.  (This  was  a 
breach  of  civility  to  Prince  Vassily  in  Anna  Pavlovna’s  drawing-room, 
and  also  to  Anna  Pavlovna,  who  had  received  the  tidings  with  equal 
enthusiasm;  but  he  could  not  refrain.) 

‘But  they  say  he  is  blind,  prince,’  he  said  to  recall  to  Prince  Vassily 
his  own  words. 

‘Allez  done,  il  y  voit  assez,’  said  Prince  Vassily,  with  the  rapid  bass 
voice  and  the  cough  with  which  he  always  disposed  of  all  difficulties.  ‘He 
sees  quite  enough,’  he  repeated.  ‘And  what  I’m  particularly  glad  of,’ 
he  went  on,  ‘is  that  the  Emperor  has  given  him  unlimited  authority  over 
all  the  troops,  over  the  whole  region,  an  authority  no  commander-in-chief 
has  ever  had  before.  It’s  another  autocrat,’  he  concluded,  with  a  victorious 
smile. 

‘God  grant  it  may  be,’  said  Anna  Pavlovna. 

The  ‘man  of  great  abilities,’  a  novice  in  court  society,  was  anxious  to 
flatter  Anna  Pavlovna  by  maintaining  her  former  opinion  against  this 
new  view  of  the  position.  He  said:  ‘They  say  the  Emperor  was  unwilling 
to  give  Kutuzov  such  authority.  They  say  he  blushed  like  a  young 
lady  to  whom  Joconde  is  read,  saying  to  him,  “The  sovereign  and  the 
country  decree  you  this  honour.”  ’ 


66g 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Perhaps  the  heart  was  not  of  the  party,’  said  Anna  Pavlovna. 

‘Oh  no,  no,’  Prince  Vassily  maintained  warmly.  Now  he  would  not 
put  Kutuzov  second  to  any  one.  To  hear  Prince  Vassily  now  Kutuzov 
was  not  simply  a  good  man  in  himself,  but  idolised  by  every  one.  ‘No 
that’s  impossible,  for  the  sovereign  has  always  known  how  to  appreciate 
him,’  he  added. 

‘God  only  grant  that  Prince  Kutuzov  may  take  the  control  of  things 
into  his  own  hands,’  said  Anna  Pavlovna,  ‘and  not  permit  any  one  to  put 
a  spoke  in  his  wheel.’ 

Prince  Vassily  knew  at  once  who  was  meant.  He  whispered,  ‘I  know 
for  a  fact  that  Kutuzov  made  it  an  express  condition  that  the  Tsarevitch 
should  not  be  with  the  army.  V ous  savez  ce  qu’il  a  dit  a  VEmpereur 
And  Prince  Vassily  repeated  the  words  said  to  have  been  spoken  by 
Kutuzov  to  the  Tsar:  ‘  “I  can  neither  punish  him  if  he  does  wrong,  nor 
reward  him  if  he  does  well.”  Oh!  he’s  a  shrewd  fellow,  Prince  Kutuzov. 
I  have  know  him  a  long  while.’ 

‘They  do  say,’  observed  the  ‘man  of  great  abilities,’  who  had  not  ac¬ 
quired  a  courtier’s  tact,  ‘that  his  excellency  even  made  it  an  express 
condition  that  the  Emperor  himself  should  not  be  with  the  army.’ 

He  had  hardly  uttered  the  words  when  Anna  Pavlovna  and  Prince 
Vassily  simultaneously  turned  their  backs  on  him,  and  looked  mournfully 
at  one  another,  with  a  sigh  at  his  naivete. 


VII 

At  the  time  when  this  was  taking  place  in  Petersburg,  the  French  had 
passed  through  Smolensk,  and  were  moving  closer  and  closer  to  Moscow. 
Napoleon’s  historian,  Thiers,  like  others  of  Napoleon’s  historians,  tries 
to  justify  his  hero  by  maintaining  that  he  was  drawn  on  to  the  walls 
of  Moscow  against  his  will.  He  is  as  right  as  any  historians  who  seek  the 
explanation  of  historic  events  in  the  will  of  a  man;  he  is  as  right  as  the 
Russian  historians,  who  assert  that  Napoleon  was  lured  to  Moscow  by 
the  skilful  strategy  of  the  Russian  generals.  In  this  case,  apart  from  the 
law  of  ‘retrospectiveness,’  which  makes  all  the  past  appear  a  preparation 
for  the  subsequent  facts,  the  element  of  mutual  interaction,  too,  comes 
in,  confusing  the  whole  subject.  A  good  chess-player,  who  has  lost  a 
game,  is  genuinely  convinced  that  his  failure  is  due  to  his  blunders,  and 
he  seeks  the  blunder  at  the  commencement  of  the  game,  forgetting  that 
at  every  move  during  the  whole  game  there  were  similar  errors,  that 
not  one  piece  has  been  played  as  perfectly  as  possible.  The  blunder  on 
which  he  concentrates  his  attention  attracts  his  notice  simply  because  his 
opponent  took  advantage  of  it.  How  much  more  complex  is  the  game 
of  war,  which  must  be  played  within  certain  limits  of  time,  in  which  there 
is  not  one  will  controlling  lifeless  toys,  in  which  the  whole  is  the  resultant 
of  the  innumerable  collisions  of  diverse  individual  wills! 

After  Smolensk,  Napoleon  tried  to  force  on  a  battle  beyond  Dorogo- 


6;o  WAR  AND  PEACE 

buzh,  at  Vyazma,  and  then  at  Tsarevo-Zaimishtche.  But  the  Russians 
could  not  give  battle,  owing  to  innumerable  combinations  of  circum¬ 
stances,  till  Borodino,  one  hundred  and  twelve  versts  from  Moscow. 
From  Vyazma  Napoleon  gave  instructions  for  an  advance  straight  upon 
Moscow. 

‘Moscow,  the  Asiatic  capital  of  this  great  empire,  the  holy  city  of  the 
peoples  of  Alexander,  Moscow,  with  its  innumerable  churches  in  the 
form  of  Chinese  pagodas!’ 

This  Moscow  would  not  let  Napoleon’s  imagination  rest.  On  the 
march  from  Vyazma  to  Tsarevo-Zaimishtche  Napoleon  was  riding  on 
his  cream-coloured  English  horse,  accompanied  by  his  guards,  and  senti¬ 
nels,  and  pages,  and  adjutants.  The  commander  of  the  staff,  Berthier, 
had  dropped  behind  to  put  questions  to  a  Russian  prisoner  taken  by  the 
cavalry.  Accompanied  by  the  interpreter,  Lelorme  d’Ideville,  he  gal¬ 
loped  after  Napoleon,  and  pulled  his  horse  up  with  an  amused  expression. 

‘Well?’  said  Napoleon. 

‘A  Cossack  of  Platov’s  detachment  says  Platov  is  effecting  a  junction 
with  the  main  army,  and  that  Kutuzov  has  been  appointed  commander- 
in-chief.  He  is  very  shrewd  and  talkative.’ 

Napoleon  smiled,  and  bade  them  give  the  Cossack  a  horse  and  bring 
him  before  him.  He  wished  to  talk  to  him  himself.  Several  adjutants 
galloped  off,  and  within  an  hour  Denisov’s  serf  Lavrushka,  whom  his 
master  had  left  with  Rostov,  rode  up  to  Napoleon,  sitting  on  a  French 
cavalry  saddle,  wearing  an  orderly’s  short  jacket,  and  looking  sly,  tipsy, 
and  mirthful.  Napoleon  bade  him  ride  at  his  side  and  began  questioning 
him. 

‘Are  you  a  Cossack?’ 

‘Yes;  a  Cossack,  your  honour.’ 

‘The  Cossack,  ignorant  in  whose  company  he  was,  since  Napoleon’s 
plain  appearance  had  nothing  to  suggest  to  the  Oriental  imagination  the 
presence  of  a  monarch,  talked  with  extraordinary  familiarity  of  the  in¬ 
cidents  of  the  war,’  says  Thiers,  relating  this  episode.  In  reality  La¬ 
vrushka,  who  had  been  drunk  the  previous  evening,  and  had  left  his 
master  without  dinner,  had  been  thrashed  for  it,  and  sent  to  the  village 
in  quest  of  fowls,  where  he  was  tempted  on  by  plunder  till  he  got  caught 
by  the  French.  Lavrushka  was  one  of  those  coarse,  impudent  lackeys, 
who  have  seen  a  good  deal  of  life,  look  on  it  as  a  duty  to  do  nothing 
without  cunning  and  trickery,  are  ready  to  do  any  kind  of  service  for 
their  masters,  and  are  particularly  keen  in  scenting  out  the  baser  im¬ 
pulses  of  their  superiors,  especially  on  the  side  of  vanity  and  pettiness 
On  coming  into  the  presence  of  Napoleon,  whom  he  easily  and  con¬ 
fidently  recognised,  Lavrushka  was  not  in  the  least  taken  aback,  anc 
only  did  his  utmost  to  win  the  favour  of  his  new  master. 

He  was  very  well  aware  that  this  was  Napoleon,  and  Napoleon’; 
presence  impressed  him  no  more  than  Rostov’s  or  the  quartermaster’s < 
with  the  rod  in  his  hand,  because  he  had  nothing  of  which  either  th( 
quartermaster  or  Napoleon  could  not  deprive  him. 


WAR  AND  PEACE  671 

He  had  repeated  alt  the  gossip  that  was  talked  among  the  officers’ 
servants.  Much  of  it  was  true.  But  when  Napoieon  asked  him  whether 
the  Russians  expected  to  conquer  Bonaparte  or  not,  Lavrushka  screwed 
up  his  eyes  and  thought  a  bit. 

Fie  saw  in  the  question  a  sharp  piece  of  cunning,  as  cunning  fellows, 
like  Lavrushka,  always  do  in  everything.  He  frowned  and  paused  a 
minute. 

‘Well,  if  it  does  come  to  a  battle,’  he  said  thoughtfully,  ‘and  pretty 
soon,  then  yours  will  win.  That’s  a  sure  thing.  But  if  now,  three  days 
and  there's  a  battle  after  that,  well  then,  I  say,  that  same  battle  will 
be  a  long  job.’  This  was  translated  to  Napoleon.  ‘If  a  battle  is  fought 
within  three  days  the  French  will  win  it,  but  if  later,  God  knows  what 
will  come  of  it,’  Lelorme  d’Ideville  put  it,  smiling.  Napoleon  did  not 
smile,  though  he  was  evidently  in  high  good  humour,  and  told  him  to 
repeat  the  words. 

Lavarushka  noticed  that,  and  to  entertain  him  further,  said,  pretending 
not  to  know  who  he  was: 

‘We  know,  you  have  got  your  Bonaparte;  he  has  conquered  every  one 
in  the  world,  ay,  but  with  us  it  will  be  a  different  story  .  .  .’  himself 
hardly  aware  how  and  why  this  bit  of  bragging  patriotism  slipped  out. 
The  interpreter  translated  these  words  without  the  conclusion’  and 
Bonaparte  smiled.  ‘The  young  Cossack  brought  a  smile  on  to  the  lips 
of  his  august  companion,’  says  Thiers.  After  a  few  paces  in  silence, 
Napoleon  turned  to  Berthier,  and  said  he  should  like  to  try  the  effect 
‘sitr  cet  enfant,  du  Don’  of  learning  that  the  man  with  whom  he  was 
speaking  was  the  Emperor  himself,  the  very  Emperor  who  had  carved 
his  immortally  victorious  name  on  the  Pyramids.  The  fact  was  communi¬ 
cated.  Lavrushka — discerning  that  this  was  done  to  test  him,  and  that 
Napoleon  expected  him  to  be  panic-stricken — tried  to  gratify  his  new 
masters  by  promptly  affecting  to  be  astounded,  struck  dumb;  he  opened 
round  eyes,  and  made  the  sort  of  face  usual  with  him  when  he  was  being 
led  off  to  be  thrashed.  ‘Hardly,’  says  Thiers,  ‘had  Napoleon’s  interpreter 
spoken,  than  the  Cossack  was  struck  dumb  with  amazement;  he  did  not 
utter  another  word,  and  walked  with  his  eyes  constantly  fixed  on  the 
great  conqueror,  whose  fame  had  reached  him  across  the  steppes  of  the 
East.  All  his  loquacity  suddenly  vanished,  and  was  replaced  by  a  naive 
and  silent  awe.  Napoleon  made  the  Cossack  a  present,  and  ordered  him 
to  be  set  at  liberty  like  un  oiseau  qu’on  rend  aux  champs  qui  I’ont  vu 
naitre.’ 

Napoleon  rode  on,  dreaming  of  that  Moscow  that  filled  his  imagina¬ 
tion,  while  the  bird  returning  to  the  fields  that  had  seen  him  born, 
galloped  back  to  the  outposts,  inventing  the  tale  he  would  tell  his  com¬ 
rades.  What  had  really  happened  he  did  not  care  to  relate,  simply  be¬ 
cause  it  seemed  to  him  not  worth  telling.  He  rode  back  to  the  Cossacks, 
inquired  where  was  his  regiment,  now  forming  part  of  Platov’s  detach¬ 
ment;  and  towards  evening  found  his  master,  Nikolay  Rostov,  encamped 
<  Yankovo.  Rostov  was  just  mounting  his  horse  to  ride  through  tb.e 


672  WAR  AND  PEACE 

villages  near  with  Ilyin  He  gave  Lavrushka  another  horse  and  took  him 
with  them. 

VIII 

Princess  Marya  was  not  in  Moscow  and  out  of  danger  as  Prince  Andrey 
supposed. 

After  Alpatitch’s  return  from  Smolensk,  the  old  prince  seemed  as 
though  he  had  suddenly  waked  out  of  a  sleep.  He  gave  orders  for  the 
militiamen  to  assemble  out  of  the  villages,  and  to  be  armed;  and  wrote 
a  letter  to  the  commander-in-chief,  in  which  he  informed  him  of  his 
intention  to  remain  at  Bleak  Hills  to  the  last  and  to  defend  himself, 
leaving  it  to  his  discretion  to  take  steps  or  not  for  the  defence  of  Bleak 
Hills,  where  he  said  one  of  the  oldest  Russian  generals  would  be  taken 
prisoner  or  die.  He  announced  to  his  household  that  he  should  remain 
at  Bleak  Hills. 

But  though  resolved  himself  to  remain,  the  prince  made  arrangements 
for  sending  the  princess  with  Dessalle  and  the  little  prince  to  Bogutcha- 
rovo,  and  from  there  on  to  Moscow.  Frightened  at  her  father’s  feverish, 
sleepless  energy,  following  on  his  previous  apathy,  Princess  Marya  could 
not  bring  herself  to  leave  him  alone,  and  for  the  first  time  in  her  life 
ventured  not  to  obey  him.  She  refused  to  go,  and  a  fearful  tempest  of 
wrath  burst  upon  her.  The  prince  reminded  her  of  every  previous  instance 
of  injustice  to  her.  Trying  to  find  pretexts  for  reviling  her,  he  said  she 
had  done  everything  to  worry  him,  that  she  had  estranged  him  from 
his  son,  that  she  harboured  the  vilest  suspicions  of  him,  that  she  made 
it  the  object  of  her  life  to  poison  his  existence.  He  drove  her  out  of  his 
study,  telling  her  that  he  did  not  care  if  she  did  not  go  away.  He  told 
her  that  he  did  not  want  to  hear  of  her  existence,  but  gave  her  fair 
warning  not  to  dare  to  show  herself  before  him.  Princess  Marya  was 
relieved  that  he  had  not,  as  she  had  dreaded,  ordered  her  to  be  forcibly  : 
removed  from  Bleak  Hills,  but  had  simply  commanded  her  not  to  show 
herself.  She  knew  that  this  meant  that  in  the  secret  recesses  of  his  soul 
he  was  glad  she  was  staying  at  home. 

The  day  after  Nikolushka  had  left,  the  old  prince  dressed  himself  in 
the  morning  in  full  uniform,  and  prepared  to  make  a  call  on  the  com-  i 
mander-in-chief.  The  carriage  was  standing  ready.  Princess  Marya  saw 
him  in  his  uniform,  with  all  his  orders  on  his  breast,  walk  out  of  the 
house  and  go  down  the  garden  to  inspect  the  armed  peasants  and  house- 
serfs.  Princess  Marya  sat  at  the  window  listening  to  his  voice  resound¬ 
ing  from  the  garden.  Suddenly  several  men  came  running  up  the  avenue 
with  panic-stricken  faces. 

Princess  Marya  ran  out  on  to  the  steps,  along  the  flower-bed  path, 
and  into  the  avenue.  A  great  crowd  of  militiamen  and  servants  were 
coming  down  it  towards  her,  and  in  the  middle  of  that  crowd  several 
men  were  holding  up  and  dragging  along  a  little  old  man  in  a  uniform 
and  decorations.  Princess  Marya  ran  towards  him,  and  in  the  dancing, 


WAR  AND  PEACE  673 

tiny  rings  of  light  that  filtered  through  the  shade  of  the  lime-tree  avenue, 
she  could  form  no  distinct  impression  of  the  change  in  his  face.  The  only 
thing  she  could  see  was  that  the  stern  and  determined  expression  of  his 
face  had  changed  to  a  look  of  timidity  and  submission.  On  seeing  his 
daughter,  he  tried  to  move  his  powerless  lips,  and  uttered  a  hoarse  sound. 
It  was  impossible  to  understand  w'hat  ha  meant.  He  was  lifted  up,  car¬ 
ried  into  his  study,  and  laid  on  the  couch,  which  had  been  such  an 
object  of  dread  to  him  of  late. 

The  doctor,  who  was  brought  over  the  same  night,  bled  him,  and 
declared  that  the  prince  had  had  a  stroke,  paralysing  his  right  side. 

To  remain  at  Bleak  Hills  was  becoming  more  and  more  dangerous,  and 
the  next  day  they  moved  the  prince  to  Bogutcharovo.  The  doctor  travelled 
with  him. 

When  they  reached  Bogutcharovo,  they  found  Dessalle  had  already 
set  off  for  Moscow  with  the  little  prince. 

For  three  weeks  the  old  prince  lay  stricken  with  paralysis,  getting 
neither  better  nor  worse,  in  the  new  house  Prince  Andrey  had  planned  at 
Bogutcharovo.  The  old  prince  was  unconscious;  he  lay  like  a  deformed 
corpse.  He  muttered  incessantly,  twitching  his  eyebrows  and  lips,  and 
it  was  impossible  to  tell  whether  he  understood  his  surroundings  or  not. 
Only  one  thing  could  be  said  for  certain:  that  was,  that  he  was  suffering, 
and  had  a  craving  to  express  something.  But  what  that  was  no  one 
could  tell:  whether  it  were  some  sick  and  half-crazy  whim;  whether  it 
related  to  public  affairs  or  family  circumstances. 

The  doctor  said  that  this  uneasiness  meant  nothing;  that  it  was  due 
to  physical  causes.  But  Princess  Marya  believed  (and  the  fact  that  her 
presence  seemed  to  intensify  the  restlessness,  confirmed  her  supposition) 
that  he  wanted  to  tell  her  something. 

He  was  evidently  suffering  both  physically  and  mentally.  There  was 
no  hope  of  recovery.  It  was  impossible  to  move  him.  What  if  he  were  to 
die  on  the  road?  ‘Wouldn’t  it  be  better  if  it  were  over,  if  all  were  over?’ 
Princess  Marya  thought  sometimes.  Day  and  night,  almost  without 
sleep,  she  watched  him,  and,  terrible  to  say,  she  watched  him,  not  in  the 
hope  of  finding  symptoms  of  a  change  for  the  better,  but  often  in  the 
hope  of  seeing  symptoms  of  the  approaching  end. 

Strange  as  it  was  for  the  princess  to  own  it  to  herself,  she  had  this 
feeling  in  her  heart.  And  what  was  still  more  horrible  to  Princess  Marya 
was  the  fact  that  ever  since  her  father’s  illness  (if  not  even  before,  when 
she  resolved  to  stay  with  him,  in  vague  expectation  of  something)  all  the 
forgotten  hopes  and  desires  slumbering  within  her  had  awakened.  Ideas 
that  had  not  entered  her  head  for  years — dreams  of  a  life  free  from  the 
terror  of  her  father,  even  of  the  possibility  of  love  and  a  happy  married 
life,  haunted  her  imagination  like  temptations  of  the  devil.  In  vain  she 
tried  to  drive  away  the  thought;  questions  were  continually  in  her  mind 
how  she  would  order  her  life  now,  after  this.  It  was  a  temptation  of  the 
devil,  and  Princess  Marya  knew  it.  She  knew  that  the  sole  weapon  of 
avail  against  him  was  prayer,  and  she  strove  to  pray.  She  threw  herself 


674 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


into  the  attitude  of  prayer,  gazed  at  the  holy  pictures,  repeated  the  words 
of  the  prayer,  but  still  she  could  not  pray.  She  felt  herself  carried  off  into 
a  new  world  of  real  life,  of  labour  and  free  activity,  utterly  opposed  to  the 
moral  atmosphere  in  which  she  had  been  kept  in  bondage,  and  in  which 
the  one  consolation  was  prayer.  She  could  not  pray  and  could  not  weep, 
and  practical  cares  absorbed  her  mind. 

To  remain  at  Bogutcharovo  was  becoming  unsafe.  Rumours  came  from 
all  sides  of  the  French  being  near,  and  in  one  village,  fifteen  versts  from 
Bogutcharovo,  a  house  had  been  sacked  by  French  marauders.  The  doctor 
insisted  on  the  necessity  of  moving  the  prince;  the  marshal  of  the  province 
sent  an  official  to  Princess  Marya  to  persuade  her  to  get  away  as  quickly 
as  possible.  The  captain  of  the  police  visited  Bogutcharovo  to  insist  on 
the  same  thing,  telling  her  that  the  French  were  only  forty  versts  away; 
that  French  proclamations  were  circulating  in  the  villages,  and  that  if 
the  princess  did  not  move  her  father  before  the  15th,  he  could  not  answer 
for  the  consequences. 

The  princess  made  up  her  mind  to  leave  on  the  15th.  The  preparations 
and  giving  all  the  necessary  instructions,  for  which  every  one  applied  to 
her,  kept  her  busy  the  whole  of  the  previous  day.  The  night  of  the  14th 
she  spent  as  usual,  without  undressing,  in  the  room  next  to  the  one 
where  the  old  prince  lay.  Several  times  she  waked  up,  hearing  his  groan¬ 
ing  and  muttering,  the  creak  of  the  bedstead,  and  the  steps  of  Tihon  and 
the  doctor  moving  him.  Several  times  she  listened  at  the  door,  and  it 
seemed  to  her  that  he  was  muttering  more  loudly  than  usual  and  turning 
more  restlessly.  She  could  not  sleep,  and  several  times  she  went  to  the 
door,  listening,  tempted  to  go  in,  but  unable  to  make  up  her  mind  to  do 
so.  Although  he  could  not  speak,  Princess  Marya  saw  and  knew  how  he 
disliked  any  expression  of  anxiety  about  him.  She  had  noticed  how  he 
turned  in  displeasure  away  from  her  eyes,  which  were  sometimes  uncon¬ 
sciously  fixed  persistently  on  him.  She  knew  her  going  in  at  night,  at  an 
unusual  time,  would  irritate  him. 

But  never  had  she  felt  so  sorry  for  him;  never  had  she  felt  it  so  dread¬ 
ful  to  lose  him.  She  went  over  all  her  life  with  him,  and  in  every  word, 
every  action,  she  saw  an  expression  of  his  love  for  her.  Occasionally  these 
reminiscences  were  interrupted  by  the  temptation  of  the  devil;  dreams 
came  back  to  her  imagination  of  what  would  happen  after  his  death,  and 
how  she  would  order  her  new  independent  existence.  But  she  drove  away 
such  thoughts  with  horror.  Towards  morning  he  was  quieter,  and  she 
fell  asleep. 

She  waked  up  late.  The  perfect  sincerity,  which  often  accompanies 
the  moment  of  waking,  showed  her  unmistakably  what  it  was  that  was 
of  most  interest  to  her  in  her  father’s  illness.  She  waked  up,  listened  to 
what  was  passing  through  the  door,  and  catching  the  sound  of  his  mut¬ 
tering,  she  told  herself  with  a  sigh  that  there  was  no  change. 

‘But  what  should  there  be?  What  did  I  hope  for?  I  hope  for  his  death,' 
she  cried,  with  inward  loathing  of  herself. 

She  washed,  dressed,  said  her  prayers,  and  went  out  on  to  the  steps. 


WARANDPEACE  675 

At  the  entrance  the  carriages  in  which  their  luggage  was  packed  were 
standing  without  horses. 

The  morning  was  warm  and  grey.  Princess  Marya  lingered  on  the 
steps,  still  horrified  at  her  own  spiritual  infamy,  and  trying  to  get  her 
ideas  into  shape  before  going  in  to  see  him. 

The  doctor  came  downstairs  and  out  to  her. 

‘He  is  a  little  better  to-day,’  said  the  doctor.  T  was  looking  for  you. 
One  can  make  out  a  little  of  what  he  says.  His  head  is  clearer.  Come  in. 
He  is  asking  for  you  .  .  .’ 

Princess  Marya ’s  heart  beat  so  violently  at  this  news  that  she  turned 
pale  and  leaned  against  the  door  to  keep  from  falling.  To  see  him,  to  talk 
to  him,  to  be  under  his  eyes  now,  when  all  her  soul  was  filled  with  these 
fearful,  sinful  imaginings  was  full  of  an  agonising  joy  and  terror  for  her. 

‘Let  us  go  in,’  said  the  doctor. 

Princess  Marya  went  in  to  her  father,  and  went  up  to  his  bedside.  He 
was  lying  raised  high  on  his  back;  his  little  bony  hands,  covered  with 
knotted  purple  veins,  were  laid  on  the  quilt;  his  left  eye  was  gazing 
straight  before  him,  while  the  right  eye  was  distorted,  and  his  lips  and 
eyebrows  were  motionless.  He  looked  so  thin,  so  small,  and  pitiable.  His 
face  looked  withered  up  or  melted  away;  his  features  all  seemed  smaller. 
Princess  Marya  went  up  and  kissed  his  hand.  His  left  hand  clasped  her 
hand  in  a  way  that  showed  he  had  long  been  wanting  her.  He  twitched 
her  hand,  and  his  eyebrows  and  lips  quivered  angrily. 

She  looked  at  him  in  dismay,  trying  to  fathom  what  he  wanted  of 
her.  When  she  changed  her  position  so  that  his  left  eye  could  see  her,  he 
seemed  satisfied,  and  for  several  seconds  kept  his  eye  fixed  oit  her.  Then 
his  lips  and  tongue  twitched;  sounds  came,  and  he  tried  to  speak,  look¬ 
ing  with  imploring  timidity  at  her,  evidently  afraid  she  would  not  under¬ 
stand  him. 

Princess  Marya  strained  every  faculty  of  attention  as  she  gazed  at 
him.  The  comic  effort  with  which  he  strove  to  make  his  tongue  work 
made  Princess  Marya  drop  her  eyes,  and  she  had  much  ado  to  stifle  the 
Sobs  that  rose  in  her  throat.  He  was  saying  something,  several  times  re¬ 
peating  his  words.  Princess  Marya  could  not  understand  them;  but  she 
tried  to  guess  what  he  was  saying,  and  repeated  interrogatively  the  words 
she  supposed  him  to  be  uttering. 

‘0  .  .  .  0  .  .  .  aye  .  .  .  aye  .  .  .!’  he  repeated  several  times.  It 
.vas  impossible  to  interpret  these  sounds.  The  doctor  thought  he  had 
guessed  it,  and  asked: 

‘The  princess  is  afraid?’ 

He  shook  his  head,  and  again  repeated  the  same  sounds. 

‘The  soul,  the  soul  is  in  pain!’  Princess  Marya  guessed.  He  grunted 
iffirmatively,  took  her  hand,  and  began  pressing  it  to  different  parts 
)f  his  breast  as  though  seeking  the  right  place  for  it. 

I  ‘Always  thinking! — about  you  .  .  .  thinking  ...  !’  he  articulated, 
ar  more  intelligibly  than  before  now  that  he  felt  sure  of  being  under- 


676  WARANDPEACE 

stood.  Princess  Marya  pressed  her  head  against  his  arm,  trying  to 
hide  her  sobs  and  tears. 

He  passed  his  hand  over  her  hair. 

‘I  called  for  you  all  night  .  .  .’  he  articulated. 

‘If  I  had  only  known  .  .  she  said,  through  her  tears.  ‘I  was 
afraid  to  come  in.’ 

He  pressed  her  hand. 

‘Weren’t  you  asleep?’ 

‘No,  I  couldn’t  sleep,’  said  Princess  Marya,  shaking  her  head. 

Unconsciously  imitating  her  father,  she  tried  to  speak  more  by  signs, 
as  he  spoke,  as  though  she,  too,  had  a  difficulty  in  articulating. 

‘Darling!’  ...  or  ‘dear  one!’  .  .  .  Princess  Marya  could  not  dis¬ 
tinguish  the  word;  but  from  the  expression  of  his  eyes  she  had  no  doubt 
what  was  said  was  a  word  of  caressing  tenderness  such  as  he  had  never 
used  to  her  before.  ‘Why  didn’t  you  come?’ 

‘And  I  was  wishing,  wishing  for  his  death!’  thought  Princess  Marya. 

He  paused. 

‘Thanks  .  .  .  to  you  .  .  .  child,  dear  one!  for  all,  for  all  .  .  .  forgive 
.  .  .  thanks!  .  .  .  forgive!  .  .  .  thanks!  .  .  .’  And  tears  flowed  from 
his  eyes.  ‘Call  Andryusha,’  he  said  suddenly,  and  a  look  of  childish  and 
deprecating  misgiving  came  into  his  face  at  the  question.  He  seemed  to 
be  himself  aware  that  his  question  had  no  meaning.  So  at  least  it  seemed 
to  Princess  Marya. 

‘I  have  had  a  letter  from  him,’  answered  Princess  Marya. 

He  looked  at  her  with  timid  wonder. 

‘Where  is  he?’ 

‘He’s  with  the  army,  father,  at  Smolensk.’ 

He  was  silent  for  a  long  while,  closing  his  eyes.  Then,  as  though  to 
answer  his  doubts,  and  to  assert  that  now  he  understood  it  all  and  re¬ 
membered,  he  nodded  his  head  and  opened  his  eyes. 

‘Yes,’  he  said,  softly  and  distinctly.  ‘Russia  is  lost!  They  have  lost  her!’ 

And  again  he  broke  into  sobs,  and  tears  flowed  from  his  eyes.  Princess 
Marya  could  restrain  herself  no  more,  and  wept  too  as  she  looked  at  his  ‘ 
face. 

He  closed  his  eyes  again.  His  sobs  ceased.  He  pointed  to  his  eyes;  and 
Tihon,  understanding  him,  wiped  away  his  tears. 

Then  he  opened  his  eyes,  and  said  something,  which,  for  a  long  while,  i 
no  one  could  understand;  and  at  last  Tihon  understood  and  interpreted. 

Princess  Marya  looked  for  the  drift  of  his  words  in  the  direction  in 
which  he  had  been  speaking  a  minute  before.  She  supposed  he  was  speak-  : 
ing  of  Russia;  then  of  Prince  Andrey,  of  herself,  of  his  grandson,  then  | 
of  his  own  death.  And  this  was  just  why  she  could  not  understand  his  j 
words. 

‘Put  on  your  white,  dress.  I  like  it,’  he  had  said. 

When  she  understood  those  words  Princess  Marya  sobbed  louder  thar 
ever,  and  the  doctor,  taking  her  on  his  arm,  led  her  out  of  the  room  on 
to  the  terrace,  trying  to  persuade  her  to  calm  herself,  and  to  devotf 


W  A  R  A  N  D  P  E  A  C  E  677 

herself  to  preparations  for  the  journey.  After  Princess  Marya  had  left 
the  prince,  he  began  talking  again  of  his  son,  of  the  war,  of  the  Tsar, 
twitched  his  eyebrows  angrily,  began  to  raise  his  hoarse  voice,  and  was 
seized  by  a  second  and  final  stroke. 

Princess  Marya  stayed  on  the  terrace.  The  day  had  become  brilliantly 
fine,  sunny,  and  warm.  She  could  grasp  nothing,  could  think  of  nothing, 
and  feel  nothing  but  her  passionate  love  for  her  father,  of  which  it 
seemed  to  her  that  she  had  not  been  aware  till  that  minute.  She  ran  out 
into  the  garden,  and  ran  sobbing  towards  the  pond  along  the  paths 
planted  with  young  lime-trees  by  Prince  Andrey. 

‘Yes  ...I...I...I  longed  for  his  death!  Yes,  I  wanted  it 
soon  to  be  over  ...  I  wanted  to  be  at  peace  .  .  .  And  what  will  be¬ 
come  of  me?  What  use  will  peace  be  to  me  when  he  is  gone?’  Princess 
Marya  muttered  aloud,  walking  with  rapid  steps  through  the  garden, 
and  pressing  her  hands  to  her  bosom,  which  heaved  with  convulsive  sobs. 
Going  round  the  garden  in  a  circle,  which  brought  her  back  again  to 
the  house,  she  saw  coming  towards  her  Mademoiselle  Bourienne  (who 
was  remaining  at  Bogutcharovo,  preferring  not  to  move  away),  and 
with  her  an  unknown  gentleman.  It  was  the  district  marshal,  who  had 
come  to  call  on  the  princess,  to  urge  upon  her  the  necessity  of  her  im¬ 
mediate  departure.  Princess  Marya  listened  and  did  not  take  in  what 
he  said.  She  took  him  into  the  house,  offered  him  lunch,  and  sat  down 
with  him.  Then  asking  him  to  excuse  her,  she  went  to  the  old  prince’s 
door.  The  doctor  came  out  with  a  perturbed  face  and  told  her  she  could 
not  go  in. 

‘Go  away,  princess;  go  away!’ 

Princess  Marya  went  out  again  into  the  garden,  and  by  the  pond  at 
the  bottom  of  the  hill  she  sat  down  on  the  grass,  in  a  place  where  no  one 
could  see  her.  She  could  not  have  said  how  long  she  was  there.  A  woman’s 
footsteps  running  along  the  path  made  her  look  round.  She  got  up  and 
saw  Dunyasha,  her  maid,  evidently  running  to  look  for  her,  stop  short, 
as  though  in  alarm,  on  seeing  her  mistress. 

‘Come,  please,  princess  .  .  .  the  prince  .  .  .’  said  Dunyasha,  in  a 
breaking  voice. 

‘I’m  coming,  I'm  coming!’  the  princess  cried  hurriedly,  not  letting 
Dunyasha  have  time  to  say  what  she  meant  to;  and  trying  to  avoid 
seeing  her,  she  ran  into  the  house. 

‘Princess,  it  is  God’s  will!  You  must  be  prepared  for  the  worst,’  said 
the  marshal,  meeting  her  at  the  door  into  the  house. 

‘Let  me  be;  it’s  not  true!’  she  cried  angrily  at  him. 

The  doctor  tried  to  stop  her.  She  pushed  him  away  and  ran  to  the 
door.  ‘What  are  these  people  with  scared  faces  stopping  me  for?  I  don’t 
want  any  of  them!  What  are  they  doing  here?’  she  thought.  She  opened 
the  door,  and  the  bright  daylight  in  the  room,  always  hitherto  darkened, 
frightened  her.  Her  old  nurse  and  other  women  were  in  the  room.  They 
all  drew  back  from  the  bed,  making  way  for  her.  He  was  still  lying  on 


<J78  WAR  AND  PEACE 

the  bed  as  before;  but  the  stern  look  on  his  calm  face  arrested  Princess 
Marya  on  the  threshold. 

‘No,  he  is  not  dead,  it  cannot  be!  ’  Princess  Marya  said  to  herself.  She  I 
went  up  to  him,  and  struggling  with  the  terror  that  came  upon  her,  she 
pressed  her  lips  to  his  cheek.  But  she  started  back  from  him  at  once. 
Instantaneously  all  the  tenderness  she  had  been  feeling  for  him  van¬ 
ished,  and  was  followed  by  a  feeling  of  horror  for  what  lay  before  her. 
‘No,  no,  he  is  no  more!  He  is  no  more,  and  here  in  the  place  where  he 
was,  is  something  unfamiliar  and  sinister,  some  fearful,  terrifying,  and 
repulsive  secret !  ’  And  hiding  her  face  in  her  hands,  Princess  Marya  sank 
into  the  arms  of  the  doctor,  who  supported  her. 

In  the  presence  of  Tihon  and  the  doctor,  the  women  washed  what  had 
been  the  prince,  bound  a  kerchief  round  the  head  that  the  mouth  might 
not  become  rigidly  open,  and  bound  another  kerchief  round  the  limbs. 
Then  the  uniform  with  the  decorations  was  put  on,  and  the  little  dried-up 
body  was  laid  on  the  table.  There  was  no  telling  when  or  who  took 
thought  for  all  this;  it  all  seemed  to  be  done  of  itself.  Towards  night 
candles  were  lighted  round  the  coffin,  a  pall  was  laid  over  it,  juniper 
was  strewn  on  the  floor,  a  printed  prayer  was  put  under  the  dead 
withered  head,  and  a  deacon  sat  in  the  corner  reading  aloud  the  Psalter. 
Like  horses  crowding,  snorting,  and  starting  round  a  dead  horse,  numbers 
of  familiar  and  unfamiliar  figures  crowded  round  the  coffin — the  marshal, 
and  the  village  elder,  and  peasant  women,  and  all  with  scared  and  fasci¬ 
nated  eyes,  crossed  themselves,  and  bowed  down  and  kissed  the  cold, 
stiff  hand  of  the  old  prince. 


IX 

Until  Prince  Andrey’s  stay  at  Bogutcharovo,  the  estate  had  never  had 
an  owner  in  residence,  and  the  Bogutcharovo  peasants  were  of  quite  a 
different  character  from  the  peasants  of  Bleak  Hills.  They  differed  from 
them  in  speech,  in  dress,  and  in  manners.  They  said  they  came  from  the 
steppes.  The  old  prince  praised  them  for  their  industry  when  they  came 
i.o  Bleak  Hills  for  harvesting,  or  digging  ponds  and  ditches;  but  he  did 
not  like  them  because  of  their  savage  manners. 

Prince  Andrey’s  residence  at  Bogutcharovo,  and  his  innovations — 
his  hospitals  and  schools  and  the  lowering  of  their  rent — had  not  softened 
their  manners,  but,  on  the  contrary,  had  intensified  their  traits  of  char¬ 
acter,  which  the  old  prince  called  their  savagery. 

Obscure  rumours  were  always  current  among  them:  at  one  time  a 
belief  that  they  were  all  to  be  carried  off  to  be  made  Cossacks,  then 
that  they  were  to  be  converted  to  some  new  religion,  then  rumours  of 
some  supposed  proclamations  of  the  Tsar,  or  of  the  oath  to  the  Tsar  Pavel 
Petrovitch  in  1797  (which  was  said  to  have  granted  freedom  to  the  peas¬ 
ants,  and  to  have  been  withdrawn  by  the  gentry  later) ;  then  of  the 


W  A  R  A  N  D  P  E  A  C  E  679 

expected  return  of  the  Tsar  Peter  Fedorovitch,  who  was  to  rise  again  from 
the  dead  in  seven  years,  and  to  bring  perfect  freedom,  and  to  make  an  end 
of  the  existing  order  of  things.  Rumours  of  the  war,  and  Bonaparte  and  his 
invasion,  were  connected  in  their  minds  with  vague  conceptions  of  Anti- 
j  christ,  of  the  end  of  the  world,  and  perfect  freedom. 

In  the  vicinity  of  Bogutcharovo  were  large  villages  inhabited  by 
Crown  serfs,  or  peasants  who  paid  rent  to  absentee  owners.  There  were 
very  few  resident  landowners  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  consequently 
very  few  house-serfs  or  peasants  able  to  read  and  write.  And  among  the 
peasants  of  that  part  of  the  country  there  could  be  seen  more  distinctly 
and  strongly  marked  than  among  others  those  mysterious  undercurrents 
in  the  life  of  the  Russian  peasantry,  which  are  so  baffling  to  contempo¬ 
raries.  Twenty  years  before,  there  had  been  a  movement  among  the 
peasants  of  the  district  to  emigrate  to  certain  supposed  warm  rivers. 
Hundreds  of  peasants,  among  them  those  of  Bogutcharovo,  had  sud¬ 
denly  begun  selling  their  cattle  and  moving  away  with  their  families 
towards  the  south-west.  Like  birds  flying  to  unknown  realms  over  the 
ocean,  these  men  with  their  wives  and  children  turned  towards  the  south¬ 
west,  where  no  one  of  them  had  been.  They  set  off  in  caravans,  redeemed 
their  freedom  one  by  one,  ran  and  drove  and  walked  to  the  unknown 
region  of  the  warm  springs.  Many  were  punished;  some  sent  to  Siberia; 
many  died  of  cold  and  hunger  on  the  road;  many  came  back  of  their 
own  accord;  and  the  movement  died  down  as  it  had  begun  without 
obvious  cause.  But  the  undercurrents  still  flowed  among  the  people,  and 
were  gathering  force  for  some  new  manifestation,  destined  to  appear  as 
strangely,  unexpectedly,  and  at  the  same  time  simply,  naturally,  and 
forcibly.  In  1812  any  one  living  in  close  relations  with  the  peasants  might 
have  observed  that  there  was  a  violent  ferment  working  below  the  sur¬ 
face,  and  an  outbreak  of  some  kind  was  at  hand. 

Alpatitch,  who  came  to  Bogutcharovo  a  little  while  before  the  old 
prince’s  death,  noticed  that  there  was  some  excitement  among  the 
peasants;  and  noticed  that,  unlike  the  Bleak  Hills  district,  where  within 
a  radius  of  sixty  versts  all  the  peasants  had  moved  away,  abandoning 
their  villages  to  be  wasted  by  the  Cossacks,  in  the  Bogutcharovo  steppe 
country  the  peasants  had  entered,  it  was  said,  into  communication  with 
the  French,  and  were  remaining  in  their  homes,  and  there  were  some 
mysterious  documents  circulating  among  them.  He  learned  through  serfs 
who  were  attached  to  him  that  the  peasant  Karp,  a  man  of  great  in¬ 
fluence  in  the  village,  had  a  few  days  previously  accompanied  a  govern¬ 
ment  transport,  and  had  returned  with  the  news  that  the  Cossacks  were 
destroying  the  deserted  villages,  while  the  French  would  not  touch  them. 
He  knew  that  another  peasant  had  on  the  previous  day  even  brought 
from  the  hamlet  of  Yislouhovo,  where  the  French  were  encamped,  a 
proclamation  from  the  French  general  that  no  harm  would  be  done  to 
the  inhabitants,  and  that  everything  taken  from  them  would  be  paid  for, 
if  they  would  remain.  In  token  of  good  faith,  the  peasant  brought  from 


68o 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

Vislouhovo  a  hundred-rouble  note  (he  did  not  know  it  was  false),  paid 
him  in  advance  for  hay. 

And  last,  and  most  important  of  all,  Alpatitch  learned  that  on  the 
day  on  which  he  had  given  the  village  elder  orders  to  collect  carts  to 
move  the  princess’s  luggage  from  Bogutcharovo,  there  had  been  a  meet¬ 
ing  in  the  village  at  which  it  was  resolved  to  wait  and  not  to  move. 
Meanwhile,  time  was  pressing.  On  the  day  of  the  prince’s  death,  the  15th 
of  August,  the  marshal  urged  Princess  Marya  to  move  the  same  day, 
as  it  was  becoming  dangerous.  He  said  that  he  could  not  answer  for 
what  might  happen  after  the  16th.  He  drove  away  that  evening,  promis¬ 
ing  to  return  next  morning  for  the  funeral.  But  next  day  he  could  not 
come,  as  he  received  information  of  an  expected  advance  of  the  French, 
and  was  only  just  in  time  to  get  his  family  and  valuables  moved  away 
from  his  own  estate. 

For  nearly  thirty  years  Bogutcharovo  had  been  under  the  direction 
of  the  village  elder,  Dron,  called  by  the  old  prince,  Dronushka. 

Dron  was  one  of  those  physically  and  morally  vigorous  peasants,  who 
grow  a  thick  beard  as  soon  as  they  are  grown  up,  and  go  on  almost  j 
unchanged  till  sixty  or  seventy,  without  a  grey  hair  or  the  loss  of  a 
tooth,  as  upright  and  vigorous  at  sixty  as  at  thirty. 

Shortly  after  the  attempted  migration  to  the  warm  rivers,  in  which 
he  had  taken  part  with  the  rest,  Dron  was  made  village  elder  and  over¬ 
seer  of  Bogutcharovo,  and  had  filled  those  positions  irreproachably  for 
twenty-three  years.  The  peasants  were  more  afraid  of  him  than  of  their 
master.  The  old  prince  and  the  young  one  and  the  steward  respected  him, 
and  called  him  in  joke  the  minister.  Dron  had  never  once  been  drunk  or 
ill  since  he  had  been  appointed  elder ;  he  had  never  after  sleepless  nights 
or  severe  labour  shown  the  slightest  sign  of  fatigue;  and  though  he  could 
not  read  or  write,  he  never  forgot  an  account  of  the  pounds  of  flour  in  the 
huge  waggon-loads  he  sold,  and  of  the  money  paid  for  them,  nor  missed 
a  sheaf  of  wheat  on  an  acre  of  the  Bogutcharovo  fields. 

This  peasant  Dron  it  was  for  whom  Alpatitch  sent  on  coming  from 
the  plundered  estate  at  Bleak  Hills.  He  ordered  him  to  get  ready  twelve 
horses  for  the  princess’s  carriages,  and  eighteen  conveyances  for  the  : 
move  which  was  to  be  made  from  Bogutcharovo.  Though  the  peasants  : 
paid  rent  instead  of  working  as  serfs,  Alpatitch  expected  to  meet  no  diffi-  i 
culty  on  their  part  in  carrying  out  this  order,  since  there  were  two 
hundred  and  thirty  efficient  families  in  Bogutcharovo,  and  the  peasants 
were  well-to-do.  But  Dron,  on  receiving  the  order,  dropped  his  eyes  and 
made  no  reply.  Alpatitch  mentioned  the  names  of  peasants  from  whom 
he  told  him  to  take  the  carts. 

Dron  replied  that  the  horses  belonging  to  those  peasants  were  away 
on  hire.  Alpatitch  mentioned  the  names  of  other  peasants.  They  too, 
according  to  Dron,  had  no  horses  available:  some  were  employed  in 
government  transport,  others  had  gone  lame,  and  others  had  died  through 
the  shortness  of  forage.  In  Dron’s  opinion,  there  was  no  hope  of  getting  .  ■ 


68r 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

horses  enough  for  the  princess’s  carriages,  not  to  speak  of  the  transport 
of  baggage. 

Alpatitch  looked  intently  at  Dron  and  scowled.  Dron  was  a  model 
village  elder,  but  Alpatitch  had  not  been  twenty  years  managing  the 
prince’s  estates  for  nothing,  and  he  too  was  a  model  steward.  He  pos¬ 
sessed  in  the  highest  degree  the  faculty  of  divining  the  needs  and  in¬ 
stincts  of  the  peasants,  with  whom  he  had  to  deal,  and  was  consequently 
an  excellent  steward.  Glancing  at  Dron,  he  saw  at  once  that  his  answers 
were  not  the  expression  of  his  own  ideas,  but  the  expression  of  the  general 
drift  of  opinion  in  the  Bogutcharovo  village,  by  which  the  elder  had 
already  been  carried  away.  At  the  same  time,  he  knew  that  Dron,  who 
had  saved  money  and  was  detested  by  the  village,  must  be  hesitating 
between  two  camps — the  master’s  and  the  peasants’.  He  detected  the 
hesitation  in  his  eyes,  and  so  frowning  he  came  closer  to  Dron. 

‘Now,  Dronushka,’  he  said,  ‘you  listen  to  me!  Don’t  you  talk  nonsense 
to  me.  His  excellency,  Prince  Andrey  Nikolaevitch,  himself  gave  me 
orders  to  move  the  folk  away,  and  not  leave  them  with  the  enemy,  and 
the  Tsar  has  issued  a  decree  that  it  is  to  be  so.  Any  one  that  stays  is  a 
traitor  to  the  Tsar.  Do  you  hear?’ 

‘I  hear,’  answered  Dron,  not  raising  his  eyes. 

Alpatitch  was  not  satisfied  with  his  reply. 

‘Ay,  Dron,  there’ll  be  trouble!’  said  Alpatitch,  shaking  his  head. 

‘It’s  for  you  to  command!’  said  Dron  dejectedly. 

‘Ay,  Dron,  drop  it!’  repeated  Alpatitch,  taking  his  hand  out  of  the 
bosom  of  his  coat,  and  pointing  with  a  solemn  gesture  to  the  ground 
under  Dron’s  feet.  ‘I  can  see  right  through  you;  and  more  than  that, 
I  can  see  three  yards  into  the  earth  under  you,’  he  said,  looking  at  the 
ground  under  Dron’s  feet. 

Dron  was  disconcerted;  he  looked  furtively  at  Alpatitch,  and  dropped 
his  eyes  again. 

‘You  drop  this  nonsense,  and  tell  the  folks  to  pack  up  to  leave  their 
homes  and  go  to  Moscow,  and  to  get  ready  carts  to-morrow  morning  for 
the  princess’s  luggage;  and  don’t  you  go  to  the  meeting.  Do  you  hear?’ 

All  at  once  Dron  threw  himself  at  his  feet. 

‘Yakov  Alpatitch,  discharge  me!  Take  the  keys  from  me;  discharge 
me,  for  Christ’s  sake!’ 

‘Stop  that!’  said  Alpatitch  sternly.  ‘I  can  see  through  you  three  yards 
into  the  earth,’  he  repeated,  knowing  that  his  skill  in  bee-keeping,  his 
knowledge  of  the  right  day  to  sow  the  oats,  and  his  success  in  pleasing 
the  old  prince  for  twenty  years  had  long  ago  gained  him  the  reputation 
of  a  wizard,  and  that  the  power  of  seeing  for  three  yards  under  a  man 
is  ascribed  to  wizards. 

Dron  got  up,  and  w'ould  have  said  something,  but  Alpatitch  inter¬ 
rupted  him. 

‘What’s  this  you’ve  all  got  in  your  head?  Eh?  .  .  .  What  are  you 
thinking  about?  Eh?’ 


682 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘What  am  I  to  do  with  the  people?’  said  Dron.  ‘They’re  all  in  a  fer¬ 
ment.  I  do  tell  them  .  . 

‘Oh,  I  dare  say  you  do,’  said  Alpatitch.  ‘Are  they  drinking?’  he  asked  ! 
briefly. 

‘They’re  all  in  a  ferment,  Yakov  Alpatitch;  they  have  got  hold  of 
another  barrel.’ 

‘Then  you  listen  to  me.  I’ll  go  to  the  police-captain  and  you  tell  them 
so,  and  tell  them  to  drop  all  this  and  get  the  carts  ready.’ 

‘Certainly,’  answered  Dron. 

Yakov  Alpatitch  did  not  insist  further.  He  had  much  experience  in 
managing  the  peasants,  and  knew  that  the  chief  means  for  securing 
obedience  was  not  to  show  the  slightest  suspicion  that  they  could  do 
anything  but  obey.  Having  wrung  from  Dron  a  submissive  ‘certainly,’ 
Yakov  Alpatitch  rested  content  with  it,  though  he  had  more  than  doubts 
- — he  had  a  conviction — that  the  carts  would  not  be  provided  without 
the  intervention  of  the  military  authorities. 

And  as  a  fact  when  evening  came,  the  carts  had  not  been  provided. 
There  had  been  again  a  village  meeting  at  the  tavern,  and  at  the  meeting  ; 
it  had  been  resolved  to  drive  the  horses  out  into  the  forest  and  not  to  : 
provide  the  conveyances.  Without  saying  a  word  of  all  this  to  the  princess, 
Alpatitch  ordered  his  own  baggage  to  be  unloaded  from  the  waggons  that 
had  come  from  Bleak  Hills  and  the  horses  to  be  taken  from  them  for 
the  princess’s  carriage,  while  he  rode  off  himself  to  the  police  authorities. 


X 

After  her  father’s  funeral  Princess  Marya  locked  herself  in  her  room 
and  would  not  let  any  one  come  near  her.  A  maid  came  to  the  door  to 
say  that  Alpatitch  had  come  to  ask  for  instructions  in  regard  to  the 
journey.  (This  was  before  Alpatitch  had  talked  to  Dron.)  Princess  Marya 
got  up  from  the  sofa  on  which  she  was  lying,  and  through  the  closed 
door  replied  that  she  was  never  going  away,  and  begged  to  be  left  in 
peace. 

The  windows  of  the  room  in  which  Princess  Marya  lay  looked  to  the 
west.  She  lay  on  the  sofa  facing  the  wall,  and  fingering  the  buttons  on 
the  leather  bolster,  she  saw  nothing  but  that  bolster,  and  her  thoughts 
were  concentrated  obscurely  on  one  subject.  She  thought  of  the  finality  : 
of  death  and  of  her  spiritual  baseness,  of  which  she  had  had  no  idea  till 
it  showed  itself  during  her  father’s  illness.  She  longed  to  pray,  but  dared 
not;  dared  not,  in  the  spiritual  state  she  was  in,  turn  to  God.  For  a  long 
while  she  lay  in  that  position. 

The  sun  was  setting,  and  the  slanting  rays  lighted  up  the  room  through 
the  open  window,  and  threw  a  glow  on  part  of  the  morocco  cushion  at 
which  Princess  Marya  was  looking.  The  current  of  her  thoughts  was  sud¬ 
denly  arrested.  She  unconsciously  sat  up,  smoothed  her  hair,  stood  up,  and 


WARANDPEACE  683 

walked  to  the  window,  involuntarily  drawing  a  deep  breath  of  the  refresh¬ 
ing  coolness  of  the  clear,  windy  evening. 

‘Yes,  now  you  can  admire  the  sunset  at  your  ease!  He  is  not  here,  and 
there  is  no  one  to  hinder  you,’  she  said  to  herself,  and  sinking  into  a  chair, 
she  let  her  head  fall  on  the  window-sill. 

Some  one  spoke  her  name  in  a  soft  and  tender  voice  from  the  garden 
and  kissed  her  on  the  head.  She  looked  up.  It  was  Mademoiselle  Bourienne 
in  a  black  dress  and  pleureuses.  She  softly  approached  Princess  Marya, 
kissed  her  with  a  sigh,  and  promptly  burst  into  tears.  Princess  Marya 
looked  round  at  her.  All  her  old  conflicts  with  her,  her  jealousy  of  her, 
recurred  to  Princess  Marya’s  mind.  She  remembered  too  that  he  had 
changed  of  late  to  Mademoiselle  Bourienne,  could  not  bear  the  sight  of 
her,  and  therefore  how  unjust  had  been  the  censure  that  she  had  in  her 
heart  passed  upon  her.  ‘Yes,  and  is  it  for  me,  for  me,  after  desiring  his 
death,  to  pass  judgment  on  any  one?’  she  thought. 

Princess  Marya  pictured  vividly  to  herself  Mademoiselle  Bourienne’s 
position,  estranged  from  her  of  late,  though  dependent  on  her,  and  living 
among  strangers.  And  she  felt  sorry  for  her.  She  looked  at  her  in  gentle 
inquiry  and  held  out  her  hand  to  her.  Mademoiselle  Bourienne  at  once 
began  kissing  her  hand  with  tears  and  talking  of  the  princess’s  sorrow, 
making  herself  a  partner  in  that  sorrow.  She  said  that  her  only  consolation 
in  her  sorrow  was  that  the  princess  permitted  her  to  share  it  with  her. 
She  said  that  all  their  former  misunderstandings  must  sink  into  nothing 
before  their  great  sorrow:  that  she  felt  herself  guiltless  in  regard  to  every 
one,  and  that  he  from  above  saw  her  love  and  gratitude.  The  princess 
heard  her  without  heeding  her  words,  though  she  looked  at  her  now  and 
then  and  listened  to  the  sound  of  her  voice. 

‘Your  position  is  doubly  dreadful,  dear  princess,’  said  Mademoiselle 
Bourienne.  ‘I  know  you  could  not  and  cannot  think  of  yourself ;  but  with 
my  love  for  you  I  am  bound  to  do  so.  .  .  .  Has  Alpatitch  been  with  you? 
Has  he  spoken  to  you  of  moving?’  she  asked. 

Princess  Marya  did  not  answer.  She  did  not  understand  who  was  to 
move  and  where.  ‘Was  it  possible  to  undertake  anything  now,  to  think  of 
anything?  Could  anything  matter?’  she  wondered.  She  made  no  reply. 

‘Do  you  know,  chere  Marie,’  said  Mademoiselle  Bourienne,  ‘that  we  are 
in  danger,  that  we  are  surrounded  by  the  French;  it  is  dangerous  to  move 
now.  If  we  move,  we  are  almost  certain  to  be  taken  prisoner,  and  God 
knows  .  .  .’ 

Princess  Marya  looked  at  her  companion,  with  no  notion  what  she  was 
saying. 

‘Oh,  if  any  one  knew  how  little  anything  matters  to  me  now,’  she  said. 
‘Of  course,  I  would  not  on  any  account  move  away  from  him  .  .  .  Alpa¬ 
titch  said  something  about  going  away.  .  .  .  You  talk  to  him  .  .  .  I  can’t 
do  anything,  and  I  don’t  want  .  .  .’ 

‘I  have  been  talking  to  him.  He  hopes  that  we  may  manage  to  get  away 
to-morrow:  but  I  think  it  would  be  better  now  to  remain  here,’  said 
Mademoiselle  Bourienne.  ‘Because  you  will  agree,  chere  Marie,  that  to  fall 


bS4  WAR  AND  PEACE 

into  the  hands  of  the  soldiers  or  of  rioting  peasants  on  the  road  would 
be  awful.’ 

Mademoiselle  Bourienne  took  out  of  her  reticule  a  document,  not  on 
the  usual  Russian  paper.  It  was  the  proclamation  of  General  Rameau, 
announcing  that  protection  would  be  given  by  the  French  commanders  to 
all  inhabitants  who  did  not  abandon  their  homes.  She  handed  it  to  the 
princess. 

‘I  imagine  the  best  thing  would  be  to  appeal  to  this  general,’  said 
Mademoiselle  Bourienne.  'I  am  convinced  that  all  proper  respect  would 
be  shown  you.’ 

Princess  Marya  read  the  document  and  her  face  worked  with  tearless 
sobs. 

‘Through  whom  did  you  get  this?'  she  asked. 

‘They  probably  found  out  I  was  French  from  my  name,’  said  Mademoi¬ 
selle  Bourienne.  flushing. 

With  the  proclamation  in  her  hand.  Princess  Marya  got  up  from  the 
window,  and  with  a  pale  face  walked  out  of  the  room  into  Prince  Andrey’s 
former  study. 

‘Dunyasha!  send  Alpatitch  to  me.  Dronushka,  or  somebody!’  said 
Princess  Mama.  ‘Ana  tell  Amalya  Karlovna  not  to  come  to  me.’  she 
added,  hearing  Mademoiselle  Bourienne ’s  voice.  ‘To  set  off  at  once!  as 
quick  as  possible!’  said  Princess  Marya,  appalled  at  the  idea  that  she 
might  be  left  in  the  power  of  the  French. 

‘That  Prince  Andrey  should  know  that  she  was  in  the  power  of  the 
French!  That  she.  the  daughter  of  Prince  Nikolay  Andreitch  Bolkonsky, 
should  stoop  to  ask  General  Rameau  to  grant  her  his  protection,  and  should 
take  advantage  of  his  good  offices.’  The  idea  appalled  her,  made  her 
shudder  and  turn  crimson.  She  felt  a  rush  of  vindictive  wrath  and  pride 
of  which  she  had  had  no  conception.  Ml  the  bitterness,  and  still  more  the 
humiliation  of  her  position  rose  vividly  to  her  imagination.  'They,  the 
French,  would  take  up  their  quarters  in  the  house:  M,  le  General  Rameau 
would  occupy  Prince  Andrey  s  study;  would  amuse  himself  by  looking 
through  and  reading  his  letters  and  papers:  Mademoiselle  Bourienne 
would  do  the  honours  of  Bogutcharovo ;  I  should  be  given  a  room  as  a 
favour:  the  soldiers  would  break  open  my  father’s  newly  dug  grave  to 
take  his  crosses  and  decorations;  they  would  tell  me  of  their  victories 
over  the  Russians,  would  affect  hypocritical  sympathy  with  my  grief,  .  .  .’ 
thought  Princess  Marya,  thinking  not  the  thoughts  natural  to  her,  but 
feeling  it  a  duty  to  think  as  her  father  and  brother  would  have  done.  To 
her  personally  it  did  not  matter  where  she  stayed  and  what  happened  to  i 
her,  but,  at  the  same  time,  she  felt  herself  the  representative  of  her  dead 
father  and  Prince  Andrey.  Unconsciously  she  thought  their  thoughts  and 
felt  their  feelings.  What  they  would  have  said,  what  they  would  have  done  j 
now,  she  felt  it  incumbent  upon  her  to  do.  She  went  into  Prince  Andrey  s 
study,  and  trying  to  enter  completely  into  his  ideas,  thought  over  her 
situation. 

The  exigencies  of  life,  which  she  had  regarded  as  of  no  consequence 


WAR  AND  PEACE  685 

II  since  her  father^  death,  all  at  once  rose  up  about  Princess  Marya  with  a 
force  she  had  known  nothing  of  before,  and  swept  her  away  with  them. 

Flushed  and  excited  she  walked  about  the  room,  sending  first  for  Al- 
patitch,  then  for  Mihail  Ivanitch,  then  for  Tihon,  then  for  Dron.  Dun- 
[yasha,  the  old  nurse,  and  the  maids  could  not  tell  her  how  far  Made- 
i  moiselle  Bourienne’s  statements  had  been  correct.  Alpatitch  was  not  in  the 
house;  he  had  gone  to  the  police  authorities.  Mihail  Ivanitch,  the  archi- 
>  tect,  came  with  sleepy  eyes  on  being  sent  for,  but  could  tell  Princess  Marya 
1  nothing.  With  the  same  smile  of  acquiescence  with  which  he  had  been  ac- 
1  customed  during  the  course  of  fifteen  years  to  meet  the  old  prince’s 
remarks  without  committing  himself,  he  now  met  the  princess's  ques- 
;  tions,  so  that  there  was  no  getting  any  definite  answer  out  of  him.  The 
1  old  valet,  Tihon.  whose  wan  and  sunken  face  wore  the  stamp  of  incon¬ 
solable  grief,  answered  ‘Yes,  princess,’  to  all  Princess  Marya ’s  questions, 
and  could  scarcely  restrain  his  sobs  as  he  looked  at  her. 

Lastly,  the  village  elder,  Dron,  came  into  the  room,  and  bowing  low  to 
fhe  princess,  took  up  his  position  near  the  doorway. 

Princess  Marya  walked  up  and  down  the  room  and  stood  still  facing 
him. 

‘Dronushka,’  she  said,  seeing  in  him  a  staunch  friend,  the  Dronushka 
who  had  every  year  brought  back  from  the  fair  at  Vyazma  the  same 
1  gingerbreads  she  connected  with  him,^  and  had  presented  them  to  her 
with  the  same  smile,  ‘Dronushka,  now,  after  our  misfortune,’  .  .  .  she 
began,  and  paused,  unable  to  proceed. 

‘We  are  all  in  God's  hands,’  he  said,  with  a  sigh. 

They  were  silent. 

‘Dronushka,  Alpatitch  has  gone  off  somewhere,  I  have  no  one  to  turn 
to.  Is  it  true,  as  I’m  told,  that  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  go  away?’ 

‘Why  shouldn’t  you  go  away,  your  excellency?  You  can  go,’  said  Dron. 
‘I  have  been  told  there  is  danger  from  the  enemy.  My  good  friend,  I  can 
do  nothing,  I  know  nothing  about  it.  I  have  nobody.  I  want  to  set  off 
without  fail  to-night  or  to-morrow  morning  early.’ 

Dron  did  not  speak.  He  looked  up  from  under  his  brows  at  Princess 
'Marya. 

‘There  are  no  horses,’  he  said.  ‘I  have  told  Yakov  Alpatitch  so  already.’ 
‘How  is  that?’  said  the  princess. 

‘It’s  all  the  visitation  of  the  Lord,’  said  Dron.  ‘Some  horses  have  been 
I'carried  off  for  the  troops,  and  some  are  dead;  it’s  a  bad  year,  it  is.  If 
only  we  don’t  die  of  hunger  ourselves,  let  alone  feeding  the  horses!  Here 
they’ve  been  three  days  without  a  bit  of  bread.  There’s  nothing,  they  have 
been  plundered  to  the  last  bit.’ 

Princess  Marya  listened  attentively  to  what  he  said  to  her. 

‘The  peasants  have  been  plundered?  They  have  no  bread?’  she  asked. 
‘They  are  dying  of  hunger,’  said  Dron;  ‘no  use  talking  of  horses  and 
licarts.’ 

‘But  why  didn’t  you  say  so,  Dronushka?  Can’t  they  be  helped?  I'll  do 
everything  I  can  .  .  .’  It  was  strange  to  Princess  Marya  to  think  that  at 


686 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

such  a  moment,  when  her  heart  was  overflowing  with  such  a  sorrow,  thei\ 
could  be  rich  people  and  poor,  and  that  the  rich  could  possibly  not  help 
the  poor.  She  vaguely  knew  that  there  was  a  store  of  ‘seignorial  corn,’  and 
that  it  was  sometimes  given  to  the  peasants.  She  knew,  too,  that  neither 
her  brother  nor  her  father  would  refuse  the  peasants  in  their  need;  she 
was  only  afraid  of  making  some  mistake  in  the  wording  of  the  order  for 
this  distribution.  She  was  glad  that  she  had  an  excuse  for  doing  something 
in  which  she  could,  without  scruple,  forget  her  own  grief.  She  began  to 
question  Dronushka  about  the  peasants’  needs,  and  to  ask  whether  there 
was  a  ‘seignorial  store’  at  Bogutcharovo. 

‘I  suppose  we  have  a  store  of  wheat  of  my  brother’s?’  she  asked. 

‘The  wheat  is  all  untouched,’  Dron  declared  with  pride.  'The  prince 
gave  me  no  orders  about  selling  it.’ 

‘Give  it  to  the  peasants,  give  them  all  they  need;  I  give  you  leave  in  my 
brother’s  name,’  said  Princess  Marya. 

Dron  heaved  a  deep  sigh  and  made  no  answer. 

‘You  distribute  the  corn  among  them,  if  it  will  be  enough  for  them. 
Distribute  it  all.  I  give  you  the  order  in  my  brother’s  name;  and  tell  them, 
what’s  ours  is  theirs.  We  would  grudge  nothing  for  them.  Tell  them  so.’  .  }■ 

Dron  watched  the  princess  intently  all  the  while  she  was  speaking. 

‘Discharge  me,  ma’am,  for  God’s  sake,  bid  them  take  the  keys  from 
me,’  said  he.  ‘I  have  served  twenty-three  years,  and  done  no  wrong;  dis¬ 
charge  me,  for  God’s  sake.’ 

Princess  Marya  had  no  notion  what  he  wanted  of  her  and  why  he  asked 
her  to  discharge  him.  She  answered  that  she  had  never  doubted  his  fidelity, 
and  that  she  was  ready  to  do  everything  for  him  and  for  the  peasants. 


XI 


An  hour  later  Dunyasha  came  in  to  the  princess  with  the  news  that  Dron 
had  come,  and  all  the  peasants  by  the  princess’s  orders  were  assembled 
at  the  granary  and  desirous  of  speaking  with  their  mistress. 

‘But  I  did  not  send  for  them,’  said  Princess  Marya.  ‘I  merely  told 
Dronushka  to  give  them  the  corn.’ 

‘Only,  for  God’s  sake,  your  excellency,  order  them  to  be  sent  away  and 
don’t  go  to  them.  It’s  all  a  plot,’  said  Dunyasha,  ‘and  Yakov  Alpatitch  will 
come  and  we  will  start  .  .  .  and  pray  .  .  .’ 

‘How  a  plot?’  asked  the  princess  in  surprise. 

‘Why,  I  know  all  about  it,  only  do  listen  to  me,  for  God’s  sake.  Ask  old 
nurse  too.  They  say  they  won’t  agree  to  move  away  at  your  orders.’ 

‘You  are  making  some  mistake.  Why,  I  have  never  given  them  orders 
to  go  away  .  .  .’  said  Princess  Marya.  ‘Call  Dronushka.’ 

Dron  on  coming  in  confirmed  Dunyasha ’s  words ;  the  peasants  had  come 
by  the  princess’s  instructions. 

‘But  I  have  never  sent  for  them,’  said  the  princess.  ‘You  must  have  given 


WARANDPEACE  687 

them  my  message  wrong.  I  only  said  that  you  were  to  give  them  the  corn.’ 

Dron  sighed  without  replying. 

‘If  so  you  command,  they  will  go  away,’  he  said. 

‘ No,  no,  I’ll  go  out  to  them,’  said  Princess  Marya. 

in  (Spite  of  Dunyasha’s  and  the  old  nurse’s  attempts  to  dissuade  her, 
Frimfess  Maryai  went  out  on  to  the  steps.  Dronushka,  Dunyasha,  the  old 
Mirsepand  Mihail  Ivanitch  followed  her. 

‘They  probably  imagine  I  am  offering  them  the  corn  to  keep  them  here 
while  I  go  away  myself,  leaving  them  at  the  mercy  of  the  French,’  thought 
Princess  Marya.  ‘I  will  promise  them  monthly  rations  and  lodgings  on  the 
Moscow  estate.  I  am  sure  Andrey  would  do  more  for  them  in  my  place,’ 
djeifcjpought,  as  she  went  out  in  the  twilight  towards  the  crowd,  waiting  on 
tfeeipasture  near  the  granary. 

jnThe  crowd  stirred,  huddling  closer,  and  rapidly  took  off  their  hats. 
Princess  Marya  came  closer  to  them,  her  eyes  cast  down  and  her  feet  trip¬ 
ping  pydr  her  gown.  So  many  different  eyes,  old  and  young,  were  fixed 
up>Qp  her/there  were  so  many  different  faces  that  Princess  Marya  did  not 
seem,  single  one  of  them,  and  feeling  it  necessary  to  address  all  at  once,  did 
not  knpw  how  to  set  about  it.  But  again  the  sense  that  she  was  the  repre- 
spnlastive  of  her  father  and  brother  gave  her  strength,  and  she  boldly  be¬ 
gan  her  speech. 

'  il  am  very  glad  you  have  come,’  she  began,  not  raising  her  eyes  and 
Meling'the  rapid  and  violent  beating  of  her  heart.  ‘Dronushka  has  told 
me  that  the  war  has  ruined  you.  That  is  our  common  trouble,  and  I  will 
grddge toothing  to  aid  you.  I  am  going  away  myself  because  it  is  dangerous 
Hele!  '(hf.  .  and  the  enemy  is  near  .  .  .  because  ...  I  give  you  every¬ 
thing,  my  friends,  and  I  beg  you  to  take  everything,  all  our  corn,  that 
yoair'h’vay  not  suffer  wrant.  But  if  you  have  been  told  that  I  am  giving  you 
oofiwto  keep  you  here,  it  is  false.  On  the  contrary,  I  beg  you  to  move  away 
trhrtuaill'your  belongings  to  our  Moscow  estate,  and  there  I  undertake  and 
promise  you  that  you  shall  not  be  in  want.  You  shall  be  given  houses  and 
bread.’  The  princess  stopped.  Nothing  was  to  be  heard  from  the  crowd 
but  sighs. 

‘I  don’t  do  this  on  my  own  account,’  the  princess  went  on ;  ‘I  do  it  in  the 
name  of  my  dead  father,  who  was  a  good  master  to  you,  and  for  my 
brother  and  his  son.’ 

She  paused  again.  No  one  broke  the  silence. 

‘We  have  trouble  in  common,  and  we  will  share  it  all  equally.  All  that 
is  mine  is  yours,’  she  said,  looking  up  at  the  faces  before  her.  All  the  eyes 
were  gazing  at  her  with  the  same  expression,  the  meaning  of  which  she 
could  not  fathom.  Whether  it  were  curiosity,  devotion,  gratitude,  or  ap¬ 
prehension,  and  distrust,  the  expression  on  all  the  faces  was  alike. 

‘Very  thankful  for  your  kindness,  only  it’s  not  for  us  to  take  the  mas¬ 
ter’s  corn,’  said  a  voice  from  the  back. 

‘But  why  not?’  said  the  princess.  No  one  answered,  and  Princess 
Marya,  looking  up  at  the  crowd,  noticed  that  now  all  the  eyes  dropped 
at  once  on  meeting  hers. 


6SS 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Why  don’t  you  want  to?’  she  asked  again. 

No  one  replied. 

Princess  Marya  was  oppressed  by  the  silence ;  she  tried  to  catch  some¬ 
body’s  eye.  [ 

‘Why  don’t  you  speak!’  she  said,  addressing  a  very  old  man  whotrtas  ; 
standing  near  her,  his  arms  propped  on  his  stick.  ‘Tell  me  if  you  th'ihft 
something  more  is  needed.  I  will  do  anything,’  she  said,  catching  his  eyec 
But  as  though  angered  by  her  doing  so,  he  bent  his  head,  and  said:  >dT  ■  B 
‘Why  should  we  agree?  We  don’t  want  your  corn.’ 

‘Why  are  we  to  give  up  everything?  We’re  not  willing  .  .  .  NaoowilH 
ing.  It’s  not  with  our  consent.  We  are  sorry  for  you,  but  we  are  not  willing 
You  go  away  by  yourself,  alone  .  .  .’  was  protested  from  different 
of  the  crowd.  And  again  all  the  faces  in  the  crowd  wore  the  same  expired! 
sion;  and  now  it  was  unmistakably  not  an  expression  of  curiosity*! And 
gratitude,  but  an  expression  of  exasperated  determination.  eeeom  '' 

‘But  you  misunderstand  me,’  said  Princess  Marya,  with  a  melanchp 
smile.  ‘Why  don’t  you  want  to  move  away?  I  promise  to  settlecybupn’ 
provide  for  you.  And  here  the  enemy  will  plunder  you  .  .  .’  But  hervjoi^ 
was  drowned  by  the  voices  of  the  crowd.  Morid  ' 

‘We’re  not  willing,  let  him  plunder  us!  We  won’t  take  your  coring 
won’t  agree!’  eaadiim  ! 

Princess  Marya  tried  again  to  catch  some  one’s  eye  in  the  crowd,  h- 
no  one  was  looking  at  her;  their  eyes  unmistakably  avoided  hers  BSJjei  felt 
strange  and  awkward.  >  fpdj  ‘iv 

‘To  be  sure,  she  would  school  us,  ...  a  good  dodge,  .  .  .  foMosbb-. 
into  slavery.  Pull  down  your  house  and  go  into  bondage.  I  dare  saybl 
give  you  corn,  says  she!  ’  voices  were  saying  in  the  crowd. 

Princess  Marya  moved  out  of  the  ring,  and  went  to  the  house*  with 
dejected  countenance.  Repeating  her  command  to  Dron  that  horses:  were 
to  be  ready  next  day  for  her  to  start,  she  went  away  to  her  own  roctanaaid 
remained  alone  with  her  own  thoughts. 


XII 

For  a  long  while  Princess  Marya  sat  at  the  open  window  of  her  room  j 
listening  to  the  sound  of  the  peasants’  voices  floating  across  from  thej 
village,  but  she  was  not  thinking  of  them.  She  felt  that  she  could  not  under-  j 
stand  them  however  long  she  thought  of  them.  She  thought  all  the  while  j 
of  one  thing — of  her  sorrow,  which  now,  after  the  break  made  by  anxiety  j 
about  the  present,  already  seemed  to  belong  to  the  past.  Now  she  could  _ 
remember,  could  weep,  and  could  pray.  With  the  setting  of  the  sun  the  I 
wind  sank.  The  night  was  still  and  fresh.  At  midnight  the  voices  in  the  j 
village  began  to  die  down ;  a  cock  crowed ;  the  full  moon  rose  from  behind  i 
a  lime-tree ;  there  rose  a  fresh,  white,  dewy  mist,  and  stillness  reigned  e 
over  the  village  and  the  house. 

One  after  another  pictures  of  the  immediate  past — her  father’s  illness! 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


689 


no 


and  last  moments — rose  before  her  imagination.  And  with  mournful  glad¬ 
ness  she  let  her  mind  now  rest  on  those  images,  only  shunning  with  horror 
the  one  last  scene  which  she  felt  she  had  not  the  strength  to  contemplate 
even  in  fancy  at  that  still  and  mysterious  hour  of  the  night.  And  those 
images  rose  with  such  clearness  and  in  such  detail  before  her,  that  they 
seemed  to  her  now  in  the  actual  present,  now  in  the  past,  and  now  in  the 
future. 

She  had  a  vivid  picture  of  the  moment  when  he  was  first  stricken  down 
and  was  being  dragged  in  from  the  garden  at  Bleak  Hills,  and  he  had 
muttered  something,  twitching  his  grey  eyebrows,  and  looking  timidly 
'and  uneasily  at  her.  ‘Even  then  he  wanted  to  tell  me  what  he  told  me  on 
the  day  of  his  death,’  she  thought.  ‘He  always  thought  what  he  told  me 
then.’ 

r  And  then  she  recalled  with  every  detail  the  night  at  Bleak  Hills  before 
li ;  stroke,  when,  with  a  presentiment  of  trouble,  she  had  remained  with 
‘mm  against  his  will.  She  had  not  slept;  and  at  night  she  had  stolen  down 
™n  tiptoe,  and  going  to  the  door  of  the  conservatory  room  where  her  father 
^as  spending  that  night,  she  had  listened  to  his  voice.  He  was  talking  in 
.  weaty,  harassed  voice  to  Tihon.  He  was  saying  something  about  the 
T*1  imea  ,  about  the  warm  nights,  about  the  Empress.  Evidently  he  wanted 

talkto  some  one.  ‘And  why  didn't  he  send  for  me?  Why  didn’t  he  let 
.ne  be  there  in  Tihon’s  place?’  Princess  Marya  had  thought  then  and 
thought  again  now.  ‘Now  he  will  never  tell  any  one  all  that  was  in  his 
‘‘heart.  Now  the  moment  will  never  return  when  he  might  have  told  me  all 
j|2e  longed  to  express,  and  I  and  not  Tihon  might  have  heard  and  under¬ 
stood.  Why  didn’t  I  go  into  his  room  then?’  she  thought.  ‘Perhaps  he 
vould  have  said  to  me  then  what  he  said  on  the  day  of  his  death.  Even 
f fhen  talking  to  Tihon  he  asked  about  me  twice.  He  was  longing  to  see  me 
while  I  was  standing  there  behind  the  door.  He  was  sad  and  weary  talking 
to  Tihon,  who  did  not  understand  him.  I  remember  how  he  spoke  to  him 
of  Liza  as  though  she  were  living — he  forgot  that  she  was  dead,  and  Tihon 
reminded  him  that  she  was  no  more,  and  he  cried,  ‘Fool!  ’  He  was  miser¬ 
able.  I  heard  from  the  door  how  he  lay  down  groaning  on  the  bed  and  cried 
out  aloud,  “My  God!  ”  Why  didn’t  I  go  in  then?  What  could  he  have  done 
to  me?  What  could  I  have  lost?  And,  perhaps,  then  he  would  have  been 
comforted,  he  would  have  said  that  word  to  me.’  And  Princess  Marya 
uttered  aloud  that  caressing  word  he  had  said  to  her  on  the  day  of  his 
death.  ‘Da-ar-ling! ’  Princess  Marya  repeated  the  word  and  broke  into 
sobs  that  relieved  her  heart.  She  could  see  his  face  before  her  now.  And 
not  the  face  she  had  known  ever  since  she  could  remember  and  had  always 
seen  at  a  distance;  but  the  weak  and  timid  face  she  had  seen  on  the  last 
day  when,  bending  to  his  lips  to  catch  what  he  said,  she  had,  for  the  first 
time,  looked  at  it  quite  close  with  all  its  wrinkles. 

‘Darling,’  she  repeated. 

‘What  was  he  thinking  when  he  uttered  that  word?  What  is  he  thinking 
now?’  was  the  question  that  rose  suddenly  to  her  mind;  and  in  answer  to 
it  she  saw  him  with  the  expression  she  had  seen  on  the  face  bound  up 


690  WAR  AND  PEACE* 

with  a  white  handkerchief  in  the  coffin.  And  the  horror  that  had  overcome 
her  at  the  moment  when  she  had  touched  him,  and  felt  that  it  was  not 
he  but  something  mysterious  and  horrible,  came  over  her  now.  She  tried 
to  think  of  something  else,  tried  to  pray,  and  could  do  nothing.  With  wide 
eyes  she  gazed  at  the  moonlight  and  the  shadows,  every  instant  expecting 
to  see  his  dead  face,  and  feeling  as  though  she  were  held  spellbound  in  the 
stillness  that  reigned  without  and  within  the  house. 

‘Dunyasha!  ’  she  whispered.  ‘Dunyasha!  ’  she  shrieked  wildly,  and  tear¬ 
ing  herself  out  of  the  stillness,  she  ran  towards  the  maids’  room,  meeting 
the  old  nurse  and  the  maids  running  out  to  meet  her. 


XIII 

On  the  1 7th  of  August  Rostov  and  Ilyin,  accompanied  by  Lavrushka,  whc  ; 
had  just  come  back  from  being  taken  prisoner  by  the  French,  and  39s  hus-  , 
sar  on  orderly  duty,  rode  out  from  Yankovo,  fifteen  versts  from-Bogu- 
tcharovo.  They  meant  to  try  a  new  horse  that  Ilyin  had  bought;  and  to 
find  out  whether  there  was  hay  to  be  had  in  the  village. 

Bogutcharovo  had  been  for  the  last  three  days  between  the  two  hostile 
armies,  so  that  the  Russian  rearguard  could  reach  the  village  as  easily  as 
the  French  vanguard;  and  therefore  Rostov,  like  a  careful  officer,  was 
anxious  to  anticipate  the  French  in  securing  any  provisions  that  might  be 
left  there. 

Rostov  and  Ilyin  were  in  the  liveliest  spirits.  On  the  way  to  Bogu¬ 
tcharovo,  which  they  knew  to  be  an  estate  belonging  to  a  prince,  with  a 
manor-house,  where  they  hoped  to  find  a  large  household,  and,  perhaps, 
pretty  servant-girls,  they  questioned  Lavrushka  about  Napoleon,  and 
laughed  at  his  stories;  then  raced  their  horses  to  test  Ilyin’s  new  purchase. 
Rostov  had  no  notion  that  the  village  to  which  he  was  going  was  the 
property  of  the  very  Prince  Bolkonsky  who  had  been  betrothed  to  his 
sister. 

Rostov  and  Ilyin  had  just  let  their  horses  race  till  they  were  weary  for  < 
the  last  time  before  Bogutcharovo,  and  Rostov,  outstripping  Ilyin,  was  j 
the  first  to  gallop  into  the  village  street. 

‘You  started  in  front,’  said  Ilyin,  flushed. 

‘Yes,  always  in  front,  in  the  meadow  and  here  too,’  answered  Rostov, 
patting  his  foaming  Don  horse. 

‘And  on  my  Frenchy,  your  excellency,’  said  Lavrushka  from  behind, 
meaning  the  wretched  cart-horse  he  was  riding,  ‘I  could  have  overtaken 
you,  only  I  didn’t  want  to  put  you  to  shame.’ 

They  rode  at  a  walking  pace  towards  the  granary,  where  there  was  a 
great  crowd  of  peasants  standing.  Several  of  the  peasants  took  off  their  1 
caps,  others  stared  at  them  without  taking  off  their  caps.  Two  old  peasants,  | 
with  wrinkled  faces  and  scanty  beards,  came  out  of  the  tavern,  reeling 
and  singing  a  tuneless  song,  and  advanced  with  smiles  towards  the  officers.  | 
‘They’re  fine  fellows!  ’  said  Rostov,  laughing.  ‘Well,  have  you  any  hay?’ 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


691 


‘And  so  alike,  somehow  .  .  said  Ilyin. 

‘Ma  .  .  .  a  .  .  .  aking  mer  .  .  .  ry  in  my  sum  .  .  .  sum  .  .  .  mer 
.  .  .’  chanted  the  peasant,  with  a  blissful  smile. 

A  peasant  came  out  of  the  crowd  and  went  up  to  Rostov. 

‘Which  part  will  you  be  from?’  asked  the  peasant. 

‘We’re  French,’  answered  Ilyin,  laughing.  ‘And  this  is  Napoleon  him¬ 
self,’  he  said,  pointing  to  Lavrushka. 

‘I  suppose  you  are  Russians  then?’  the  peasant  inquired. 

‘And  have  you  many  troops  here?’  asked  another  short  peasant,  ap¬ 
proaching. 

‘A  great  many,’  answered  Rostov.  ‘Rut  why  are  you  all  assembled  here?’ 
he  added.  ‘Is  it  a  holiday  or  what?’ 

‘The  old  men  are  met  about  the  village  business,’  answered  the  peasant, 
moving  away  from  him. 

At  that  moment  there  came  into  sight  two  women  and  a  man  in  a  white 
hat  running  from  the  prince’s  house  towards  the  officers. 

‘The  one  in  pink’s  mine;  hands  off,  beware!’  said  Ilyin,  noticing  Dun- 
yasha  running  resolutely  towards  them. 

‘She’ll  be  the  girl  for  us!’  said  Lavrushka,  winking  to  Ilyin. 

‘What  is  it  you  want,  my  pretty?’  said  Ilyin,  smiling. 

‘The  princess  sent  me  to  ask  of  what  regiment  are  you,  and  what  is 
your  name?’ 

‘This  is  Count  Rostov,  the  commander  of  the  squadron,  and  I  am  your 
humble  servant.’ 

‘Mer  .  .  .  mer  .  .  .  mer  .  .  .  arbour! ’  chanted  the  drunken  peasant, 
smiling  blissfully,  and  gazing  at  Ilyin  as  he  talked  to  the  girl.  Alpatitch 
followed  Dunyasha,  taking  off  his  hat  to  Rostov  as  he  approached. 

‘I  make  bold  to  trouble  your  honour,’  he  said,  putting  one  hand  in  his 
bosom,  and  speaking  with  a  respectfulness  in  which  there  was  a  shade 
of  contempt  for  the  officer’s  youth.  ‘My  mistress,  the  daughter  of  general- 
in-chief  Prince  Nikolay  Andreitch  Bolkonsky,  who  died  on  the  15th  of 
this  month,  being  in  difficulties  owing  to  the  coarse  ignorance  of  those 
people’ — he  pointed  to  the  peasants — ‘begs  you  to  come  .  .  .  Would  you 
not  be  pleased,’  said  Alpatitch,  with  a  melancholy  smile,  ‘to  move  a  little 
away,  as  it  is  not  so  convenient  before  .  .  .’  Alpatitch  indicated  two 
peasants,  who  were  hovering  about  him,  like  gadflies  about  a  horse. 

‘Ay!  .  .  .  Alpatitch!  ...  Ay!  Yakov  Alpatitch!  first-rate  job!  Eh? 
.  .  .  for  Christ’s  sake,  forgive  us.  First-rate!  ay?’  cried  the  peasants, 
smiling  gleefully  at  him. 

Rostov  looked  at  the  drunken  peasants,  and  smiled. 

‘Or  possibly  this  entertains  your  excellency?’  said  Yakov  Alpatitch. 
with  a  sober  air,  pointing  with  his  other  hand  to  the  old  peasants. 

‘No,  there’s  nothing  very  entertaining  in  that,’  said  Rostov,  and  he 
moved  away.  ‘What  is  the  matter?’  he  inquired. 

‘I  make  bold  to  submit  to  your  excellency  that  the  rude  peasants  here 
will  not  let  their  lady  leave  the  estate,  and  threaten  to  take  the  horses  out 


692  WAR  AND  PEACE 

of  her  carriage,  so  that  everything  has  been  packed  since  morning,  yet  her 
excellency  cannot  get  away.’ 

‘Impossible!  ’  cried  Rostov. 

‘I  have  the  honour  of  submitting  to  you  the  simple  truth,’  said  Alpatitch. 

Rostov  got  off  his  horse,  and  giving  it  to  the  orderly,  walked  with 
Alpatitch  to  the  house,  questioning  him  further  about  the  state  of  affairs. 

The  princess’s  offer  of  corn,  and  her  interview  with  Dron  and  with  the 
peasants,  had,  in  fact,  made  the  position  so  much  worse  that  Dron  had 
finally  given  up  the  keys  of  office,  joined  the  peasants  and  refused  to  ap¬ 
pear  when  Alpatitch  sent  for  him.  In  the  morning  when  the  princess 
ordered  the  horses  to  be  put  in  for  her  to  set  off,  the  peasants  had  come 
out  in  a  great  crowd  to  the  granary,  and  had  sent  to  say  that  they  would 
not  let  the  princess  go  out  of  the  village;  that  there  was  an  edict  that 
people  were  not  to  leave  their  houses,  and  that  they  would  unharness  the 
horses.  Alpatitch  went  out  to  lecture  them;  in  reply  they  told  him  (a 
certain  Karp  was  the  principal  speaker,  Dron  kept  in  the  background  in 
the  crowd)  that  the  princess  could  not  be  allowed  to  go,  that  there  was  an 
edict  forbidding  it,  but  that  only  let  her  stay,  and  they  would  serve  her 
and  obey  her  in  everything  as  before. 

At  the  moment  when  Rostov  and  Ilyin  were  galloping  along  the  village  ; 
street,  regardless  of  the  efforts  of  Alpatitch,  the  old  nurse,  and  the  maid  to 
dissuade  her,  Princess  Marya  had  just  ordered  the  horses  to  be  put  in,  and 
was  intending  to  start.  But  seeing  the  horsemen  galloping  up,  the  coach¬ 
men  took  them  for  the  French,  and  ran  away,  and  a  great  lamentation 
arose  among  the  women  of  the  household. 

‘Kind  sir!  protector!  God  has  sent  thee,’  cried  voices,  with  much  feel¬ 
ing,  as  Rostov  crossed  the  vestibule.  Princess  Marya  was  sitting  helpless  ; 
and  distraught  in  the  hall,  when  Rostov  was  shown  in  to  see  her.  She  : 
did  not  know  who  he  was,  or  what  brought  him  there,  or  what  was  hap¬ 
pening  to  her.  Seeing  his  Russian  face,  and  recognising  him  at  his  first 
words  and  gait  for  a  man  of  her  own  rank,  she  looked  at  him,  with  her 
deep,  luminous  gaze,  and  began  speaking  in  a  voice,  broken  and  trembling 
with  emotion.  Rostov  at  once  conceived  a  romance  in  this  meeting.  ‘A 
defenceless  girl,  crushed  by  sorrow,  alone,  abandoned  to  the  mercy  of 
coarse,  rebellious  peasants!  And  what  strange  destiny  has  brought  me 
here!’  thought  Rostov,  as  he  listened  to  her  aftd  looked  at  her.  ‘And; 
what  mildness,  what  nobility  in  her  features  and  expression !  ’  he  thought, 
as  he  listened  to  her  timid  story. 

When  she  began  to  tell  him  that  all  this  had  happened  the  day  after  her 
father’s  funeral,  her  voice  trembled.  She  turned  away,  and  as  though 
afraid  Rostov  might  ascribe  her  words  to  a  desire  to  work  on  his  feelings, 
she  glanced  at  him  with  a  look  of  apprehensive  inquiry.  There  were  tears 
in  Rostov’s  eyes.  Princess  Marya  noticed  it,  and  looked  at  him  with  the  ! 
luminous  eyes  that  made  one  forget  the  plainness  of  her  face. 

‘I  cannot  express  how  glad  I  am,  princess,  that  I  happened  to  come 
this  way,  and  am  able  to  serve  you  in  anything,’  said  Rostov,  rising.  ‘I 
trust  you  will  start  at  once,  and  I  answer  for  it  on  my  honour,  no  person 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


693 

shall  dare  to  cause  you  annoyance,  if  you  will  only  permit  me  to  escort 
you,’  and  making  a  deep  bow,  such  as  are  made  to  ladies  of  the  royal 
family,  he  turned  to  the  door. 

By  the  respectfulness  of  his  tone,  Rostov  tried  to  show  that  though 
he  would  consider  it  a  happiness  to  be  acquainted  with  her,  he  did  not 
wish  to  take  advantage  of  her  misfortune  to  force  an  acquaintanceship 
upon  her. 

Princess  Marya  felt  and  appreciated  this  tone. 

‘I  am  very,  very  grateful  to  you,’  she  said  to  him  in  French;  ‘but  I 
hope  it  was  all  only  a  misunderstanding,  and  that  no  one  is  to  blame.’ 
She  began  all  at  once  to  cry. 

‘Excuse  me,’  she  said. 

Rostov,  knitting  his  brows,  bowed  low  once  more,  and  went  out  of 
the  room. 


XIV 

‘Well,  is  she  pretty?  But,  my  boy,  my  pink  girl’s  charming;  her  name 
is  Dunyasha.’  .  .  .  But  glancing  into  Rostov’s  face,  Ilyin  paused.  He 
saw  his  hero  and  superior  officer  was  absorbed  in  a  very  different  train  of 
thought. 

Rostov  looked  angrily  at  Ilyin,  and  without  replying,  strode  off  rapidly 
to  the  village. 

‘I’ll  teach  them;  I’ll  pay  them  out;  the  scoundrels,’  he  muttered  to 
himself. 

Alpatitch  followed  Rostov  at  a  quick  trot,  which  he  could  only  just  keep 
from  breaking  into  a  run. 

‘What  decision  has  your  honour  come  to?’  he  said,  overtaking  him. 
Rostov  stopped  short,  and  clenching  his  fists  moved  suddenly  up  to 
Alpatitch  with  a  menacing  gesture. 

‘Decision?  What  decision,  old  shuffler?’  he  shouted.  ‘What  have  yOu 
been  thinking  about?  Eh?  The  peasants  are  unruly  and  you  don’t  know 
how  to  manage  them?  You’re  a  traitor  yourself.  I  know  you.  I'll  flog 
the  skin  off  the  lot  of  you  .  .  .’  And,  as  though  afraid  of  wasting  the 
energy  of  his  anger,  he  left  Alpatitch  and  went  quickly  ahead.  Alpatitch, 
swallowing  his  wounded  feelings,  hurried  with  a  swaying  step  after 
Rostov,  still  giving  him  the  benefit  of  his  reflections  on  the  subject.  He 
said  that  the  peasants  were  in  a  very  stubborn  state,  that  at  the  moment 
it  was  imprudent  to  oppositionise  them,  without  an  armed  force,  and 
would  it  not  be  better  first  to  send  for  armed  force. 

‘I’ll  give  them  armed  force.  .  .  .  I’ll  oppositionise  them  .  .  .’  Nikolay 
muttered  meaninglessly,  choking  with  irrational  animal  rage  and  desire 
to  vent  that  rage  on  some  one.  Without  considering  what  he  was  going  to 
do,  unconsciously,  he  moved  with  a  rapid,  resolute  step  up  to  the  crowd. 
And  the  nearer  he  approached,  the  more  Alpatitch  felt  that  his  imprudent 
action  might  produce  the  happiest  results.  The  peasants  in  the  crowd  were 


6q4  WAR  AND  PEACE 

feeling  the  same  thing  as  they  watched  his  firm  and  rapid  step  and  de¬ 
termined,  frowning  face. 

After  the  hussars  had  entered  the  village  and  Rostov  had  gone  in  to 
see  the  princess,  a  certain  hesitation  and  division  of  opinion  had  become 
apparent  in  the  crowd.  Some  of  the  peasants  began  to  say  that  the  horse¬ 
men  were  Russians,  and  it  might  be  expected  they  would  take  it  amiss 
that  they  had  not  let  their  young  lady  go.  Dron  was  of  that  opinion; 
but  as  soon  as  he  expressed  it,  Karp  and  others  fell  upon  him. 

‘How  many  years  have  you  been  fattening  on  the  village?’  shouted 
Karp.  ‘It’s  all  one  to  you!  You’ll  dig  up  your  pot  of  money  and  make  off 
with  it.  What  is  it  to  you  if  our  homes  are  ruined  or  not?’ 

‘We  were  told  everything  was  to  be  in  order  and  no  one  to  leave  their 
homes,  and  not  a  thing  to  be  moved  away — and  that’s  all  about  it!’ 
shouted  another. 

‘It  was  your  son’s  turn;  but  you  spared  your  fat  youngster,’  a  little 
old  man  suddenly  burst  out,  pouncing  upon  Dron,  ‘and  sent  my  Vanka 
to  be  shaved  for  a  soldier.  Ugh,  and  yet  we  all  have  to  die!’ 

‘To  be  sure,  we  all  have  to  die!’ 

‘I’m  not  one  to  go  against  the  mir,’  said  Dron. 

‘Not  one  to  go  against  it;  you  have  grown  fat  off  it.’  .  .  . 

Two  lanky  peasants  said  their  say.  As  soon  as  Rostov,  accompanied 
by  Ilyin,  Lavrushka,  and  Alpatitch  approached  the  crowd,  Karp,  thrust¬ 
ing  his  fingers  into  his  sash,  walked  forward  with  a  slight  smile.  Dron, 
on  the  contrary,  retreated  to  the  back,  and  the  crowd  huddled  closer  to¬ 
gether. 

‘Hey!  who  is  elder  among  you  here?’  shouted  Rostov,  walking  quickly 
up  to  the  crowd. 

‘The  elder?  What  do  you  want  him  for?  .  .  .’  asked  Karp.  But  he 
hardly  had  time  to  get  the  words  out  when  his  hat  was  sent  flying  off 
his  head,  and  he  was  sent  reeling  from  a  violent  blow  on  the  head. 

‘Caps  off,  traitors!’  shouted  Rostov’s  full-blooded  voice.  ‘Where  is  the 
elder?’  he  roared  furiously. 

‘The  elder,  the  elder’s  wanted.  Dron  Zaharitch,  he  calls  you,’  voices  i 
were  heard  saying,  hurriedly  subservient,  and  caps  were  taken  off. 

‘We  can’t  be  said  to  be  unruly;  we’re  following  the  orders,’  declared 
Karp.  And  several  voices  at  the  back  began  at  the  same  instant: 

‘It’s  as  the  elders  settle;  there  are  too  many  of  you  giving  orders  .  .  .’ 

‘Talking?  .  .  .  Mutiny!  .  .  .  Scoundrels!  Traitors!  ’  Rostov  shouted, 
without  thinking,  in  a  voice  unlike  his  own,  as  he  seized  Karp  by  the 
collar.  ‘Bind  him,  bind  him!’  he  shouted,  though  there  was  no  one  to 
bind  him  but  Lavrushka  and  Alpatitch. 

Lavrushka,  however,  ran  up  to  Karp  and  seized  his  arms  from  be¬ 
hind. 

“Shall  I  call  our  fellows  from  below  the  hill,  your  honour?’  he  shouted. 

Alpatitch  turned  to  the  peasants,  calling  upon  two  of  them  by  name 
to  bind  Karp.  The  peasants  obediently  stepped  out  of  the  crowd  and 
began  undoing  their  belts. 


695 


W  A  R  AND  PEACE 

|  ‘Where’s  the  village  elder?'  shouted  Rostov. 

Dron,  with  a  pale  and  frowning  face,  stepped  out  of  the  crowd. 

‘Are  you  the  elder?  Bind  him,  Lavrushka,’  shouted  Rostov,  as  though 
,the  order  could  meet  with  no  sort  of  opposition.  And  in  fact  two  peasants 
did  begin  binding  Dron,  who  took  off  his  sash,  and  gave  it  them  as  though 
to  assist  in  the  operation. 

‘And  all  of  you,  listen  to  me,’  Rostov  turned  to  the  peasants.  ‘March  • 
straight  to  your  homes  this  minute,  and  don’t  let  me  hear  your  voices 
(again.’ 

‘Why,  we  haven’t  done  any  harm.  It  was  all,  do  you  see,  through 
foolishness.  Only  a  bit  of  nonsense  ...  I  always  said  that  it  wasn’t  the 
right  thing,’  said  voices,  blaming  one  another. 

‘Didn’t  I  tell  you?’  said  Alpatitch,  resuming  his  rightful  position. 
‘You’ve  done  wrong,  lads.’ 

‘It  was  our  foolishness,  Yakov  Alpatitch,’  answered  voices,  and  the 
crowd  at  once  began  to  break  up  and  to  disperse  about  the  village. 

The  two  peasants  who  were  bound  they  took  to  the  manor-house.  The 
two  drunken  peasants  followed  them. 

‘Ay,  now  look  at  you!’  said  one  of  them,  addressing  Karp. 

‘Do  you  suppose  you  can  talk  to  the  gentry  like  that?  What  were  you 
thinking  about?  You  are  a  fool,’  put  in  the  other;  ‘a  regular  fool.’ 

Within  two  hours  the  horses  and  carts  required  were  standing  in  the 
courtyard  of  the  Bogutcharovo  house.  The  peasants  were  eagerly  hurry¬ 
ing  out  and  packing  in  the  carts  their  owners’  goods;  and  Dron,  who  had 
at  Princess  Marya’s  desire,  been  released  from  the  lumber-room,  where 
they  had  shut  him  up,  was  standing  in  the  yard,  giving  directions  to 
the  men.  . 

‘Don’t  pack  it  so  carelessly,’  said  one  of  the  peasants,  a  tall  man  with 
a  round,  smiling  face,  taking  a  casket  out  of  a  housemaid's  hands.  'It’s 
worth  money  too,  you  may  be  sure.  Why,  if  you  fling  it  down  like  that 
or  put  it  under  the  cord,  it  will  get  scratched.  I  don’t  like  to  see  things 
done  so.  Let  everything  be  done  honestly,  according  to  rule,  I  say.  There, 
like  this,  under  the  matting,  and  cover  it  up  with  hay;  there,  that’s  first- 
rate.’ 

‘Mercy  on  us,  the  books,  the  books,’  said  another  peasant,  bringing 
out  Prince  Andrey’s  bookshelves.  ‘Mind  you  don’t  stumble!  Ay,  but  it’s 
heavy,  lads;  the  books  are  stout  and  solid!  ’ 

‘Yes,  they  must  have  worked  hard  to  write  them!’  said  a  tall,  round- 
faced  peasant  pointing  with  a  significant  wink  to  a  lexicon  lying  upper¬ 
most. 

Rostov,  not  wishing  to  force  his  acquaintance  on  the  princess,  did  not 
go  back  to  the  house,  but  remained  at  the  village  waiting  for  her  to  drive 
out.  When  Princess  Marya’s  carriage  drove  out  from  the  house,  Rostov 
mounted  his  horse  and  escorted  her  as  far  as  the  road  occupied  by  our 
troops,  twelve  versts  from  Bogutcharovo.  At  the  inn  at  Yankovo  he 


696  WAR  AND  PEACE 

parted  from  her  respectfully,  for  the  first  time  permitting  himself  to 
kiss  her  hand. 

‘How  can  you  speak  of  it!’  he  said,  blushing  in  response  to  Princess 
Marya’s  expression  of  gratitude  to  him  for  saving  her,  as  she  called  it. 
‘Any  police  officer  would  have  done  as  much.  If  we  only  had  to  wage 
war  with  peasants,  we  would  not  have  let  the  enemy  advance  so  far,’  he 
said,  trying  with  a  sort  of  bashfulness  to  change  the  conversation,  ‘I  am 
only  happy  to  have  had  the  opportunity  of  making  your  acquaintance. 
Good-bye,  princess.  I  trust  you  may  find  happiness  and  consolation,  and 
I  hope  I  may  meet  you  again  in  happier  circumstances.  If  you  don’t 
want  to  make  me  blush,  please  don’t  thank  me.’ 

But  if  the  princess  thanked  him  no  more  in  words,  she  thanked  him 
with  the  whole  expression  of  her  face,  which  was  radiant  with  gratitude 
and  warmth.  She  could  not  believe  that  she  had  no  cause  to  thank  him. 
On  the  contrary,  to  her  mind  it  was  an  incontestable  fact  that  had  it  not 
been  for  him,  she  must  inevitably  have  fallen  a  victim  to  the  rebellious 
peasants  or  the  French;  that  he,  to  save  her,  had  exposed  himself  to 
obvious  and  fearful  danger;  and  even  more  certain  was  the  fact  that  he 
was  a  man  of  noble  and  lofty  soul,  able  to  sympathise  with  her  position 
and  her  grief.  His  kindly  and  honest  eyes,  with  tears  starting  to  them  at 
the  moment  when  weeping  herself  she  had  spoken  of  her  loss,  haunted 
her  imagination.  When  she  had  said  good-bye  to  him  and  was  left  alone, 
Princess  Marya  suddenly  felt  tears  in  her  eyes,  and  then — not  for  the 
first  time — the  question  occurred  to  her:  ‘Was  she  in  love  with  him?1 
On  the  rest  of  the  way  to  Moscow,  though  the  princess’s  position  was  by 
no  means  a  joyful  one,  Dunyasha,  who  was  in  the  carriage  with  her, 
noticed  that  her  mistress’s  face  wore  a  vaguely  happy  and  pensive  smile, 
as  she  looked  out  of  the  window. 

‘Well,  what  if  I  have  fallen  in  love  with  him?’  Though  she  was  ashamed 
at  acknowledging  to  herself  that  she  had  fallen  in  love  with  a  man  who 
would  perhaps  never  care  for  her,  she  comforted  herself  with  the  reflection 
that  no  one  would  ever  know  it,  and  she  was  not  to  blame,  if  she  loved 
in  secret  for  the  first  and  last  time  and  for  her  whole  life  long. 

Sometimes  she  recalled  his  looks,  his  sympathy,  his  words,  and  happi-  < 
ness  seemed  to  her  not  quite  impossible.  And  then  it  was  that  Dunyasha 
noticed  that  she  looked  out  of  the  window  smiling. 

‘And  to  think  that  he  should  come  to  Bogutcharovo  and  at  that  very 
moment!’  thought  Princess  Marya.  ‘And  that  his  sister  should  have 
refused  Andrey!’  And  in  all  that,  Princess  Marya  saw  the  hand  of 
Providence. 

The  impression  made  on  Rostov  by  Princess  Marya  was  a  very  agree¬ 
able  one.  When  he  thought  of  her,  he  felt  pleased.  And  when  his  comrades, 
hearing  of  his  adventure  at  Bogutcharovo,  rallied  him  on  having  gone  to 
look  for  hay,  and  having  picked  up  one  of  the  greatest  heiresses  in  Russia, 
it  made  him  angry.  He  was  angry  just  because  the  idea  of  marrying  the 
gentle,  and,  to  his  mind,  charming  Princess  Marya  with  her  enormous 
fortune  had  more  than  once,  against  his  own  will,  occurred  to  his  mind. 


WARANDPEACE  697 

As  far  as  he  personally  was  concerned,  Nikolay  could  have  asked  nothing 
better  than  to  have  Princess  Marya  for  his  wife.  To  marry  her  would 
make  the  countess,  his  mother,  happy,  and  would  repair  his  father’s  broken 
fortunes.  And  it  would  even — Nikolay  felt  it — make  the  happiness  of  the 
princess  herself. 

But  Sonya?  A.nd  his  promise?  And  that  was  why  it  made  Rostov 
angry  to  be  rallied  about  the  Princess  Bolkonsky. 


XV 

On  receiving  the  chief  command  of  the  army,  Kutuzov  remembered 
Prince  Andrey  and  sent  him  a  summons  to  headquarters. 

Prince  Andrey  reached  Tsarevo-Zaimishtche  on  the  very  day  and  at 
the  very  hour  when  Kutuzov  was  making  his  first  inspection  of  the  troops. 
Prince  Andrey  stopped  in  the  village  at  the  house  of  the  priest,  where  the 
commander-in-chief’s  carriage  was  standing,  and  sat  down  on  a  bench 
at  the  gate  to  await  his  highness,  as  every  one  now  called  Kutuzov. 
From  the  plain  beyond  the  village  came  the  sounds  of  regimental  music, 
and  the  roar  of  a  vast  multitude,  shouting  ‘Hurrah !  ’  to  the  new  com- 
mander-in-chief.  At  the  gate,  some  ten  paces  from  Prince  Andrey,  stood 
two  orderlies,  a  courier,  and  a  butler,  taking  advantage  of  their  master’s 
absence  to  enjoy  the  fine  weather.  A  swarthy,  little  lieutenant-colonel 
of  hussars,  his  face  covered  with  bushy  moustaches  and  whiskers,  rode 
up  to  the  gate,  and  glancing  at  Prince  Andrey  asked  whether  his  highness 
were  putting  up  here  and  whether  he  would  soon  be  back. 

Prince  Andrey  told  him  that  he  did  not  belong  to  his  highness’s  staff, 
but  had  only  just  arrived.  The  lieutenant-colonel  of  hussars  turned  to 
the  smart  orderly,  and  the  orderly  told  him  with  the  peculiar  scornfulness 
with  which  commander-in-chief’s  orderlies  do  speak  to  officers: 

‘His  highness?  We  expect  him  back  immediately.  What  is  your 
business?’ 

The  officer  grinned  in  his  moustaches  at  the  orderly’s  tone,  dismounted, 
gave  his  horse  to  a  servant,  and  went  up  to  Bolkonsky  with  a  slight  bow. 

Bolkonsky  made  room  for  him  on  the  bench.  The  hussar  sat  down 
beside  him. 

“You,  too,  waiting  for  the  commander-in-chief?’  he  began.  ‘They  say 
he  is  willing  to  see  any  one,  thank  God!  It  was  a  very  different  matter 
with  the  sausage-makers!  Yermolov  might  well  ask  to  be  promoted  a 
German.  Now,  I  dare  say,  Russians  may  dare  to  speak  again.  And  devil 
knows  what  they  have  been  about.  Nothing  but  retreating  and  retreating. 
Have  you  been  in  the  field?’  he  asked. 

‘I  have  had  the  pleasure,’  said  Prince  Andrey,  ‘not  only  of  taking  part 
in  the  retreat,  but  also  of  losing  everything  I  valued  in  the  retreat — not 
to  speak  of  my  property  and  the  home  of  my  birth  .  .  .  my  father,  who 
died  of  grief.  I  am  a  Smolensk  man.’ 

‘Ah!  .  .  .  Are  you  Prince  Bolkonsky?  Very  glad  to  make  your  ac- 


698  WARANDPEACE 

quaintance.  Lieutenant-colonel  Denisov,  better  known  by  the  name  of 
Yaska,’  said  Denisov,  pressing  Prince  Andrey’s  hand  and  looking  into 
his  face  with  a  particularly  kindly  expression.  ‘Yes,  I  had  heard  about 
it,’  he  said  sympathetically,  and  after  a  brief  pause  he  added:  ‘Yes,  this 
is  Scythian  warfare.  It’s  all  right,  but  not  for  those  who  have  to  pay 
the  piper.  So  you  are  Prince  Andrey  Bolkonsky?’  He  shook  his  head. 
‘I  am  very  glad,  prince;  very  glad  to  make  your  acquaintance,’  he  added, 
pressing  his  hand  again  with  a  melancholy  smile. 

Prince  Andrey  knew  of  Denisov  from  Natasha’s  stories  of  her  first 
suitor.  The  recollection  of  them — both  sweet  and  bitter — carried  him 
back  to  the  heart-sickness  of  which  he  had  of  late  never  thought,  though 
it  still  lay  buried  within  him.  Of  late  so  many  different  and  grave  mat-  I 
ters,  such  as  the  abandonment  of  Smolensk,  his  visit  to  Bleak  Hills,  the 
recent  news  of  his  father’s  death — so  many  emotions  had  filled  his  heart 
that  those  memories  had  long  been  absent,  and  when  they  returned  did 
not  affect  him  nearly  so  violently.  And  for  Denisov,  the  associations 
awakened  by  the  name  of  Bolkonsky  belonged  to  a  far-away,  romantic 
past,  when,  after  supper  and  Natasha’s  singing,  hardly  knowing  what 
he  was  doing,  he  had  made  an  offer  to  the  girl  of  fifteen.  He  smiled  at 
the  recollection  of  that  time  and'his  love  for  Natasha,  and  passed  at  once 
to  what  he  was  just  now  intensely  and  exclusively  interested  in.  This 
was  a  plan  of  campaign  he  had  formed  while  on  duty  at  the  outposts 
during  the  retreat.  He  had  laid  the  plan  before  Barclay  de  Tolly,  and 
now  intended  to  lay  it  before  Kutuzov.  The  plan  was  based  on  the  fact 
that  the  line  of  the  French  operations  was  too  extended,  and  on  the ' 
suggestion  that,  instead  of  or  along  with  a  frontal  attack,  barring  the 
advance  of  the  French,  attacks  should  be  made  on  their  communications. 
He  began  explaining  his  plan  to  Prince  Andrey. 

‘They  are  not  able  to  defend  all  that  line;  it’s  impossible.  I’ll  under¬ 
take  to  break  through  them.  Give  me  five  hundred  men  and  I  would 
cut  their  communications,  that’s  certain!  The  one  system  to  adopt  is 
partisan  warfare.’ 

Denisov  got  up  and  began  with  gesticulations  to  explain  his  plans  to 
Bolkonsky.  In  the  middle  of  his  exposition  they  heard  the  shouts  of  the 
army,  mingling  with  music,  and  song,  and  apparently  coming  from 
detached  groups  scattered  over  a  distance.  From  the  village  came  cheers 
and  the  tramp  of  horses’  hoofs. 

‘Himself  is  coming,’  shouted  the  Cossack,  who  stood  at  the  gate;  ‘he’s 
coming!’ 

Bolkonsky  and  Denisov  moved  up  to  the  gate,  where  there  stood  a 
knot  of  soldiers  (a  guard  of  honour),  and  they  saw  Kutuzov  coming 
down  the  street  mounted  on  a  low  bay  horse.  An  immense  suite  of  generals 
followed  him.  Barclay  rode  almost  beside  him;  a  crowd  of  officers  was 
running  behind  and  around  them  shouting  ‘hurrah!’ 

His  adjutants  galloped  into  the  yard  before  him.  Kutuzov  impatiently 
kicked  his  horse,  which  ambled  along  slowly  under  his  weight,  and  con¬ 
tinually  nodded  his  head  and  put  his  hand  up  to  his  white  horse-guard’s 


WAR  AND  PEACE  699 

cap,  with  a  red  band  and  no  peak.  When  he  reached  the  guard  of  honour, 
a  set  of  stalwart  grenadiers,  mostly  cavalry  men,  saluting  him,  he  looked 
at'  them  for  a  minute  in  silence,  with  the  intent,  unflinching  gaze  of  a 
man  used  to  command;  then  he  turned  to  the  group  of  generals  and 
Dfficers  standing  round  him.  His  face  suddenly  wore  a  subtle  expression; 
he  shrugged  his  shoulders  with  an  air  of  perplexity.  ‘And  with  fellows 
like  that  retreat  and  retreat!  ’  he  said.  ‘Well,  good-bye,  general,’  he  added, 
and  spurred  his  horse  into  the  gateway  by  Prince  Andrey  and  Denisov. 

‘Hurrah !  hurrah !  hurrah !  ’  rang  out  shouts  behind  him. 

Since  Prince  Andrey  had  seen  him  last  Kutuzov  had  grown  stouter 
and  more  corpulent  than  ever;  he  seemed  swimming  in  fat.  But  the 
familiar  scar,  and  the  white  eye,  and  the  expression  of  weariness  in  his 
Face  and  figure  were  unchanged.  He  was  wearing  a  white  horse-guard’s 
cap  and  a  military  coat,  and  a  whip  on  a  narrow  strap  was  slung  over 
bis  shoulder.  He  sat  heavily  swaying  on  his  sturdy  horse. 

‘Fugh!  .  .  .  fugh!  .  .  .  fugh!  .  .  .’  he  whistled,  hardly  audibly,  as 
be  rode  into  the  courtyard.  Plis  face  expressed  the  relief  of  a  man  who 
!ooks  forward  to  resting  after  a  performance.  He  drew  his  left  foot  out 
Df  the  stirrup,  and  with  a  lurch  of  his  whole  person,  frowning  with  the 
effort,  brought  it  up  to  the  saddle,  leaned  "on  his  knee,  and  with  a  groan  let 
limself  drop  into  the  arms  of  the  Cossacks  and  adjutants,  who  stood  ready 
:o  support  him. 

He  pulled  himself  together,  looked  round  with  half-shut  eyes,  glanced 
it  Prince  Andrey,  and  evidently  not  recognising  him,  moved  with  his 
shambling  gait  towards  the  steps. 

‘Fugh!  .  .  .  fugh!  .  .  .  fugh!’  he  whistled,  and  again  looked  round 
it  Prince  Andrey.  As  is  often  the  case  with  the  aged,  the  impression  of 
Prince  Andrey’s  face  did  not  at  once  call  up  the  memory  of  his  personality. 
Ah,  how  are  you,  how  are  you,  my  dear  boy,  come  along  .  .  .’  he  said 
vearily,  and  walked  heavily  up  the  steps  that  creaked  under  his  weight. 
Be  unbuttoned  his  coat  and  sat  down  on  the  seat  in  the  porch. 

‘Well,  how’s  your  father?’ 

‘The  news  of  his  death  reached  me  yesterday,’  said  Prince  Andrey 
>riefly. 

Kutuzov  looked  at  him  with  eyes  opened  wide  with  dismay,  then  he 
00k  off  his  cap,  and  crossed  himself.  ‘The  peace  of  heaven  be  with  him! 
Ynd  may  God’s  will  be  done  with  all  of  us!’  He  heaved  a  heavy  sigh 
ind  paused.  ‘I  loved  him  deeply  and  respected  him,  and  I  feel  for  you 
vith  all  my  heart.’  He  embraced  Prince  Andrey,  pressed  him  to  his  fat 
>reast,  and  for  some  time  did  not  let  him  go.  YVhen  he  released  him, 
’rince  Andrey  saw  that  Kutuzov’s  thick  lips  were  quivering  and  there 
rere  tears  in  his  eyes.  He  sighed  and  pressed  his  hands  on  the  seat  to  help 
limself  in  rising  from  it. 

‘Come  in,  come  in,  we’ll  have  a  chat,’  he  said;  but  at  that  moment 
)enisov,  who  stood  as  little  in  dread  of  the  authorities  as  he  did  of  the 
nemy,  walked  boldly  up,  his  spurs  clanking  on  the  steps,  regardless  of 
be  indignant  whispers  of  the  adjutants,  who  tried  to  prevent  him. 


Too  WARANDPEACE 

Kutuzov,  his  hands  still  pressed  on  the  seat  to  help  him  up,  looked  rue¬ 
fully  at  Denisov.  Denisov,  mentioning  his  name,  announced  that  he  had  to 
communicate  to  his  highness  a  matter  of  great  importance  for  the  wel¬ 
fare  of  Russia.  Kutuzov  bent  his  weary  eyes  on  Denisov,  and,  lifting  his 
hands  with  a  gesture  of  annoyance,  folded  them  across  his  stomach,  and 
repeated,  ‘For  the  welfare  of  Russia?  Well,  what  is  it?  Speak.’  Denisov 
blushed  like  a  girl  (it  was  strange  to  see  the  colour  come  on  that  hirsute, 
time-worn,  hard-drinking  face),  and  began  boldly  explaining  his  plan 
for  cutting  the  enemy’s  line  between  Smolensk  and  Vyazma.  Denisov’s 
home  was  in  that  region,  and  he  knew  the  country  well.  His  plan  seemed 
unquestionably  a  good  one,  especially  with  the  energy  of  conviction  that 
was  in  his  words.  Kutuzov  stared  at  his  own  feet,  and  occasionally  looked 
round  towards  the  yard  of  the  next  cottage,  as  though  he  were  expecting 
something  unpleasant  to  come  from  it.  From  the  cottage  there  did  in 
fact  emerge,  during  Denisov’s  speech,  a  general  with  a  portfolio  under 
his  arm. 

‘Eh?’  Kutuzov  inquired  in  the  middle  of  Denisov’s  exposition,  ‘are  you 
ready  now?’ 

‘Yes,  your  highness,’  said  the  general.  Kutuzov  shook  his  head  with 
an  air  that  seemed  to  say,  ‘How  is  one  man  to  get  through  it  all?’  and 
gave  his  attention  again  to  Denisov. 

‘I  give  you  my  word  of  honour  as  a  Russian  officer,’  Denisov  was 
saying,  ‘that  I  will  cut  Napoleon’s  communications.’ 

‘Is  Kirill  Andreevitch  Denisov,  the  ober-intendant,  any  relation  of 
yours?’  Kutuzov  interposed. 

‘My  uncle,  your  highness.’ 

‘Oh!  we  used  to  be  friends,’  said  Kutuzov,  more  cheerily.  ‘Very  good, 
very  good,  my  dear  boy ;  you  stay  here  on  the  staff ;  we’ll  have  a  talk 
to-morrow.’  Nodding  to  Denisov,  he  turned  away  and  put  out  his  hand 
for  the  papers  Konovnitsyn  had  brought  him. 

‘Will  not  your  highness  be  pleased  to  walk  into  the  house?’  said  the 
general  on  duty  in  a  discontented  voice;  ‘it’s  necessary  to  look  through 
the  plans  and  to  sign  some  papers.’  An  adjutant  appeared  at  the  door  i 
to  announce  that  everything  was  in  readiness  within.  But  apparently 
Kutuzov  preferred  to  be  rid  of  business  before  going  indoors.  He 
paused  .  .  . 

‘No;  have  a  table  placed  here,  my  dear  boy;  I’ll  look  through  them  , 
here,’  he  said.  ‘Don’t  you  go  away,’  he  added,  addressing  Prince  Andrey. 
Prince  Andrey  remained  in  the  porch  listening  to  the  general  on  duty. 

While  the  latter  was  presenting  his  report  Prince  Andrey  heard  the 
whisper  of  a  woman’s  voice  and  the  rustle  of  a  woman’s  silk  dress  at  the 
door.  Several  times  glancing  in  that  direction  he  noticed  behind  the 
door  a  plump,  rosy-faced,  good-looking  woman  in  a  pink  dress  with  a 
lilac  silk  kerchief  on  her  head.  She  had  a  dish  in  her  hand,  and  was  | 
apparently  waiting  for  the  commander-in-chief  to  enter.  Kutuzov’s 
adjutant  explained  to  Prince  Andrey  in  a  whisper  that  this  was  the  priest’s 
wife,  the  mistress  of  the  house,  who  intended  to  offer  his  highness  bread 


WARANDPEACE  701 

and  salt,  the  emblems  of  welcome,  on  his  entrance.  Her  husband  had 
met  his  highness  with  the  cross  in  church,  and  she  intended  to  welcome  him 
to  the  house.  .  .  .  ‘She’s  very  pretty,’  added  the  adjutant  with  a  smile. 
Kutuzov  looked  round  at  the  words.  He  heard  the  general's  report,  the 
subject  of  which  was  chiefly  a  criticism  of  the  position  of  the  troops  before 
Tsarevo-Zaimishtche,  just  as  he  had  heard  Denisov,  and  just  as,  seven 
years  before,  he  had  heard  the  discussions  of  the  military  council  before 
Austerlitz.  He  was  obviously  hearing  it  simply  because  he  had  ears,  and 
although  one  of  them  was  stuffed  up  with  cotton-wool  they  could  not 
help  hearing.  But  it  wTas  obvious  that  nothing  that  general  could  possibly 
say  could  surprise  or  interest  him,  that  he  knew  beforehand  all  he  would 
be  told,  and  listened  only  because  he  had  to  listen  to  it,  just  as  one  has  to 
listen  to  the  litany  being  sung.  All  Denisov  had  said  was  practical  and 
sensible.  What  the  general  was  saying  was  even  more  practical  and 
sensible,  but  apparently  Kutuzov  despised  both  knowledge  and  intellect, 
and  knew  of  something  else  that  would  settle  things — something  different, 
quite  apart  from  intellect  and  knowledge.  Prince  Andrey  watched  the 
commander-in-chief’s  face  attentively,  and  the  only  expression  he  could 
detect  in  it  was  an  expression  of  boredom,  of  curiosity  to  know  the  mean¬ 
ing  of  the  feminine  whispering  at  the  door,  and  of  a  desire  to  observe 
the  proprieties.  It  was  obvious  that  Kutuzov  despised  intellect  and  learn¬ 
ing,  and  even  the  patriotic  feeling  Denisov  had  shown;  but  he  did  not 
despise  them  through  intellect,  nor  through  sentiment,  nor  through  learn¬ 
ing  (for  he  made  no  effort  to  display  anything  of  the  kind),  he  despised 
them  through  something  else — through  his  old  age,  through  his  experience 
Df  life.  The  only  instruction  of  his  own  that  Kutuzov  inserted  in  the 
report  related  to  acts  of  marauding  by  Russian  troops.  The  general,  at 
the  end  of  the  report,  presented  his  highness  a  document  for  signature 
relating  to  a  petition  for  damages  from  a  landowner  for  the  cutting  of 
dis  oats  by  certain  officers. 

Kutuzov  smacked  his  lips  together  and  shook  his  head,  as  he  listened 
:o  the  matter. 

‘Into  the  stove  .  .  .  into  the  fire  with  it!  And  I  tell  you  once  for  all, 
ny  dear  fellow,’  he  said,  ‘all  such  things  put  into  the  fire.  Let  them  cut 
:he  corn  and  burn  the  wood  to  their  heart’s  content.  It’s  not  by  my 
rrders  and  it's  not  with  my  permission,  but  I  can't  pursue  the  matter.  It 
;:an’t  be  helped.  You  can’t  hew  down  trees  without  the  chips  flying.’  He 
'lanced  once  more  at  the  paper.  ‘Oh,  this  German  preciseness,’  he  com- 
nented,  shaking  his  head. 


XVI 

Well,  now,  that’s  all,’  said  Kutuzov,  as  he  signed  the  last  paper,  and 
ising  clumsily,  and  straightening  his  fat,  white  neck,  he  went  to  the  door 
vith  a  more  cheerful  countenance. 

The  priest’s  wife,  with  the  colour  rushing  to  her  face,  snatched  up 


702  WAR  AND  PEACE 

the  dish,  and  though  she  '.tad  been  so  long  preparing,  she  did  not  succeed 
in  presenting  it  at  the  right  moment.  With  a  low  bow  she  offered  it  to 
Kutuzov.  Kutuzov  screwed  up  his  eyes.  He  smiled,  chucked  her  under 
the  chin,  and  said: 

‘And  what  a  pretty  face!  Thank  you,  my  dear!’ 

Tie. took  some  gold  coins  out  of  his  trouser  pocket,  and  put  them  on 
the  dish.  ‘Well,  and  how  are  we  getting  on?’  he  said,  going  towards  the 
room  that  had  been  assigned  him.  The  priest’s  wife,  with  smiling  dimples 
on  her  rosy  face,  followed  to  show  him  the  room.  The  adjutant  came 
out  to  Prince  Andrey  in  the  porch,  and  invited  him  to  lunch.  Half  an 
hour  later  Kutuzov  sent  for  Prince  Andrey.  He  was  reclining  in  a  low 
chair,  still  in  the  same  unbuttoned  military  coat.  He  had  a  French  novel 
in  his  hand,  and  at  Prince  Audrey’s  entrance  laid  a  paper-knife  in  it  and 
put  it  aside.  It  was  Les  Chevaliers  du  Cygne,  a  work  by  Madame  de 
Genlis,  as  Prince  Andrey  saw  by  the  cover. 

‘Well,  sit  down;  sit  down  here.  Let  us  have  a  little  talk,’  said  Kutuzov. 
‘It’s  sad;  very  sad.  But  remember,  my  dear,  think  of  me  as  a  father, 
another  father,  to  you  .  .  .  !’ 

Prince  Andrey  told  Kutuzov  all  he  knew  about  his  father’s  end,  and 
what  he  had  seen  at  Bleak  Hills. 

‘To  think  what  we  have  been  brought  to!’  Kutuzov  cried  suddenly, 
in  a  voice  full  of  feeling,  Prince  Andrey’s  story  evidently  bringing  vividly 
before  him  the  position  of  Russia. 

‘Wait  a  bit;  wait  a  bit!’  he  added,  with  a  vindictive  look  in  his  face, 
and  apparently  unwilling  to  continue  a  conversation  that  stirred  him  too 
deeply,  he  said: 

‘I  sent  for  you  to  keep  you  with  me.’ 

‘I  thank  your  highness!’  answered  Prince  Andrey,  ‘but  I  am  afraid 
I  am  no  more  good  for  staff  work,’  he  said,  with  a  smile,  which  Kutuzov 
noticed.  He  looked  at  him  inquiringly.  ‘And  the  great  thing  is,’  added 
Prince  Andrey,  ‘I  am  used  to  my  regiment.  I  like  the  officers;  and  I 
think  the  men  have  come  to  like  me.  I  should  be  sorry  to  leave  the 
regiment.  If  I  decline  the  honour  of  being  in  attendance  on  you,  believe 
me  .  .  .’ 

Kutuzov’s  podgy  face  beamed  with  a  shrewd,  good-natured,  and  yet 
subtly  ironical  expression.  He  cut  Bolkonsky  short. 

‘I’m  sure  you  would  have  been  of  use  to  me.  But  you’re  right;  you’re 
right.  It’s  not  here  that  we  want  men.  There  are  always  a  multitude 
of  counsellors;  but  men  are  scarce.  The  regiments  wouldn’t  be  what  they 
are  if  all  the  would-be  counsellors  would  serve  in  them  like  you.  I  remem¬ 
ber  you  at  Austerlitz.  I  remember,  I  remember  you  with  the  flag!’  said 
Kutuzov,  and  a  flush  of  pleasure  came  into  Prince  Andrey’s  face  at  this 
reminiscence.  Kutuzov  held  out  his  hand  to  him,  offering  him  his  cheek 
to  kiss,  and  again  Prince  Andrey  saw  tears  in  the  old  man’s  eyes.  Though 
Prince  Andrey  knew  Kutuzov’s  tears  were  apt  to  come  easily,  and  that 
he  was  particularly  affectionate  and  tender  with  him  from  the  desire 


WARANDPEACE  703 

to  show  sympathy  with  his  loss,  yet  he  felt  this  reminder  of  Austerlitz 
agreeable  and  flattering. 

‘Go  your  own  way,  and  God  bless  you  in  it.  ...  I  know  your  path 
is  the  path  of  honour!’  He  paused.  ‘I  missed  you  at  Bucharest.  I  wanted 
some  one  to  send  .  .  And  changing  the  subject,  Kutuzov  began  talk¬ 
ing  of  the  Turkish  war,  and  of  the  peace  that  had  been  concluded.  ‘Yes, 
I  have  been  roundly  abused,’ he  said, ‘both  for  the  war  and  the  peace  .  .  . 
but  it  all  happened  in  the  nick  of  time.’  ‘Everything  comes  in  time  for 
him  who  knows  how  to  wait,’  he  said,  quoting  the  French  proverb.  ‘And 
there  were  as  many  counsellors  there  as  here,  .  .  .’  he  went  on,  returning 
to  the  superfluity  of  advisers,  a  subject  which  evidently  occupied  his 
mind.  ‘Ugh,  counsellors  and  counsellors!’  he  said.  ‘If  we  had  listened 
to  all  of  them,  we  should  be  in  Turkey  now.  We  should  not  have  made 
peace,  and  the  war  would  never  have  been  over.  Always  in  haste,  and 
more  haste,  worse  speed.  Kamensky  would  have  come  to  grief  there,  if  he 
hadn’t  died.  He  went  storming  fortresses  with  thirty  thousand  men.  It's 
easy  enough  to  take  fortresses,  but  it’s  hard  to  finish  off  a  campaign 
successfully.  Storms  and  attacks  are  not  what’s  wanted,  but  time  and 
patience.  Kamensky  sent  his  soldiers  to  attack  Rustchuk,  but  I  trusted 
to  them  alone — time  and  patience — and  I  took  more  fortresses  than 
Kamensky,  and  made  the  Turks  eat  horseflesh!’  He  shook  his  head. 
‘And  the  French  shall,  too.  Take  my  word  for  it,’  cried  Kutuzov,  growing 
warmer  and  slapping  himself  on  the  chest,  ‘I’ll  make  them  eat  horseflesh!’ 
And  again  his  eyes  were  dim  with  tears. 

‘We  shall  have  to  give  battle,  though,  shan’t  we?’  said  Prince  Andrey. 

‘We  must,  if  every  one  wants  to;  there  is  no  help  for  it.  .  .  .  But,  mark 
my  words,  my  dear  boy!  The  strongest  of  all  warriors  are  these  two — 
time  and  patience.  They  do  it  all,  and  our  wise  counsellors  n’ entendent 
pas  de  ccttc  oreille,  voila  le  mal.  Some  say  ay,  and  some  say  no.  What’s 
one  to  do?’  he  asked,  evidently  expecting  a  reply.  ‘Come,  what  would  you 
have  me  do?’  he  repeated,  and  his  eyes  twinkled  with  a  profound,  shrewd 
expression.  ‘I’ll  tell  you  what  to  do,’  he  said,  since  Prince  Andrey  still 
did  not  answer.  ‘I’ll  tell  you  what  to  do,  and  what  I  do.  Dans  le  doute, 
mon  cher’ — he  paused — ‘abstiens-toi.’  He  articulated  deliberately  the 
French  saying. 

‘Well,  good-bye,  my  dear.  Remember,  with  all  my  heart,  I  feel  for 
your  sorrow,  and  that  for  you  I’m  not  his  highness,  nor  prince,  nor 
commander-in-chief,  but  simply  a  father  to  you.  If  you  want  anything, 
come  straight  to  me.  Good-bye,  my  dear  boy!’  Again  he  embraced  and 
kissed  him. 

And  before  Prince  Andrey  had  closed  the  door,  Kutuzov  settled  him¬ 
self  comfortably  with  a  sigh,  and  renewed  the  unfinished  novel  of  Madame 
Genlis,  Les  Chevaliers  du  Cygne. 

How,  and  why  it  was,  Prince  Andrey  could  not  explain,  but  after  this 
interview  with  Kutuzov,  he  went  back  to  his  regiment  feeling  reassured 
as  to  the  future  course  of  the  war,  and  as  to  the  man  to  whom  its  guidance 
was  intrusted.  The  more  clearly  he  perceived  the  absence  of  everything 


7°4  WARANDPEACE 

personal  in  the  old  leader,  who  seemed  to  have  nothing  left  of  his  own 
but  habits  of  passions,  and  instead  of  an  intellect  grasping  events  and 
making  plans,  had  only  the  capacity  for  the  calm  contemplation  of  the 
course  of  events,  the  more  confident  he  felt  that  all  would  be  as  it  should 
be.  ‘He  will  put  in  nothing  of  himself.  He  will  contrive  nothing,  will 
undertake  nothing,’  thought  Prince  Andrey;  ‘but  he  will  hear  everything, 
will  think  of  everything,  will  put  everything  in  its  place,  will  not  hinder 
anything  that  could  be  of  use,  and  will  not  allow  anything  that  could 
do  harm.  He  knows  that  there  is  something  stronger  and  more  important 
than  his  will — that  is  the  inevitable  march  of  events,  and  he  can  see  them, 
can  grasp  their  significance,  and,  seeing  their  significance,  can  abstain 
from  meddling,  from  following  his  own  will,  and  aiming  at  something 
else.  ‘And  the  chief  reason,’  thought  Prince  Andrey,  ‘why  one  believes 
in  him  is  that  he’s  Russian,  in  spite  of  Madame  Genlis’s  novel  and  the 
French  proverbs,  that  his  voice  shook  when  he  said,  “What  we  have 
been  brought  to!”  and  that  he  choked  when  he  said  “he  would  make 
them  eat  horseflesh!  ”  ’ 

It  was  this  feeling,  more  or  less  consciously  shared  by  all,  that  de¬ 
termined  the  unanimous  approval  given  to  the  appointment  of  Kutuzov 
to  the  chief  command,  in  accordance  with  national  sentiment,  and  in 
opposition  to  the  intrigues  at  court. 


XVII 

After  the  Tsar  had  left  Moscow,  the  life  of  that  city  flowed  on  in  its 
old  accustomed  channel,  and  the  current  of  that  life  ran  so  much  as  usual 
that  it  was  difficult  to  remember  the  days  of  patriotic  fervour  and  enthusi¬ 
asm,  and  hard  to  believe  that  Russia  actually  was  in  danger,  and  that  the 
members  of  the  English  club  were  also  her  devoted  sons,  ready  to  make 
any  sacrifice  for  her  sake.  The  one  thing  that  recalled  the  general  patriotic 
fervour  of  the  days  of  the  Tsar’s  presence  in  Moscow  was  the  call  for 
contributions  of  men  and  money,  and  these  demands  were  presented  at 
once  in  a  legal,  official  form,  so  that  they  seemed  inevitable.  As  the  enemy  i 
drew  nearer  to  Moscow  the  attitude  taken  by  its  inhabitants  in  regard 
to  their  position  did  not  become  more  serious,  but,  on  the  contrary,  more 
frivolous,  as  is  always  the  case  with  people  who  see  a  great  danger  ap¬ 
proaching.  At  the  approach  of  danger  there  are  always  two  voices  that 
soeak  with  equal  force  in  the  heart  of  man:  one  very  reasonably  tells 
the  man  to  consider  the  nature  of  the  danger  and  the  means  of  avoiding 
it ;  the  other  even  more  reasonably  says  that  it  is  too  painful  and  harassing  i  i 
to  think  of  the  danger,  since  it  is  not  in  a  man’s  power  to  provide  for 
everything  and  escape  from  the  general  march  of  events;’  and  that  it  is 
therefore  better  to  turn  aside  from  the  painful  subject  till  it  has  come, 
and  to  think  of  what  is  pleasant.  In  solitude  a  man  generally  yields  to  the 
first  voice;  in  society  to  the  second.  So  it  was  now  with  the  inhabitants  of 


W  A  R  A  N  D  P  E  A  C  E  7°5 

Moscow.  It  was  long  since  there  had  been  so  much  gaiety  in  Moscow  as 
that  year. 

Rastoptchin’s  posters,  with  a  print  at  the  top  of  a  gin-shop,  a  potman, 
and  the  Moscow  artisan,  Karpushka  Tchigirin,  ‘who,  having  gone  into 
the  militia,  heard  that  Bonaparte  meant  to  come  to  Moscow,  was  mightily 
wroth  thereat,  used  very  bad  language  about  all  the  French,  came  out 
of  the  gin-shop  and  began  to  address  the  people  assembled  under  the 
eagles,’  were  as  much  read  and  discussed  as  the  last  bouts  rimes  of 
Vassily  Lvovitch  Pushkin. 

In  the  corner  room  of  the  club  the  members  gathered  together  to  read 
these  posters;  and  some  liked  the  way  Karpushka  was  made  to  jeer 
at  the  French,  saying  that  ‘they  would  be  blown  out  with  Russian  cab¬ 
bage,  that  Russian  porridge  would  rip  their  guts  open,  and  cabbage  soup 
would  finish  them  off;  that  they  were  all  dwarfs,  and  a  village  lass  could 
toss  three  of  them  on  her  pitchfork  single-handed!  ’ 

Some  people  did  not  approve  of  this  tone,  and  said  it  was  vulgar  and 
stupid.  People  said  that  Rastoptchin  had  sent  all  Frenchmen,  and  even 
foreigners,  out  of  Moscow,  and  that  there  had  been  spies  and  agents 
of  Napoleon  among  them.  But  they  talked  of  this  principally  in  order 
to  repeat  the  witticisms  uttered  by  Rastoptchin  on  the  occasion.  The 
foreigners  had  been  put  on  a  barque  sailing  to  Nizhny,  and  Rastoptchin 
had  said  to  them:  ‘Keep  yourselves  to  yourselves,  get  into  the  barque, 
and  take  care  it  does  not  become  the  barque  of  Charon  to  you.1  People 
talked  too  of  all  the  government  offices  having  been  removed  from  Mos¬ 
cow,  and  added  Shinshin’s  joke,  that  for  that  alone  Moscow  ought  to  be 
grateful  to  Napoleon.  People  said  that  Mamonov’s  regiment  was  costing 
him  eight  hundred  thousand ;  that  Bezuhov  was  spending  even  more  on 
his;  but  that  the  noblest  proof  of  Bezuhov’s  patriotism  was  that  he  was 
going  to  put  on  the  uniform  himself  and  ride  at  the  head  of  his  regiment, 
without  any  charge  for  seats  to  spectators. 

‘You  have  no  mercy  on  any  one,’  said  Julie  Drubetskoy,  gathering  up  a 
pinch  of  scraped  lint  in  her  slender  fingers  covered  with  rings. 

Julie  was  intending  to  leave  Moscow  next  day,  and  was  giving  a  fare¬ 
well  soiree. 

‘Bezuhov  est  ridicule,  but  he  is  so  good-natured,  so  nice;  how  can  you 
take  pleasure  in  being  so  caustique?’ 

‘Forfeit!  ’  said  a  young  man  in  a  volunteer’s  uniform,  whom  Julie  called 
‘mon  chevalier ’  and  was  taking  with  her  to  Nizhny. 

In  Julie’s  circle,  as  in  many  circles  in  Moscow,  it  was  a  principle  now 
to  speak  nothing  but  Russian,  and  those  who  made  a  mistake  by  speaking 
French  had  to  pay  a  forfeit  for  the  benefit  of  the  committee  of  voluntary 
subscriptions. 

‘Another  forfeit  for  a  Gallicism,’  said  a  Russian  writer  who  happened 
to  be  present.  ‘  “Take  pleasure!”  is  not  Russian.’ 

‘You  have  no  mercy  on  any  one,’  Julie  went  on  to  the  volunteer,  paying 
no  attention  to  the  remark  of  the  author. 

‘Caustique,  I  admit,’  she  said,  ‘and  I’ll  pay  for  the  pleasure  of  telling 


706  WARANDPEACE 

you  the  truth.  I  am  ready  to  pay  even  more;  but  I  am  not  responsible 
for  Gallicisms,’  she  said  to  the  writer.  ‘I  have  neither  the  time  nor  the 
money  to  engage  a  teacher  and  learn  Russian  like  Prince  Galitzin.  Ah, 
here  he  is!’  added  Julie.  ‘Qnand  on  .  .  .  No,  no,’  she  protested  to  the 
volunteer,  ‘you’re  not  going  to  catch  me.  When  one  speaks  of  the  sun, 
one  sees  its  rays.  We  were  just  talking  of  you,’  she  said,  smiling  affably 
to  Pierre,  and  adding,  with  the  easy  lying  characteristic  of  society  women, 
‘We  were  saying  your  regiment  was  certain  to  be  a  finer  one  than 
Mamonov’s.’ 

‘Oh,  don’t  talk  to  me  about  my  regiment,’  answered  Pierre,  kissing  his 
hostess’s  hand,  and  sitting  down  beside  her.  ‘I  am  so  heartily  sick  of  it!’ 

‘You  will  take  the  command  of  it  yourself,  of  course?’  said  Julie,  with 
a  sly  and  sarcastic  look  towards  the  volunteer. 

The  latter  was  by  no  means  so  ready  to  be  caustic  in  Pierre’s  presence, 
and  his  countenance  betokened  perplexity  as  to  what  Julie’s  smile  could 
signify.  In  spite  of  his  absent-mindedness  and  good  nature,  Pierre’s  pres¬ 
ence  never  failed  to  cut  short  any  attempt  at  ridicule  at  his  expense. 

‘No,’  answered  Pierre,  laughing  and  looking  at  his  huge,  bulky  figure; 
‘I  should  make  too  good  a  target  for  the  French,  and  indeed  I’m  afraid 
I  could  hardly  scramble  on  to  a  horse’s  back.’ 

Among  the  people  picked  out  as  subjects  for  gossip,  Julie’s  friends 
happened  to  pitch  on  the  Rostovs.  ‘Their  pecuniary  position  is  very 
serious,  I  am  told,’  said  Julie.  ‘And  the  count  is  so  unreasonable.  The 
Razumovskys  wanted  to  buy  his  house  and  his  estate  in  the  environs, 
and  the  matter  is  still  dragging  on.  He  will  ask  too  much.’ 

‘No,  I  fancy  purchase  will  be  concluded  in  a  few  days,’  said  some  one. 
‘Though  it’s  madness  to  buy  anything  in  Moscow  just  now.’ 

‘Why  so?’  said  Julie.  ‘Surely  you  don’t  suppose  that  Moscow  is  in  any 
danger.’ 

‘Why  are  you  leaving  it  then?’ 

‘I?  That’s  a  strange  question.  I  am  going  because  .  .  .  well,  because 
everybody’s  going,  and  I  am  not  a  Jeanne  d’Arc  nor  an  Amazon.’ 

‘Oh,  oh!  Give  me  another  strip  of  linen  to  scrape.’ 

‘He  ought  to  be  able  to  pay  off  all  his  debts,  if  he  sets  about  it  properly,’ 
the  volunteer  observed  of  Count  Rostov. 

‘He’s  a  good-hearted  old  fellow,  but  very  foolish.’ 

‘And  why  are  they  staying  on  here  so  long?  They  were  meaning  to 
leave  for  the  country  long  ago.  Natalie  is  quite  well  again  now,  I  suppose?’ 
Julie  asked  Pierre,  with  a  sly  smile. 

‘They  are  waiting  for  their  younger  son,’  said  Pierre.  ‘He  went  into 
Obolensky’s  Cossacks,  and  was  sent  off  to  Byela  Tserkov.  The  regiment 
is  being  formed  there.  But  now  they  have  transferred  him  to  my  regiment, 
and  he  is  expected  every  day.  The  count  wanted  to  get  away  long  ago. 
but  nothing  would  induce  the  countess  to  leave  Moscow  till  her  son’s 
return.’ 

‘I  saw  them  the  day  before  yesterday  at  the  Arharovs.’  Natalie  has 


WAR  AND  PEACE  707 

quite  recovered  her  looks  and  her  spirits.  She  sang  a  song.  How  easily 
some  people  get  over  everything!  ’ 

‘Get  over  what?’  Pierre  asked,  looking  displeased. 

Julie  smiled. 

‘O  count,  you  know,  such  chivalrous  knights  as  you  are  only  to  be 
found  in  Madame  Suza’s  novels.’ 

‘Knights!  What  do  you  mean?’  Pierre  asked  blushing. 

‘Come  now,  my  dear  count.  C’est  la  fable  de  tout  Moscou.  Je  vous 
admire,  ma  parole  d’honncur! 

‘Forfeit!  forfeit!’  said  the  volunteer. 

‘Oh,  very  well.  One  cannot  talk,  what  a  bore  it  is!’ 

‘What  is  the  talk  of  all  Moscow?’  said  Pierre  angrily,  rising  to  his  feet. 

‘Nonsense,  count,  you  know!’ 

‘I  know  nothing  about  it,’  said  Pierre. 

‘I  know  what  great  friends  you  have  always  been  with  Natalie,  and 
so  .  .  .  But,  I  was  always  more  friendly  with  Vera.  That  darling  Vera.’ 

‘No,  madam,’  Pierre  persisted  in  a  tone  of  annoyance.  ‘I  have  by  no 
means  taken  upon  myself  the  role  of  Countess  Rostov’s  knight;  indeed, 
it’s  almost  a  month  since  I  have  been  near  them.  But  I  cannot  understand 
the  cruelty  .  .  .’ 

‘Qui  s’ excuse  s’ accuse,'  cried  Julie,  smiling,  and  waving  the  lint  trium¬ 
phantly,  and  that  she  might  have  the  last  word,  she  promptly  changed  the 
subject.  ‘By  the  way,  I  have  heard  poor  Marie  Bolkonsky  arrived  in 
Moscow  yesterday.  Have  you  heard  she  has  lost  her  father?’ 

‘Really?  Where  is  she?  I  should  like  to  see  her,’  said  Pierre. 

‘I  spent  the  evening  with  her  yesterday.  She  is  going  on  to-day  or 
to-morrow  morning  to  their  estate  in  the  province  with  her  nephew.’ 

‘Well,  how  is  she?  Tell  me,’  said  Pierre. 

‘Oh,  she  is  well,  but  very  sad.  But  do  you  know  who  rescued  her?  It 
is  quite  a  romance.  Nikolay  Rostov.  She  was  surrounded;  they  tried  to 
kill  her  and  wounded  her  servants.  He  rushed  in  and  saved  her.  .  .  .’ 

‘Another  romance,’  said  the  volunteer.  ‘This  general  flight  is  evidently 
intended  to  marry  off  all  the  old  maids.  Katish  is  one,  Princess  Bolkonsky 
another.’ 

‘You  know,  I  really  do  believe  she’s  un  petit  peu  amoureuse  du  jeune 
homme.’ 

‘Forfeit!  forfeit!  forfeit! 

‘But  how  is  one  to  say  that  in  Russian?’ 


XVIII 

When  Pierre  returned  home,  he  was  handed  two  new  placards  of  Ras- 
toptchin’s  that  had  just  appeared. 

The  first  declared  that  the  rumour,  that  it  was  forbidden  to  leave 
Moscow  by  Count  Rastoptchin’s  order,  was  false,  and  that,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  he  was  glad  that  ladies  and  merchants’  wives  were  leaving  the 


70S  WAR  AND  PEACE 

town.  ‘There  will  be  less  panic  and  less  false  news,’  said  the  notice;  ‘but 
I  will  stake  my  life  on  it  that  the  miscreant  will  never  enter  Moscow.’ 

These  words  first  showed  Pierre  clearly  that  the  French  certainly 
would  enter  Moscow.  In  the  second  placard  it  was  announced  that  our 
headquarters  were  at  Vyazma,  that  Count  Wittgenstein  had  defeated  the 
French,  but  that  since  many  of  the  inhabitants  of  Moscow  were  desirous 
of  arming  themselves,  weapons  had  been  provided  to  meet  their  wishes 
in  the  arsenal;  swords,  pistols,  and  guns  could  all  be  procured  there  at 
a  low  rate. 

The  tone  of  this  notice  was  not  as  jocose  as  the  former  supposed 
discourses  of  Tchigirin.  The  two  placards  made  Pierre  ponder.  It  was 
evident  to  him  that  the  menacing  storm  cloud,  for  the  advent  of  which 
his  whole  soul  longed,  though  it  roused  an  involuntary  thrill  of  horror, 
it  was  evident  that  that  cloud  was  coming  closer. 

‘Shall  I  enter  the  service  and  join  the  army  or  wait  here?’  Pierre 
thought,  a  question  he  had  put  to  himself  a  hundred  times  already.  He 
took  up  a  pack  of  cards  that  lay  on  the  table  to  deal  them  for  a  game 
of  patience. 

‘If  I  succeed  in  this  game  of  patience,’  he  said  to  himself,  shuffling  the 
pack  as  he  held  it  in  his  hand  and  looked  upwards;  ‘if  I  succeed,  it 
means  .  .  .  what  does  it  mean?’  ...  He  had  not  time  to  decide  this 
question  when  he  heard  at  the  door  of  his  study  the  voice  of  the  eldest 
princess,  asking  whether  she  might  come  in.  ‘Then  it  will  mean  that  1 
must  set  off  to  join  the  army,’  Pierre  told  himself.  ‘Come,  come  in,’  he 
said  to  the  princess. 

The  eldest  of  his  cousins,  the  one  with  the  long  waist  and  the  stony 
face,  was  the  only  one  still  living  in  Pierre’s  house;  the  two  younger 
sisters  had  both  married. 

‘Excuse  my  coming  to  you,  cousin,’  she  said  in  a  tone  of  reproach  and 
excitement.  ‘Some  decision  really  must  be  come  to,  you  know.  What  is 
going  to  happen?  Every  one  has  left  Moscow,  and  the  populace  are 
becoming  unruly.  Why  are  we  staying  on?’ 

‘On  the  contrary,  everything  seems  going  on  satisfactorily,  ma  cousine /  < 
6aid  Pierre  in  the  habitually  playful  tone  he  had  adopted  with  his  cousin, 
to  carry  off  the  embarrassment  he  always  felt  at  being  in  the  position  of 
a  benefactor  to  her. 

‘Oh,  yes,  satisfactorily  .  .  .  highly  satisfactory,  I  dare  say.  Varvara 
Ivanovna  told  me  to-day  how  our  troops  are  distinguishing  themselves.  It 
is  certainly  a  credit  to  them.  And  the  populace,  too,  is  in  complete  revolt, 
they  won’t  obey  any  one  now;  even  my  maid  has  begun  to  be  insolent. 
If  it  goes  on  like  this,  they  will  soon  begin  killing  us.  One  can’t  walk  about 
the  streets.  And  the  worst  of  it  is,  in  another  day  or  two  the  French  will 
be  here.  Why  are  we  waiting  for  them?  One  favour  I  beg  of  you,  mon 
cousin,’  said  the  princess,  ‘give  orders  for  me  to  be  taken  to  Petersburg; 
whatever  I  may  be,  any  way  I  can’t  live  under  Bonaparte’s  rule.’ 

‘But  what  nonsense,  ma  cuusine\  where  do  you  get  your  information 
from?  On  the  contrary  .  .  .’ 


WAR  AND  PEACE  7°9 

‘I’m  not  going  to  submit  to  your  Napoleon.  Other  people  may  do  as 
they  like.  ...  If  you  won’t  do  this  for  me  .  .  .’ 

‘But  I  will,  I’ll  give  orders  for  it  at  once.’ 

The  princess  was  obviously  annoyed  at  having  no  one  to  be  angry  with. 
Muttering  something,  she  sat  down  on  the  edge  of  the  chair. 

‘But  you  have  been  incorrectly  informed,’  said  Pierre.  ‘All’s  quiet  in 
the  town,  and  there’s  no  sort  of  danger.  See  I  have  just  read  .  .  .’  Pierre 
showed  the  princess  the  placards.  ‘The  count  writes  that  he  will  stake 
his  life  on  it  that  the  enemy  will  never  be  in  Moscow.’ 

‘Ah,  your  count,’  the  princess  began  spitefully,  ‘he’s  a  hypocrite,  a 
miscreant  who  has  himself  stirred  the  mob  on  to  disorder.  Didn’t  he  write 
in  his  idiotic  placards  that  they  were  to  take  anybody  whoever  it  might 
be  and  drag  by  the  hair  to  the  lock-up  (and  how  silly  it  is!).  Honour 
and  glory,  says  he,  to  the  man  who  does  so.  And  this  is  what  he  has 
brought  us  to.  Varvara  Ivanovna  told  me  the  mob  almost  killed  her  for 
speaking  French.’ 

‘Oh,  well,  well  .  .  .  You  take  everything  too  much  to  heart,’  said 
Pierre,  and  he  began  dealing  out  the  patience. 

Although  he  did  succeed  in  the  game,  Pierre  did  not  set  off  to  join 
the  army,  but  stayed  on  in  Moscow,  now  rapidly  emptying,  and  was  still 
in  the  same  agitation,  uncertainty  and  alarm,  and,  at  the  same  time, 
joyful  expectation  of  something  awful. 

Next  day  the  princess  set  off  in  the  evening,  and  Pierre’s  head-steward 
came  to  inform  him  that  it  was  impossible  to  raise  the  money  he  required 
for  the  equipment  of  his  regiment  unless  he  sold  one  of  his  estates.  The 
head-steward  impressed  on  Pierre  generally  that  all  this  regimental  craze 
would  infallibly  bring  him  to  ruin.  Pierre  could  hardly  conceal  a  smile  as 
he  listened  to  the  head-steward. 

‘Well,  sell  it  then,’  he  said.  ‘There’s  no  help  for  it,  I  can’t  draw  back 
now!  ’ 

The  worse  the  position  of  affairs,  and  especially  of  his  own  affairs, 
the  better  pleased  Pierre  felt,  and  the  more  obvious  it  was  to  him  that 
the  catastrophe  he  expected  was  near  at  hand.  Scarcely  any  of  Pierre’s 
acquaintances  were  left  in  the  town.  Julie  had  gone,  Princess  Marya  had 
gone.  Of  his  more  intimate  acquaintances  the  Rostovs  were  the  only 
people  left;  but  Pierre  did  not  go  to  see  them. 

To  divert  his  mind  that  day,  Pierre  drove  out  to  the  village  of  Vorori- 
tsovo,  to  look  at  a  great  air  balloon  which  was  being  constructed  by  Lep- 
pich  to  use  against  the  enemy,  and  the  test  balloon  which  was  to  be 
sent  up  the  following  day.  The  balloon  was  not  yet  ready;  but  as  Pierre 
learned,  it  was  being  constructed  by  the  Tsar’s  desire.  The  Tsar  had 
written  to  Count  Rastoptchin  about  it  in  the  following  terms: 

‘As  soon  as  Leppich  is  ready,  get  together  a  crew  for  his  car  consisting 
of  thoroughly  trustworthy  and  intelligent  men,  and  send  a  courier  to 
General  Kutuzov  to  prepare  him  for  it.  I  have  mentioned  it  to  him.  Im¬ 
press  upon  Leppich,  please,  to  take  careful  note  where  he  descends  the 
first  time,  that  he  may  not  go  astray  and  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 


7io  WARANDPEACE 

It  is  essential  that  he  should  regulate  his  movements  in  accordance  with 

the  movements  of  the  commander-in-chief.1 

On  his  way  home  from  Vorontsovo,  Pierre  drove  through  Bolotny ' 
Square,  and  seeing  a  crowd  at  Lobnoye  Place,  stopped  and  got  out  of  his 
chaise.  The  crowd  were  watching  the  flogging  of  a  French  cook,  accused 
of  being  a  spy.  The  flogging  was  just  over,  and  the  man  who  had  admin¬ 
istered  it  was  untying  from  the  whipping-post  a  stout,  red-whiskered  man 
in  blue  stockings  and  a  green  tunic,  who  was  groaning  piteously.  Another 
victim,  a  thin,  pale  man,  was  standing  by.  Both,  to  judge  by  their  faces, 
were  Frenchmen.  With  a  face  of  sick  dread  like  that  of  the  thin  French¬ 
man,  Pierre  pushed  his  way  in  among  the  crowd. 

‘What  is  it?  Who  are  they?  What  for?’  he  kept  asking.  But  the  atten¬ 
tion  of  the  crowd — clerks,  artisans,  shopkeepers,  peasants,  women  in 
pelisses  and  jackets — was  so  intently  riveted  on  what  was  taking  place 
on  the  Lobnoye  Place  that  no  one  answered.  The  stout  man  got  up, 
shrugged  his  shoulders  frowning,  and  evidently  trying  to  show  fortitude, 
began  putting  on  his  tunic  without  looking  about  him.  But  all  at  once 
his  lips  quivered  and  to  his  own  rage  he  began  to  cry,  as  grown-up  men 
of  sanguine  temperament  do  cry.  The  crowd  began  talking  loudly,  to 
drown  a  feeling  of  pity  in  themselves,  as  it  seemed  to  Pierre. 

‘Some  prince’s  cook.  .  .  .’ 

‘Eh,  monsieur,  Russian  sauce  is  a  bit  strong  for  a  French  stomach 
.  .  .  sets  the  teeth  on  edge,’  said  a  wrinkled  clerk  standing  near  Pierre, 
just  when  the  Frenchman  burst  into  tears.  The  clerk  looked  about  him 
for  signs  of  appreciation  of  his  jest.  Several  persons  laughed,  but  some 
were  still  gazing  in  dismay  at  the  man  who  was  undressing  the  second 
Frenchman  and  about  to  flog  him. 

Pierre  choked,  scowled,  and  turning  quickly,  went  back  to  his  chaise, 
still  muttering  something  to  himself  as  he  went,  and  took  his  seat  in  it. 
During  the  rest  of  the  way  he  several  times  started,  and  cried  out  so 
loudly  that  the  coachman  at  last  asked  him  what  he  desired. 

‘Where  are  you  driving?’  Pierre  shouted  to  the  coachman  as  he  drove 
to  Lubyanka. 

‘You  told  me  to  drive  to  the  governor’s,’  answered  the  coachman. 

‘Fool!  dolt!’  shouted  Pierre,  abusing  his  coachman,  a  thing  he  very 
rarely  did.  ‘I  told  you  home;  and  make  haste,  blockhead!  This  very 
day  I  must  set  off,’  Pierre  said  to  himself. 

At  the  sight  of  the  tortured  Frenchman  and  the  crowd  round  the  Lob¬ 
noye  Place,  Pierre  had  so  unhesitatingly  decided  that  he  could  stay  no 
longer  in  Moscow,  and  must  that  very  day  set  off  to  join  the  army,  that 
it  seemed  to  him  either  that  he  had  told  the  coachman  so,  or  that  the 
coachman  ought  to  know  it  of  himself. 

On  reaching  home  Pierre  told  his  omniscient  and  omnipotent  head- 
coachman,  Yevstafitch,  who  was  known  to  all  Moscow,  that  he  was  going 
to  drive  that  night  to  Mozhaisk  to  the  army,  and  gave  orders  for  his 
saddle  horses  to  be  sent  on  there.  All  this  could  not  be  arranged  in  one 
day,  and  therefore  by  Yevstafitch’s  representations  Pierre  was  induced 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


711 

to  defer  his  departure  till  next  day  to  allow  time  for  relays  of  horses  to 
be  sent  on  ahead. 

The  24th  was  a  bright  day  after  a  spell  of  bad  weather,  and  after 
dinner  on  that  day  Pierre  set  out  from  Moscow.  Changing  horses  in  the 
night  at  Perhushkovo,  Pierre  learned  that  a  great  battle  had  been  fought 
that  evening.  He  was  told  that  the  earth  had  been  vibrating  there  at 
Perhushkovo  from  the  cannon.  No  one  could  answer  Pierre’s  question 
whether  the  battle  was  a  victory  or  a  defeat.  This  was  the  battle  (#f  the 
24th  at  Shevardino.  Towards  dawn  Pierre  approached  Mozhaisk. 

Troops  were  quartered  on  all  the  houses  in  Mozhaisk,  and  at  the  inn, 
where  Pierre  was  met  by  his  coachman  and  postillion,  there  was  not  a 
room  to  spare ;  the  whole  place  was  full  of  officers. 

From  Mozhaisk  onwards  troops  were  halting  or  marching  everywhere. 
Cossacks,  foot  soldiers,  horse  soldiers,  waggons,  gun-carriages,  and  can¬ 
nons  were  evetywhere. 

Pierre  pushed  on  as  fast  as  possible,  and  the  further  he  got  and  the 
more  deeply  he  plunged  into  this  ocean  of  soldiers,  the  stronger  became 
the  thrill  of  uneasiness  and  of  a  new  pleasurable  sensation.  It  was  a  feeling 
akin  to  what  he  had  felt  at  the  Slobodsky  Palace  on  the  Tsar’s  visit,  a 
sense  of  the  urgent  necessity  of  taking  some  step  and  making  some  sacri¬ 
fice.  He  was  conscious  now  of  a  glad  sense  that  all  that  constitutes  the 
happiness  of  life,  comfort,  wealth,  even  life  itself,  were  all  dust  and  ashes, 
which  it  was  a  joy  to  fling  away  in  comparison  with  something  else. 
.  .  .  What  that  something  else  was  Pierre  could  not  have  said,  and  in¬ 
deed  he  did  not  seek  to  get  a  clear  idea,  for  whose  sake  and  for  what 
object  he  found  such  peculiar  joy  in  sacrificing  all.  He  was  not  interested 
in  knowing  the  object  of  the  sacrifice,  but  the  sacrifice  itself  afforded 
him  a  new  joyful  sensation. 


XIX 

On  the  24lh  was  fought  the  battle  before  the  redoubt  of  Shevardino;  on 
the  25th  not  a  shot  was  fired  on  either  side;  on  the  26th  was  fought  the 
battle  of  Borodino. 

How  and  with  what  object  were  the  battles  of  Shevardino  and  Borodino 
fought?  Why  was  the  battle  of  Borodino  fought?  There  was  not  the 
slightest  sense  in  it,  either  for  the  French  or  for  the  Russians.  The  im¬ 
mediate  result  of  it  was,  and  was  bound  to  be,  for  the  Russians,  that  we 
were  brought  nearer  to  the  destruction  of  Moscow  (the  very  thing  we 
dreaded  above  everything  in  the  world) ;  and  for  the  French,  that  they 
were  brought  nearer  to  the  destruction  of  their  army  (which  they,  too, 
dreaded  above  everything  in  the  world).  That  result  was  at  the  time 
perfectly  obvious,  and  yet  Napoleon  offered  battle,  and  Kutuzov  ac¬ 
cepted  it. 

If  military  leaders  were  guided  by  reasonable  considerations  only,  it 
would  seem  that  it  must  have  been  clear  to  Napoleon  that  in  advancing 


712  WAR  AND  PEACE 

two  thousand  versts  into  the  heart  of  the  country  and  giving  battle,  with 
the  probable  contingency  of  losing  a  quarter  of  his  men,  he  was  going  to 
certain  destruction;  and  that  it  must  have  been  equally  clear  to  Kutuzov 
that  in  accepting  that  battle  and  risking  the  loss  of  a  fourth  of  his  army, 
he  would  infallibly  lose  Moscow.  For  Kutuzov  this  was  mathematically 
clear,  as  clear  as  it  is  at  chess,  that  if  I  have  one  piece  less  than  my 
adversary  and  I  exchange  pieces,  I  am  certain  to  be  a  loser  by  it,  and 
therefore  must  avoid  exchanging  pieces.  When  my  adversary  has  sixteen 
pieces  and  I  have  fourteen,  I  am  only  one-eighth  weaker  than  he;  but 
when  we  have  exchanged  thirteen  pieces,  he  is  three  times  as  strong  as 
I  am. 

Up  to  the  battle  of  Borodino  our  forces  were  approximately  five-sixths 
of  the  French,  but  after  that  battle  they  were  only  one-half — that  is, 
before  the  battle  a  hundred  thousand  against  a  hundred  and  twenty 
thousand,  and  after  the  battle  fifty  thousand  against  a  hundred  thou¬ 
sand.  And  yet  the  shrewd  and  experienced  Kutuzov  fought  the  battle. 
Napoleon,  a  military  genius,  as  he  is  called,  gave  battle,  losing  a  fourth 
of  his  army  and  drawing  his  line  of  communications  out  further  than 
ever.  If  we  are  told  that  he  expected  the  taking  of  Moscow  to  complete 
the  campaign,  as  the  taking  of  Vienna  had  done,  we  may  say  that  there 
are  many  evidences  to  the  contrary.  Napoleon’s  historians  themselves  tell 
us  that  he  wanted  to  halt  as  soon  as  he  reached  Smolensk;  that  he  knew 
the  danger  of  his  extended  line,  and  that  he  knew  that  the  taking  of 
Moscow  would  not  be  the  end  of  the  campaign,  because  from  Smolensk 
he  had  learned  in  what  condition  the  towns  were  left  when  abandoned 
to  him,  and  he  had  not  received  a  single  reply  to  his  reiterated  expres¬ 
sions  of  a  desire  to  open  negotiations. 

In  giving  and  accepting  battle  at  Borodino,  Kutuzov  and  Napoleon 
acted  without  design  or  rational  plan.  After  the  accomplished  fact  his-  : 
torians  have  brought  forward  cunningly  devised  evidences  of  the  fore¬ 
sight  and  genius  of  the  generals,  who  of  all  the  involuntary  instruments 
of  the  world’s  history  were  the  most  slavish  and  least  independent  agents. 

The  ancients  have  transmitted  to  us  examples  of  epic  poems  in  which 
the  whole  interest  of  history  is  concentrated  in  a  few  heroic  figures;  and 
under  their  influence  we  are  still  unable  to  accustom  our  minds  to  the 
idea  that  history  of  that  kind  is  meaningless  at  our  stage  in  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  humanity. 

In  answer  to  the  next  question,  how  the  battles  of  Borodino  and  She- 
vardino  came  to  be  fought,  we  have  also  a  very  definite,  well-known, 
and  utterly  false  account.  All  the  historians  describe  the  affair  thus: 

The  Russian  army,  they  say,  in  its  retreat  from  Smolensk  sought  out 
the  best  position  for  a  general  engagement,  and  such  a  position  they 
found  in  Borodino.  The  Russians,  they  say,  fortified  the  position  before¬ 
hand,  to  the  left  of  the  road  (from  Moscow  to  Smolensk)  at  right  angles 
to  it,  from  Borodino  to  Utitsa,  at  the  very  place  where  the  battle  was 
fought. 

In  front  of  this  position,  they  tell  us,  a  fortified  earthwork  was  thrown 


WAR  AND  PEACE  71$ 

ud  on  the  Shevardino  redoubt  as  an  outpost  for  observation  of  the  enemy’s 
movements. 

On  the  24th,  we  are  told,  Napoleon  attacked  this  redoubt,  and  took 
it.  On  the  26th  he  attacked  the  whole  Russian  army,  which  had  taken 
up  its  position  on  the  plain  of  Borodino. 

This  is  what  we  are  told  in  the  histories,  and  all  that  is  perfectly  incor¬ 
rect,  as  any  one  may  easily  see  who  cares  to  go  into  the  matter. 

The  Russians  did  not  seek  out  the  best  position;  on  the  contrary,  on 
their  retreat  they  had  passed  by  many  positions  better  than  Borodino. 
They  did  not  make  a  stand  at  one  of  these  positions,  because  Kutuzov 
did  not  care  to  take  up  a  position  he  had  not  himself  selected,  because 
the  popular  clamour  for  a  battle  had  not  yet  been  so  strongly  expressed, 
because  Miloradovitch  had  not  yet  arrived  with  reinforcements  of  militia, 
and  for  countless  other  reasons. 

The  fact  remains  that  there  were  stronger  positions  on  the  road  the 
Russian  army  had  passed  along,  and  that  the  plain  of  Borodino,  on 
which  the  battle  was  fought,  is  in  no  respect  a  more  suitable  position 
than  any  other  spot  in  the  Russian  empire  to  which  one  might  point  at 
hazard  on  the  map. 

Far  from  having  fortified  the  position  on  the  left  at  right  angles  to  the 
road — that  is  the  spot  on  which  the  battle  was  fought — the  Russians 
never,  till  the  25th  of  August  1812,  dreamed  of  a  battle  being  possible 
on  that  spot.  The  proof  of  this  is,  first,  that  there  were  no  fortifications 
there  before  the  25th,  and  that  the  earthworks  begun  on  that  day  were 
not  completed  by  the  26th;  and,  secondly,  the  Shevardino  redoubt,  owing 
to  its  situation  in  front  of  the  position  on  which  the  battle  was  actually 
fought,  was  of  no  real  value.  With  what  object  was  that  redoubt  more 
strongly  fortified  than  any  of  the  other  points?  And  with  what  object 
was  every  effort  exhausted  and  six  thousand  men  sacrificed  to  defend  it 
till  late  at  night  on  the  24th?  A  picket  of  Cossacks  would  have  been 
enough  to  keep  watch  on  the  enemy’s  movements.  And  a  third  proof  that 
the  position  of  the  battlefield  was  not  foreseen,  and  that  the  redoubt  of 
Shevardino  was  not  the  foremost  point  of  that  position,  is  to  be  found 
in  the  fact  that  Barclay  de  Tolly  and  Bagration  were,  till  the  25th, 
under  the  impression  that  the  Shevardino  redoubt  was  the  left  flank  of 
the  position,  and  that  Kutuzov  himself,  in  the  report  written  in  hot  haste 
after  the  battle,  speaks  of  Shevardino  as  the  left  flank  of  the  position. 
Only  a  good  time  later,  when  reports  of  the  battle  were  written  at  leisure, 
the  incorrect  and  strange  statement  was  invented  (probably  to  cover 
the  blunders  of  the  commander-in-chief,  who  had,  of  course,  to  appear 
infallible)  that  the  Shevardino  redoubt  served  as  an  advance  post,  though 
it  was  in  reality  simply  the  fortified  point  of  the  left  flank,  and  that  the 
battle  of  Borodino  was  fought  by  us  on  a  fortified  position  selected  be¬ 
forehand  for  it,  though  it  was  in  reality  fought  on  a  position  quite  unfore¬ 
seen,  and  almost  unfortified. 

The  affair  obviously  took  place  in  this  way.  A  position  had  been  pitched 
upon  on  the  stream  Kolotcha,  which  intersects  the  high-road,  not  at  a 


7i4  WARANDPEACE 

right  angle,  but  at  an  acute  angle,  so  that  the  left  flank  was  at  Shevardino, 
the  right  near  the  village  of  Novoe,  and  the  centre  at  Borodino,  near  the  I 
confluence  of  the  Kolotcha  and  the  Voina.  Any  one  looking  at  the  plain  of 
Borodino,  and  not  considering  how  the  battle  actually  was  fought, 
would  pick  out  this  position,  covered  by  the  Kolotcha,  as  the  obvious 
one  for  an  army,  whose  object  was  to  check  the  advance  of  an  enemy 
marching  along  the  Smolensk  road  towards  Moscow. 

Napoleon,  riding  up  on  the  24th  to  Valuev,  did  not  (we  are  told  in 
the  histories)  see  the  position  of  the  Russians  from  Utitsa  to  Borodino  (he 
could  not  have  seen  that  position  since  it  did  not  exist),  and  did  not 
see  the  advance  posts  of  the  Russian  army,  but  in  the  pursuit  of  the 
Russian  rearguard  stumbled  upon  the  left  flank  of  the  Russian  position 
at  the  redoubt  of  Shevardino,  and,  to  the  surprise  of  the  Russians,  his 
troops  crossed  the  Kolotcha.  And  the  Russians,  since  it  was  too  late  for 
a  general  engagement,  withdrew  their  left  wing  from  the  position  they 
had  intended  to  occupy,  and  took  up  a  new  position,  which  had  not  been 
foreseen,  and  was  not  fortified.  By  crossing  to  the  left  bank  of  the  Kolo¬ 
tcha,  on  the  left  of  the  road,  Napoleon  shifted  the  whole  battle  from  right 
to  left  (looking  from  the  Russian  side),  and  transferred  it  to  the  plain 
between  Utitsa,  Semyonovskoye  and  Borodino — a  plain  which  in  itself 
was  a  no  more  favourable  position  than  any  other  plain  in  Russia — and 
>n  that  plain  was  fought  the  whole  battle  of  the  26th. 

Had  Napoleon  not  reached  the  Kolotcha  on  the  evening  of  the  24th, 
and  had  he  not  ordered  the  redoubt  to  be  attacked  at  once  that  evening, 
had  he  begun  the  attack  next  morning,  no  one  could  have  doubted  that 
the  Shevardino  redoubt  was  the  left  flank  of  the  Russian  position;  and 
the  battle  would  have  been  fought  as  we  expected.  In  that  case  we  should 
probably  have  defended  the  Shevardino  redoubt  by  our  left  flank  even 
more  obstinately;  we  should  have  attacked  Napoleon  in  the  centre  or  on 
the  right,  and  the  general  engagement  would  have  been  fought  on  the 
24th  on  the  position  prepared  and  fortified  for  it.  But  as  the  attack  was 
made  on  our  left  flank  in  the  evening  after  the  retreat  of  our  rearguard, 
that  is,  immediately  after  the  action  at  Gridnevo,  and  as  the  Russian 
generals  would  not,  or  could  not,  begin  the  general  engagement  on  the 
evening  of  the  24th,  the  first  and  most  important  action  of  the  battle  of 
Borodino  was  lost  on  the  24th,  and  that  loss  led  inevitably  to  the  loss 
of  the  battle  fought  on  the  26th. 

After  the  loss  of  the  Shevardino  redoubt,  we  found  ourselves  on  the 
morning  of  the  25th  with  our  left  flank  driven  from  its  position,  and  were 
forced  to  draw  in  the  left  wing  of  our  position  and  hurriedly  fortify  it 
where  we  could. 

So  that  on  the  26th  of  August  the  Russian  troops  were  only  defended 
by  weak,  unfinished  earthworks,  and  the  disadvantage  of  that  position 
was  aggravated  by  the  fact  that  the  Russian  generals,  not  fully  recognis¬ 
ing  the  facts  of  the  position  (the  loss  of  the  position  on  the  left  flank, 
and  the  shifting  of  the  whole  field  of  the  coming  battle  from  right  to  left), 


WARANDPEACE  7*5 

retained  their  extended  formation  from  Novoe  to  Utitsa,  and,  conse¬ 
quently  had  to  transfer  their  troops  from  right  to  left  during  the  battle. 
Consequently,  we  had  during  the  whole  battle  to  face  the  whole  French 
army  attacking  our  left  wing,  with  our  forces  of  half  the  strength. 

(Poniatovsky’s  action  facing  Utitsa  and  Uvarov’s  action  against  the 
French  right  flank  were  quite  independent  of  the  general  course  of  the 
battle.) 

And  so  the  battle  of  Borodino  was  fought,  not  at  all  as,  in  order  to 
cover  the  blunders  of  our  commanders,  it  is  described  by  our  historians, 
whose  accounts,  consequently,  diminish  the  credit  due  to  the  Russian 
army  and  the  Russian  people.  The  battle  of  Borodino  was  not  fought  on 
a  carefully  picked  and  fortified  position,  with  forces  only  slightly  weaker 
on  the  Russian  side.  After  the  loss  of  the  Shevardino  redoubt,  the  Rus¬ 
sians  fought  on  an  open,  almost  unfortified  position,  with  forces  half  the 
strength  of  the  French,  that  is,  in  conditions  in  which  it  was  not  merely 
senseless  to  fight  for  ten  hours  and  gain  a  drawn  battle,  but  incredibly 
difficult  to  keep  the  army  for  three  hours  together  from  absolute  rout  and 
flight. 


XX 

On  the  morning  of  the  25th  Pierre  drove  out  of  Mozhaisk.  On  the  slope 
of  an  immense,  steep,  and  winding  hill,  leading  out  of  the  town,  Pierre 
got  out  of  the  carriage,  and  walked  by  a  cathedral  on  the  right  of  the 
hill,  where  a  service  was  being  performed.  A  cavalry  regiment  followed 
him  down  the  hill,  the  singers  of  the  regiment  in  front.  A  train  of  carts 
came  up  the  hill  towards  them,  filled  with  wounded  from  the  previous 
day’s  engagement.  The  peasant  drivers  kept  running  from  side  to  side, 
shouting  and  whipping  the  horses.  The  carts,  in  each  of  which  three  or 
four  wounded  soldiers  were  lying  or  sitting,  jolted  up  and  down  on  the 
stones  that  had  been  thrown  on  the  steep  ascent  to  mend  the  road.  The 
wounded  men,  pale  and  bandaged  up,  with  compressed  lips  and  knitted 
brows,  clung  to  the  sides,  as  they  were  shaken  and  jolted  in  the  carts. 
Almost  all  of  them  stared  with  naive  and  childlike  curiosity  at  Pierre’s 
white  hat  and  green  coat. 

Pierre’s  coachman  shouted  angrily  at  the  train  of  wounded  men  to 
keep  to  one  side  of  the  road.  The  cavalry  regiment,  coming  down  the 
hill  in  time  to  their  song,  overtook  Pierre’s  chaise  and  blocked  the  road. 
Pierre  stopped,  keeping  close  to  the  edge  of  the  road  that  had  been  hol¬ 
lowed  out  in  the  hill.  The  sun  did  not  reach  over  the  side  of  the  hill  to  the 
road,  and  there  it  felt  cold  and  damp.  But  overhead  it  was  a  bright 
August  morning,  and  the  chimes  rang  out  merrily.  One  cart  full  of 
wounded  men  came  to  a  standstill  at  the  edge  of  the  road  quite  close  to 
Pierre.  The  driver,  in  bast  shoes,  ran  panting  up  to  his  cart,  thrust  a  stone 
under  the  hind  wheels,  which  were  without  tires,  and  began  setting 
straight  the  breech  on  his  horse. 

An  old  wounded  soldier,  with  his  arm  in  a  sling,  walking  behind  the 


716  WARANDPEACE 

cart,  caught  hold  of  it  with  his  uninjured  arm,  and  looked  round  at  Pierre. 

‘Well,  fellow-countryman,  are  we  to  be  put  down  here  or  taken  on  to 
Moscow?’  he  said. 

Pierre  was  so  lost  in  thought  that  he  did  not  hear  the  question.  He 
looked  from  the  cavalry  regiment,  which  was  now  meeting  the  train 
of  wounded,  to  the  cart  by  which  he  stood,  with  the  two  wounded 
men  sitting,  and  one  lying  down  in  it.  One.  of  the  soldiers  sitting 
in  the  cart  had  probably  been  wounded  in  the  cheek.  His  whole  head 
was  done  up  in  bandages,  and  one  cheek  was  swollen  as  large  as  a  baby’s 
head.  All  his  mouth  and  nose  were  on  one  side.  This  soldier  was  looking 
at  the  cathedral  and  crossing  himself.  Another,  a  young  fellow,  a  light¬ 
haired  recruit,  as  white  as  though  there  were  not  a  drop  of  blood  in  his 
thin  face,  gazed  with  a  fixed,  good-natured  smile  at  Pierre.  The  third  lay 
so  that  his  face  could  not  be  seen.  The  singers  of  the  cavalry  regiment 
passed  close  by  the  cart. 

‘A!  za-pro-pa-la  .  . 

they  sang  the  military  dance  tune.  As  though  seconding  them,  though  in 
a  different  tone  of  gaiety,  clanged  out  the  metallic  notes  of  the  chimes  at 
the  top  of  the  hill.  And  the  hot  rays  of  the  sun  bathed  the  top  of  the 
opposite  slope  with  sunshine  sparkling  with  another  suggestion  of  gaiety. 
But  where  Pierre  stood  under  the  hillside,  by  the  cart  full  of  wounded 
soldiers,  and  the  panting,  little  nag,  it  was  damp,  overcast,  and  dismal. 

The  soldier  with  the  wounded  cheek  looked  angrily  at  the  singing  horse 
soldiers. 

‘Oh,  the  smart  fellows!’  he  murmured  reproachfully. 

‘It’s  not  soldiers  only,  but  peasants,  too,  I  have  seen  to-day!  Peasants, 
too,  they  are  hunting  up,’  said  the  soldier  standing  by  the  cart,  address¬ 
ing  himself  to  Pierre,  with  a  melancholy  smile.  ‘They  can’t  pick  and 
choose  now.  .  .  .  They  want  to  mass  all  the  people  together- — it’s  a 
matter  of  Moscow,  you  see.  There  is  only  one  thing  to  do  now.’  In  spite 
of  the  vagueness  of  the  soldier’s  words,  Pierre  fully  grasped  his  mean¬ 
ing,  and  nodded  his  head  approvingly. 

The  road  was  clear  once  more,  and  Pierre  walked  downhill,  and  drove 
on  further. 

Pierre  drove  on,  looking  on  both  sides  of  the  road  for  familiar  faces, 
and  meeting  none  but  unfamiliar,  military  faces,  belonging  to  all  sorts 
of  regiments,  and  all  staring  with  the  same  surprise  at  his  white  hat  and 
green  coat. 

After  driving  four  versts,  for  the  first  time  he  met  an  acquaintance,  and 
greeted  him  joyfully.  This  was  a  doctor,  one  of  the  heads  of  the  medical 
staff.  He  drove  to  meet  Pierre  in  a  covered  gig,  with  a  young  doctor  sitting 
beside  him;  and  recognising  Pierre,  he  called  to  the  Cossack,  who  sat  on 
the  driver’s  seat,  and  told  him  to  stop. 

‘Count,  your  excellency,  how  do  you  come  here?’  asked  the  doctor. 

‘Oh,  I  wanted  to  have  a  look  .  . 


WAR  AND  PEACE  717 

‘Oh  well,  there  will  be  something  to  look  at  .  .  .’  Pierre  got  out  of  his 
:arriage,  and  stopped  to  have  a  talk  with  the  doctor,  explaining  to  him 
lis  plan  for  taking  part  in  the  battle. 

The  doctor  advised  Bezuhov  to  go  straight  to  his  highness. 

‘Why,  you  would  be  God  knows  where  during  the  battle,  out  of  sight,’ 
le  said,  with  a  glance  at  his  young  companion;  ‘and  his  highness  knows 
70U  anyway,  and  will  give  you  a  gracious  reception.  That’s  what  I  should 
io,  my  friend,’  said  the  doctor. 

The  doctor  seemed  tireci  and  hurried. 

‘So  you  think.  ...  But  one  thing  more  I  wanted  to  ask  you,  where 
s  the  position  exactly?’  said  Pierre. 

‘The  position?’  said  the  doctor;  ‘well,  that’s  not  in  my  line.  Drive  on 
0  Tatarinovo,  there’s  a  great  deal  of  digging  going  on  there.  There  you'll 
;ome  out  on  a  mound;  from  there  you  get  a  view,’  said  the  doctor. 

‘A  view  from  it?  .  .  .  If  you  would  .  .  .’ 

But  the  doctor  interrupted,  and  moved  toward  his  gig. 

‘I  would  have  shown  you  the  way,  but  by  God,  you  see’  (the  doctor 
nade  a  significant  gesture),  ‘I’m  racing  to  the  commander  of  the  corps. 
iVe’re  in  such  a  fix,  you  see  .  .  .  you  know,  count,  there’s  to  be  a  battle 
;o-morrow;  with  a  hundred  thousand  troops,  we  must  reckon  on  twenty 
thousand  wounded  at  least;  and  we  haven’t  the  stretchers,  nor  beds,  nor 
ittendants,  nor  doctors  for  six  thousand.  There  are  ten  thousand  carts; 
out  we  want  other  things;  one  must  manage  as  one  can.’ 

The  strange  idea  that  of  those  thousands  of  men,  alive  and  well,  young 
and  old,  who  had  been  staring  with  such  light-hearted  amusement  at  his 
hat,  twenty  thousand  were  inevitably  doomed  to  wounds  and  death  (per¬ 
haps  the  very  men  whom  he  had  seen)  made  a  great  impression  on  Pierre. 

‘They  will  die,  perhaps,  to-morrow;  how  can  they  think  of  anything 
but  death?’  And  suddenly,  by  some  latent  connection  of  ideas,  he  saw  a 
vivid  picture  of  the  hillside  of  Mozhaisk,  the  carts  of  wounded  men,  the 
:himes,  the  slanting  sunshine,  and  the  singing  of  the  cavalry  regiment. 

‘They  were  going  into  battle,  and  meeting  wounded  soldiers,  and  never 
for  a  minute  paused  to  think  what  was  in  store  for  them,  but  went  by 
ind  winked  at  their  wounded  comrades.  And  of  all  those,  twenty  thou¬ 
sand  are  doomed  to  death,  and  they  can  wonder  at  my  hat!  Strange!’ 
thought  Pierre,  as  he  went  on  towards  Tatarinovo. 

Carriages,  waggons,  and  crowds  of  orderlies  and  sentinels  were  standing 
ibout  a  gentleman’s  house  on  the  left  side  of  the  road.  The  commander- 
n-chief  was  putting  up  there.  But  when  Pierre  arrived,  he  found  his  high- 
iess  and  almost  all  the  staff  were  out.  They  had  all  gone  to  the  church 
service.  Pierre  pushed  on  ahead  to  Gorky;  and  driving  uphill  into  a  little 
village  street,  Tierre  saw  for  the  first  time  the  peasants  of  the  militia 
n  white  shirts,  with  crosses  on  their  caps.  With  loud  talk  and  laughter, 
;ager  and  perspiring,  they  were  working  on  the  right  of  the  road  at  a  huge 
■nound  overgrown  with  grass. 

Some  of  them  were  digging  out  the  earth,  others  were  carrying  the  earth 
iway  in  wheelbarrows,  while  a  third  lot  stood  doing  nothing. 


71S  WAR  AND  PEACE 

There  were  two  officers  on  the  knoll  giving  them  instructions.  Seeing 
these  peasants,  who  were  unmistakably  enjoying  the  novelty  of  their 
position  as  soldiers,  Pierre  thought  again  of  the  wounded  soldiers  at  Moz¬ 
haisk,  and  he  understood  what  the  soldier  had  tried  to  express  by  the 
words  ‘they  want  to  mass  all  the  people  together.’  The  sight  of  these 
bearded  peasants  toiling  on  the  field  of  battle  with  their  queer,  clumsy 
boots,  with  their  perspiring  necks,  and  here  and  there  with  shirts  unbut¬ 
toned  showing  their  sun-burnt  collar-bones,  impressed  Pierre  more 
strongly  than  anything  he  had  yet  seen  and  he^rd  with  the  solemnity  and 
gravity  of  the  moment. 

XXI 

Pierre  got  out  of  his  carriage,  and  passing  by  the  toiling  peasants, 
clambered  up  the  knoll  from  which  the  doctor  had  told  him  he  could  get 
a  view  of  the  field  of  battle. 

It  was  eleven  o’clock  in  the  morning.  The  sun  was  a  little  on  the  left, 
and  behind  Pierre,  and  in  the  pure,  clear  air,  the  huge  panorama  that' 
stretched  in  an  amphitheatre  before  him  from  the  rising  ground  lay  bathed 
in  brilliant  sunshine. 

The  Smolensk  high-road  ran  winding  through  that  amphitheatre,  in¬ 
tersecting  it  towards  the  left  at  the  top,  and  passing  through  a  village 
with  a  white  church,  which  lay  some  five  hundred  paces  before  and  below 
the  knoll.  This  was  Borodino.  The  road  passed  below  the  village,  crossed 
a  bridge,  and  ran  winding  uphill  and  downhill,  mounting  up  and  up  to 
the  hamlet  of  Valuev,  visible  six  versts  away,  where  Napoleon  now  was. 
Behind  Valuev  the  road  disappeared  into  a  copse  turning  yellow  on  the 
horizon.  In  this  copse  of  birch-  and  pine-trees,  on  the  right  of  the  road, 
could  be  seen  far  away  the  shining  cross  and  belfry  of  the  Kolotsky  mon¬ 
astery.  Here  and  there  in  the  blue  distance,  to  right  and  to  left  of  the 
copse  and  the  road,  could  be  seen  smoking  camp-fires  and  indistinct 
masses  of  our  troops  and  the  enemy’s.  On  the  right,  along  the  course  of 
the  rivers  Kolotcha  and  Moskva,  the  country  was  broken  and  hilly. 
Through  the  gaps  between  the  hills  could  be  seen  the  villages  of  Bezzu- 
bovo  and  Zaharino.  On  the  left  the  ground  was  more  level;  there  were 
fields  of  corn  and  a  smoking  village  that  had  been  set  on  fire — Semyo- 
novskoye. 

Everything  Pierre  saw  was  so  indefinite,  that  in  no  part  of  the  scene 
before  him  could  he  find  anything  fully  corresponding  to  his  preconcep¬ 
tions.  There  was  nowhere  a  field  of  battle  such  as  he  had  expected  to  see, 
nothing  but  fields,  dells,  troops,  woods,  camp-fires,  villages,  mounds,  and 
streams.  With  all  Pierre’s  efforts,  he  could  not  discover  in  the  living  land¬ 
scape  a  military  position.  He  could  not  even  distinguish  between  our 
troops  and  the  enemy’s. 

‘I  must  ask  some  one  who  understands  it,’  he  thought,  and  he  addressed 
the  officer,  who  was  looking  with  curiosity  at  his  huge,  unmilitary  figure. 

‘Allow  me  to  ask,’  Pierre  said,  ‘what  village  is  that  before  us?’ 


WAR  AND  PEACE  ynj. 

‘Burdino,  isn’t  it  called?’  said  the  officer,  turning  inquiringly  to  his 
comrade. 

‘Borodino,’  the  other  corrected. 

The  officer,  obviously  pleased  at  an  opportunity  for  conversation,  went 
nearer  to  Pierre. 

‘Are  these  our  men  there?’  asked  Pierre. 

‘Yes,  and  away  further,  those  are  the  French,’  said  the  officer.  ‘There 
they  are,  there  you  can  see  them.’ 

‘Where?  where?’  asked  Pierre. 

‘One  can  see  them  with  the  naked  eye.  Look!’  The  officer  pointed  to 
smoke  rising  on  the  left  beyond  the  river,  and  the  same  stern  and  grave 
expression  came  into  his  face  that  Pierre  had  noticed  in  many  of  the  faces 
he  had  met. 

‘Ah,  that’s  the  French!  And  there?  .  .  .’  Pierre  pointed  to  a  knoll  on 
the  left  about  which  troops  could  be  seen. 

‘Those  are  our  men.’ 

‘Oh,  indeed!  And  there?  .  .  .’  Pierre  pointed  to  another  mound  in  the 
distance,  with  a  big  tree  on  it,  near  a  village  that  could  be  seen  in  a  gap 
between  the  hills,  where  there  was  a  dark  patch  and  the  smoke  of  camp¬ 
fires. 

‘Ah!  that’s  he  again!’  said  the  officer.  (It  was  the  redoubt  of  Shevar- 
dino.)  ‘Yesterday  that  was  ours,  but  now  it’s  his.’ 

‘So  what  is  our  position,  then?’ 

‘Our  position?’  said  the  officer,  with  a  smile  of  satisfaction.  ‘I  can  de¬ 
scribe  it  very  clearly,  because  I  have  had  to  do  with  the  making  of  al¬ 
most  all  our  fortifications.  There,  our  centre,  do  you  see,  is  here  at  Boro¬ 
dino.’  He  pointed  to  the  village  with  the  white  church,  in  front  of  them. 
‘There’s  the  ford  across  the  Kolotcha.  Here,  do  you  see,  where  the  rows 
of  mown  hay  are  still  lying  in  the  low  ground,  there’s  the  bridge.  That’s 
our  centre.  Our  right  flank  is  away  yonder’  (he  pointed  to  the  right,  far 
away  to  the  hollows  among  the  hills) ,  ‘there  is  the  river  Moskva,  and  there 
we  have  thrown  up  three  very  strong  redoubts.  The  left  flank  .  .  .’  there 
the  officer  paused.  ‘It’s  hard  to  explain,  you  see.  .  .  .  Yesterday  our  left 
flank  was  over  there,  at  Shevardino,  do  you  see,  where  the  oak  is.  But 
now  we  have  drawn  back  our  left  wing,  now  it’s  over  there, — you  see  the 
village  and  the  smoke — that’s  Semyonovskoye,  and  here — look,’  he 
pointed  to  Raevsky’s  redoubt.  ‘Only  the  battle  won’t  be  there,  most  likely. 
He  has  moved  his  troops  here,  but  that’s  a  blind;  he  will  probably  try  to 
get  round  on  the  right.  Well,  but  however  it  may  be,  there’ll  be  a  lot  of 
men  missing  at  roll-call  to-morrow!’  said  the  officer. 

The  old  sergeant,  who  came  up  during  the  officer’s  speech,  had  waited 
in  silence  for  his  superior  officer  to  finish  speaking.  But  at  this  point  he 
interrupted  him  in  undisguised  annoyance  at  his  last  words. 

‘We  have  to  send  for  gabions,’  he  said  severely. 

The  officer  seemed  abashed,  as  though  he  were  fully  aware  that  though 
he  might  think  how  many  men  would  be  missing  next  day,  he  ought  not 
to  talk  about  it. 


720  WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Well,  send  the  third  company  again,’  he  said  hurriedly.  ‘And  who  are 
you,  not  one  of  the  doctors?’ 

‘No,  I  am  nothing  in  particular,’  answered  Pierre.  And  he  went  down¬ 
hill  again,  passing  the  peasant  militiamen. 

‘Ah,  the  damned  beasts!  ’  said  the  officer,  pinching  his  nose,  and  hurry¬ 
ing  by  them  with  Pierre. 

‘Here  they  come!  .  .  .  They  are  bringing  her,  they  are  coming.  .  .  . 
Here  she  is  .  .  .  they’ll  be  here  in  a  minute,’  cried  voices  suddenly,  and 
officers,  soldiers,  and  peasants  ran  forward  along  the  road. 

A  church  procession  was  coming  up  the  hill  from  Borodino.  In  front  of 
it  a  regiment  of  infantry  marched  smartly  along  the  dusty  road,  with 
their  shakoes  off  and  their  muskets  lowered.  Behind  the  infantry  came 
the  sounds  of  church  singing. 

Soldiers  and  peasants  came  running  down  bareheaded  to  meet  it,  over¬ 
taking  Pierre. 

‘They  are  bringing  the  Ploly  Mother!  Our  defender  .  .  .  the  Holy 
Mother  of  Iversky!  .  .  .’ 

‘The  Holy  Mother  of  Smolensk  .  .  .’  another  corrected. 

The  militiamen  who  had  been  in  the  village  and  those  who  had  been 
working  at  the  battery,  flinging  down  their  spades,  ran  to  meet  the  pro¬ 
cession.  The  battalion  marching  along  the  dusty  road  was  followed  by 
priests  in  church  robes,  a  little  old  man  in  a  hood  with  attendant  deacons 
and  choristers.  Behind  them  came  soldiers  and  officers  bearing  a  huge 
holy  picture,  with  tarnished  face  in  a  setting  of  silver.  This  was  the  holy 
ikon  that  had  been  brought  away  from  Smolensk,  and  had  accompanied 
the  army  ever  since.  Behind,  before,  and  all  around  it,  walked  or  ran 
crowds  of  soldiers  with  bared  heads,  bowing  to  the  earth. 

On  the  top  of  the  hill  the  procession  stopped ;  the  men  bearing  the  holy 
picture  on  a  linen  cloth  were  relieved  by  others;  the  deacons  relighted 
their  censers,  and  the  service  began.  The  burning  rays  of  the  sun  beat 
vertically  down  on  the  crowds;  a  faint,  fresh  breeze  played  with  the  hair 
of  their  bare  heads,  and  fluttered  the  ribbons  with  which  the  holy  picture 
was  decked;  the  singing  sounded  subdued  under  the  open  sky.  An  im¬ 
mense  crowd — officers,  soldiers,  and  militiamen — stood  round,  all  with 
bare  heads.  In  a  space  apart,  behind  the  priests  and  deacons,  stood  the 
persons  of  higher  rank.  A  bald  general,  with  the  order  of  St.  George  on 
his  neck,  stood  directly  behind  the  priest.  He  was  unmistakably  a  Ger¬ 
man,  for  he  stood,  not  crossing  himself,  patiently  waiting  for  the  end 
of  the  service,  to  which  he  thought  it  right  to  listen,  probably  as  a  means 
of  arousing  the  patriotism  of  the  Russian  peasantry;  another  general 
stood  in  a  martial  pose  and  swung  his  arm  before  his  chest,  looking  about 
him  as  he  made  the  sign  of  the  cross.  Pierre,  standing  among  the  peasants, 
recognised  in  this  group  of  higher  rank  several  persons  he  knew.  But  he 
did  not  look  at  them;  his  whole  attention  was  engrossed  by  the  serious 
expression  of  the  faces  in  the  crowd,  soldiers  and  peasants  alike,  all  gazing 
with  the  same  eagerness  at  the  holy  picture.  As  soon  as  the  weary  choris¬ 
ters  (it  was  their  twentieth  service)  began  languidly  singing  their  habit-  ' 


WARANDPEACE  721 

lal  chant,  ‘O  Mother  of  God,  save  Thy  servants  from  calamity,’  and 
>riest  and  deacon  chimed  in,  ‘For  to  Thee  we  all  fly  as  our  invincible 
kilwark  and  Protectress,’  there  was  a  gleam  on  every  face  of  that  sense 
if  the  solemnity  of  the  coming  moment,  which  he  had  seen  on  the  hill  at 
dozhaisk  and  by  glimpses  in  so  many  of  the  faces  meeting  him  that 
norning.  And  heads  were  bowed  lower,  while  locks  of  hair  fluttered  in 
he  breeze,  and  there  was  the  sound  of  sighing  and  beating  the  breast  as 
he  soldiers  crossed  themselves. 

The  crowd  suddenly  parted  and  pressed  upon  Pierre.  Some  one,  prob- 
bly  a  very  great  person,  judging  by  the  promptitude  with  which  they 
nade  way  for  him,  was  approaching  the  holy  picture. 

It  was  Kutuzov,  who  had  been  making  the  round  of  the  position.  On 
lis  way  back  to  Tatarinovo,  he  joined  the  service.  Pierre  at  once  recog- 
lised  him  from  his  peculiar  figure,  which  marked  him  out  at  once. 

In  a  long  military  coat,  with  his  enormously  stout  figure  and  bent  back, 
vith  his  white  head  uncovered,  and  his  blind  white  eye,  conspicuous  in 
lis  puffy  face,  Kutuzov  walked  with  his  waddling,  swaying  gait  into  the 
ing  and  stood  behind  the  priest.  He  crossed  himself  with  an  habitual 
gesture,  bent  down,  with  his  hand  touching  the  earth,  and,  sighing  heavily, 
lowed  his  grey  head.  Kutuzov  was  followed  by  Bennigsen  and  his  suite, 
n  spite  of  the  presence  of  the  commander-in-chief,  which  drew  the  at- 
ention  of  all  persons  of  higher  rank,  the  militiamen  and  soldiers  went 
in  praying  without  looking  at  him. 

When  the  service  was  over,  Kutuzov  went  up  to  the  holy  picture, 
Iropped  heavily  down  on  his  knees,  bowing  to  the  earth,  and  for  a  long 
ime  he  attempted  to  get  up,  and  was  unable  from  his  weakness  and 
leavy  weight.  His  grey  head  twitched  with  the  strain.  At  last  he  did  get 
ip,  and  putting  out  his  lips  in  a  naive,  childlike  way  kissed  the  holy 
ncture,  and  again  bowed  down,  with  one  hand  touching  the  ground.  The 
ither  generals  followed  his  example;  then  the  officers,  and  after  them  the 
.oldiers  and  militiamen  ran  up  with  excited  faces,  pushing  each  other, 
ind  shoving  breathlessly  forward. 


XXII 

Staggering  from  the  crush  of  the  crowd  that  carried  him  along  with  it, 
Pierre  looked  about  him. 

‘Count!  Pyotr  Kirillitch!  How  did  you  come  here?’  said  a  voice. 
Pierre  looked  round. 

Boris  Drubetskoy,  brushing  his  knee  with  his  hand  (he  had  probably 
nade  it  dusty  in  his  devotions  before  the  holy  picture)  came  up  to  Pierre 
railing.  Boris  was  elegantly  dressed,  though  his  get-up  was  of  a  style 
ippropriate  to  active  service.  He  wore  a  long  military  coat  and  had  a 
■iding-whip  slung  across  his  shoulder,  as  Kutuzov  had. 

Kutuzov  had  meanwhile  reached  the  village,  and  sat  down  in  the  shade 
)f  the  nearest  house,  on  a  bench  which  one  Cossack  ran  to  fetch  him,  and 


722  WAR  AND  PEACE 

another  hastily  covered  with  a  rug.  An  immense  retinue  of  magnificent 
officers  surrounded  him. 

The  procession  was  moving  on  further,  accompanied  by  the  crowd. 
Pierre  stood  still  about  thirty  paces  from  Kutuzov,  talking  to  Boris. 

He  explained  to  him  his  desire  to  take  part  in  the  battle  and  to  inspect 
the  position. 

‘I  tell  you  what  you  had  better  do/  said  Boris.  T  will  do  the  honours 
of  the  camp  for  you.  You  will  see  everything  best  of  all  from  where  Count 
Bennigsen  is  to  be.  I  am  in  attendance  on  him.  I  will  mention  it  to  him.  i 
And  if  you  like  to  go  over  the  position,  come  along  with  us;  we  are  just 
going  to  the  left  flank.  And  then  when  we  come  back,  I  beg  you  will 
stay  the  night  with  me,  and  we  will  make  up  a  game  of  cards.  You  know 
Dmitry  Sergeitch,  of  course.  He  is  staying  there.'  He  pointed  to  the  ! 
third  house  in  Gorky. 

‘But  I  should  have  liked  to  have  seen  the  right  flank.  I’m  told  it  is 
very  strong/  said  Pierre.  ‘I  should  have  liked  to  go  from  the  river  Moskva 
through  the  whole  position.’ 

‘Well,  that  you  can  do  later,  but  the  great  thing  is  the  left  flank.’ 

‘Yes,  yes.  And  where  is  Prince  Bolkonsky’s  regiment?  can  you  point 
it  out  to  me?’  asked  Pierre. 

‘Andrey  Nikolaevitch’s?  We  shall  pass  it.  I  will  take  you  to  him.’ 

‘What  about  the  left  flank?’  asked  Pierre. 

‘To  tell  you  the  truth,  between  ourselves,  there’s  no  making  out  how 
things  stand  with  the  left  flank/  said  Boris  confidentially,  dropping  his 
voice.  ‘Count  Bennigsen  had  proposed  something  quite  different.  He  pro¬ 
posed  to  fortify  that  knoll  over  there,  not  at  all  as  it  has  .  .  .  but  .  .  .’ 
Boris  shrugged  his  shoulders.  ‘His  highness  would  not  have  it  so,  or  he 
was  talked  over.  You  see  .  .  .’  Boris  did  not  finish  because  Kaisarov, 
Kutuzov’s  adjutant,  at  that  moment  came  up  to  Pierre.  ‘Ah,  Paisy  Ser¬ 
geitch/  said  Boris  to  him,  with  an  unembarrassed  smile,  ‘I  am  trying,  you 
see,  to  explain  the  position  to  the  count.  It’s  amazing  how  his  highness 
can  gauge  the  enemy’s  plans  so  accurately!’ 

‘Do  you  mean  about  the  left  flank?’  said  Kaisarov. 

‘Yes,  yes;  just  so.  Our  left  flank  is  now  extremely  strong.’ 

Although  Kutuzov  had  made  a  clearance  of  the  superfluous  persons  on 
the  staff,  Boris  had  succeeded,  after  the  change  he  had  made,  in  retain¬ 
ing  a  post  at  headquarters.  Boris  was  in  attendance  on  Count  Bennigsen. 
Count  Bennigsen,  like  every  one  on  whom  Boris  had  been  in  attendance, 
looked  on  young  Prince  Drubetskoy  as  an  invaluable  man.  Among  the 
chief  officers  of  the  army  there  were  two  clearly  defined  parties:  Kutuzov’s 
party  and  the  party  of  Bennigsen,  the  chief  of  the  staff.  Boris  belonged 
to  the  latter  faction,  and  no  one  succeeded  better  than  he  did  in  paying 
the  most  servile  adulation  to  Kutuzov,  while  managing  to  insinuate  that 
the  old  fellow  was  not  good  for  much,  and  that  everything  was  really 
due  to  the  initiative  of  Bennigsen.  Now  the  decisive  moment  of  battle 
had  come,  which  must  mean  the  downfall  of  Kutuzov  and  the  transfer 
of  the  command  to  Bennigsen,  or  if  Kutuzov  should  gain  the  battle,  the 


WARANDPEACE  723 

credit  of  it  must  be  skilfully  put  down  to  Bennigsen.  In  any  case  many 
promotions  were  bound  to  be  made,  and  many  new  men  were  certain 
to  be  brought  to  the  front  after  the  morrow.  And  Boris  was  consequently 
in  a  state  of  nervous  exhilaration  all  that  day. 

Others  of  Pierre’s  acquaintances  joined  him;  and  he  had  not  time  to 
answer  all  the  questions  about  Moscow  that  were  showered  upon  him, 
nor  to  listen  to  all  they  had  to  tell  him.  Every  face  wore  a  look  of  excite¬ 
ment  and  agitation.  But  it  seemed  to  Pierre  that  the  cause  of  the  ex¬ 
citement  that  was  betrayed  by  some  of  those  faces  was  to  be  found  in 
questions  of  personal  success,  and  he  could  not  forget  that  other  look  of 
excitement  he  had  seen  in  the  other  faces,  that  suggested  problems,  not  of 
personal  success,  but  the  universal  questions  of  life  and  death. 

Kutuzov  noticed  Pierre’s  figure  and  the  group  gathered  about  him. 

‘Call  him  to  me,’  said  Kutuzov. 

An  adjutant  communicated  his  highness’s  desire,  and  Pierre  went  to¬ 
wards  the  bench.  But  a  militiaman  approached  Kutuzov  before  him.  It 
was  Dolohov. 

‘How  does  that  man  come  to  be  here?’  asked  Pierre. 

‘Oh,  he’s  such  a  sly  dog,  he  pokes  himself  in  everywhere!’  was  the  an¬ 
swer  he  received.  ‘He  has  been  degraded  to  the  ranks,  you  know.  Now 
he  wants  to  pop  up  again.  He  has  made  plans  of  some  sort  and  spies  in 
the  enemy’s  lines  at  night  .  .  .  but  he’s  a  plucky  fellow  .  .  .’ 

Pierre  took  off  his  hat  and  bowed  respectfully  to  Kutuzov. 

‘I  decided  that  if  I  were  to  lay  the  matter  before  your  highness,  you 
might  dismiss  me  or  say  that  you  were  aware  of  the  facts  and  then  I 
shouldn’t  lose  anything,’  Dolohov  was  saying. 

‘To  be  sure.’ 

‘And  if  I  were  right,  I  should  do  a  service  for  my  fatherland,  for  which 
I  am  ready  to  die.’ 

‘To  be  sure  ...  to  be  sure  .  . 

‘And  if  your  highness  has  need  of  a  man  who  would  not  spare  his  skin, 
graciously  remember  me  .  .  .  perhaps  I  might  be  of  use  to  your  high¬ 
ness  .  .  .’ 

‘To  be  sure  ...  to  be  sure  .  .  .’  repeated  Kutuzov,  looking  with  a 
laughing,  half-closed  eye  at  Pierre. 

Meanwhile  Boris,  with  his  courtier-like  tact,  had  moved  close  to  the 
commander-in-chief  with  Pierre,  and  in  the  most  natural  manner,  in  a 
quiet  voice,  as  though  continuing  his  previous  conversation,  he  said  to 
Pierre : 

‘The  peasant  militiamen  have  simply  put  on  clean,  white  shirts  to  be 
ready  to  die.  What  heroism,  count!’ 

Boris  said  this  to  Pierre  with  the  evident  intention  of  being  overheard 
by  his  excellency.  He  knew  Kutuzov’s  attention  would  be  caught  by 
those  wo-ds,  and  his  highness  did  in  fact  address  him. 

‘What  are  you  saying  about  the  militia?’  he  said  to  Boris. 

‘They  have  put  on  white  shirts,  your  highness,  by  way  of  preparing  for 
to-morrow,  to  be  ready  for  death.’ 


724  WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Ah!  ...  A  marvellous,  unique  people,’  said  Kutuzov,  and  closing 
his  eyes  he  shook  his  head.  ‘A  unique  people!’  he  repeated,  with  a  sigh. 

‘Do  you  want  a  sniff  of  powder?’  he  said  to  Pierre.  ‘Yes;  a  pleasant 
smell.  I  have  the  honour  to  be  one  of  your  wife’s  worshippers;  is  she  quite 
well?  My  quarters  are  at  your  service.’  And  Kutuzov  began,  as  old  people 
often  do,  gazing  abstractedly  about  him,  as  though  forgetting  all  he  had  to 
say  or  do.  Apparently  recollecting  the  object  of  his  search,  he  beckoned  to 
Andrey  Sergeitch  Kaisarov,  the  brother  of  his  adjutant. 

‘How  was  it,  how  do  they  go,  those  verses  of  Marin?  How  do  they  go? 
What  he  wrote  on  Gerakov:  “You  will  be  teacher  in  the  corps  ...”  Tell 
me,  tell  me,’  said  Kutuzov,  his  countenance  relaxing  in  readiness  for  a 
laugh.  Kaisarov  repeated  the  lines  .  .  .  Kutuzov,  smiling,  nodded  his 
head  to  the  rhythm  of  the  verse. 

When  Pierre  moved  away  from  Kutuzov,  Dolohov  approached  and 
took  his  hand. 

‘I  am  very  glad  to  meet  you  here,  count,’  he  said,  aloud,  disregarding 
the  presence  of  outsiders,  and  speaking  with  a  marked  determination  and 
gravity.  ‘On  the  eve  of  a  day  which  God  knows  who  among  us  will  be 
destined  to  survive  I  am  glad  to  have  the  chance  of  telling  you  that  I 
regret  the  misunderstandings  there  have  been  between  us  in  the  past; 
and  I  should  be  glad  to  think  you  had  nothing  against  me.  I  beg  you  to 
forgive  me.’ 

Pierre  looked  with  a  smile  at  Dolohov,  not  knowing  what  to  say  to  him. 
With  tears  starting  into  his  eyes,  Dolohov  embraced  and  kissed  Pierre. 

Borris  had  said  a  few  words  to  his  general,  and  Count  Bennigsen  ad¬ 
dressed  Pierre,  proposing  that  he  should  accompany  them  along  the  line. 

‘You  will  find  it  interesting,’  he  said. 

‘Yes,  very  interesting,’  said  Pierre. 

Half  an  hour  later  Kutuzov  was  on  his  way  back  to  Tatarinovo,  while 
Bennigsen  and  his  suite,  with  Pierre  among  them,  were  inspecting  the 
position. 

XXIII 

From  Gorky  Bennigsen  went  down  the  high-road  to  the  bridge,  which 
the  officer  on  the  knoll  had  pointed  out  to  Pierre  as  the  centre  of  the 
position,  where  by  the  riverside  lay  rows  of  sweet-scented,  new-mown 
hay.  They  crossed  the  bridge  to  the  village  of  Borodino,  then  turned  to 
the  left,  and  passing  immense  numbers  of  men  and  cannons,  came  out  on 
to  the  high  knoll  on  which  militiamen  were  at  work  excavating.  This  was 
the  redoubt,  as  yet  unnamed,  afterwards  called  Raevsky’s  redoubt,  or 
the  battery  on  the  mound. 

Pierre  did  not  take  special  notice  of  this  redoubt.  He  did  not  dream  that 
that  spot  would  be  more  memorable  for  him  than  any  other  part  of  the 
plain  of  Borodino.  Then  they  crossed  a  hollow  to  Semyonovskoye,  where 
the  soldiers  were  dragging  away  the  last  logs  of  the  huts  and  barns.  Then 
they  rode  on  downhill  and  uphill  again,  across  a  field  of  rye,  trampled 


WAR  AND  PEACE  725 

md  laid  as  though  by  hail,  along  the  track  newly  made  by  the  artillery, 
Dver  the  ridges  of  the  ploughed  field,  to  the  earthworks,  at  which  the  men 
were  still  at  work. 

Bennigsen  halted  at  the  earthworks,  and  looked  in  front  at  the  redoubt 
jf  Shevardino,  which  had  been  ours  the  day  before.  Several  horsemen 
:ould  be  descried  upon  it.  The  officers  said  that  Napoleon  and  Murat  were 
;here.  And  all  gazed  eagerly  at  the  little  group  of  horsemen.  Pierre  too 
;tared  at  them,  trying  to  guess  which  of  the  scarcely  discernible  figures 
vas  Napoleon.  At  last  the  group  of  horsemen  descended  the  hill  and 
Dassed  out  of  sight. 

Bennigsen  began  explaining  to  a  general  who  had  ridden  up  to  him  the 
vhole  position  of  our  troops.  Pierre  listened  to  his  words,  straining  every 
acuity  of  his  mind  to  grasp  the  essential  points  of  the  coming  battle,  but 
0  his  mortification  he  felt  that  his  faculties  were  not  equal  to  the  task. 
:Ie  could  make  nothing  of  it.  Bennigsen  finished  speaking,  and  noticing 
rflerre’s  listening  face,  he  said,  turning  suddenly  to  him: 

‘It’s  not  very  interesting  for  you,  I  expect.’ 

‘Oh,  on  the  contrary,  it’s  very  interesting,’  Pierre  repeated,  not  quite 
ruthfully. 

From  the  earthworks  they  turned  still  more  to  the  left  of  the  road 
hat  ran  winding  through  a  thick,  low-growing,  birch  wood.  In  the  middle 
>f  the  wood  a  brown  hare  with  white  feet  popped  out  on  the  road  before 
hem,  and  was  so  frightened  by  the  tramp  of  so  many  horses,  that  in 
ts  terror  it  hopped  along  the  road  just  in  front  of  them  for  a  long  while, 
ousing  general  laughter,  and  only  when  several  voices  shouted  at  it, 
lashed  to  one  side  and  was  lost  in  the  thicket.  After  a  couple  of  versts 
>f  woodland,  they  came  out  on  a  .clearing,  where  were  the  troops  of 
futchkov’s  corps,  destined  to  protect  the  left  flank. 

At  this  point,  at  the  extreme  left  flank,  Bennigsen  talked  a  great  deal 
vith  much  heat;  and  gave  instructions,  of  great  importance  from  a  mili¬ 
ary  point  of  view,  as  it  seemed  to  Pierre.  Just  in  front  of  the  spot  where 
rutchkov’s  troops  were  placed  there  rose  a  knoll,  which  was  not  occupied 
>y  troops.  Bennigsen  was  loud  in  his  criticism  of  this  oversight,  saying 
hat  it  was  insane  to  leave  a  height  that  commanded  the  country  round 
moccupied  and  place  troops  just  below  it.  Several  generals  expressed  the 
ame  opinion.  One  in  particular,  with  martial  warmth,  declared  that 
hey  were  doomed  there  to  certain  destruction.  Bennigsen,  on  his  own 
esponsibility,  ordered  the  troops  to  be  moved  on  to  the  high-road. 

This  change  of  position  on  the  left  flank  made  Pierre  more  than  ever 
loubtful  of  his  capacity  for  comprehending  military  matters.  As  he  heard 
Jennigsen  and  the  other  generals  criticising  the  position  of  the  troops  at 
he  foot  of  the  hill,  Pierre  fully  grasped  and  shared  their  views.  But  that 
vas  why  he  could  not  imagine  how  the  man  who  had  placed  them  there 
.oiild  have  made  so  gross  and  obvious  a  blunder. 

Pierre  did  not  know  that  the  troops  had  not  been  placed  there  to  de- 
end  their  position,  as  Bennigsen  supposed,  but  had  been  stationed  in 
hat  concealed  spot  in  ambush,  in  order  unobserved  to  deal  a  sudden 


726  WAR  AND  PEACE 

blow  at  the  enemy  unawares.  Bennigsen,  ignorant  of  this  project,  mover 
the  troops  into  a  prominent  position  without  saying  anything  about  thi; 
change  to  the  commander-in-chief. 


XXIV 

Prince  Andrey  was  on  that  bright  August  evening  lying  propped  on  his 
elbow  in  a  broken-down  barn  in  the  village  of  Knyazkovo,  at  the  furthei 
end  of  the  encampment  of  his  regiment.  Through  a  gap  in  the  broken  wall 
he  was  looking  at  the  line  of  thirty-year-old  pollard  birches  in  the  hedge, 
at  the  field  with  sheaves  of  oats  lying  about  it,  and  at  the  bushes  where 
he  saw  the  smoke  of  camp-fires,  at  which  the  soldiers  were  doing  their 
cooking. 

Cramped  and  useless  and  burdensome  as  his  life  seemed  now  to  Prince 
Andrey,  he  felt  nervously  excited  and  irritable  on  the  eve  of  battle,  just 
as  he  had  felt  seven  years  earlier  before  Austerlitz. 

He  had  received  and  given  all  orders  for  the  next  day’s  battle.  He  had 
nothing  more  to  do.  But  thoughts — the  simplest,  most  obvious,  and 
therefore  most  awful — would  not  leave  him  in  peace.  He  knew  that  the 
battle  next  day  would  be  the  most  awful  of  all  he  had  taken  part  in. 
and  death,  for  the  first  time,  presented  itself  to  him,  not  in  relation  to  hi? 
actual  manner  of  life,  or  to  the  effect  of  it  on  others,  but  simply  in  rela¬ 
tion  to  himself,  to  his  soul,  and  rose  before  him  simply  and  awfully  with 
a  vividness  that  made  it  like  a  concrete  reality.  And  from  the  height  of, 
this  vision  everything  that  had  once  occupied  him  seemed  suddenly 
illumined  by  a  cold,  white  light,  without  shade,  without  perspective  or 
outline.  His  whole  life  seemed  to  him  like  a  magic  lantern,  at  which  he 
had  been  looking  through  the  glass  and  by  artificial  light.  Now  he  saw 
suddenly,  without  the  glass,  in  the  clear  light  of  day,  those  badly  daubed 
pictures.  ‘Yes,  yes,  there  are  they;  there  are  the  cheating  forms  that 
excited  torments  and  ecstasies  in  me,’  he  said  to  himself,  going  over  in 
imagination  the  chief  pictures  of  the  magic  lantern  of  his  life,  looking  at 
them  now  in  the  cold,  white  daylight  of  a  clear  view  of  death.  ‘These  are 
they,  these  coarsely  sketched  figures  which  seemed  something  splendid 
and  mysterious.  Glory,  the  good  of  society,  love  for  a  woman,  the  father- 
r,and — what  grand  pictures  they  used  to  seem  to  me,  with  what  deep 
meaning  they  seemed  to  be  filled !  And  it  is  all  so  simple,  so  colourless  and 
coarse  in  the  cold  light  of  the  day  that  I  feel  is  dawning  for  me.’  The 
three  chief  sorrows  of  his  life  held  his  attention  especially.  His  love  for 
a  woman,  his  father’s  death,  and  the  invasion  of  the  French — now  in 
possession  of  half  of  Russia.  ‘Love!  .  .  .  That  little  girl,  who  seemed  to 
me  brimming  over  with  mysterious  forces.  How  I  loved  her!  I  made  ro¬ 
mantic  plans  of  love,  of  happiness  with  her!  O  simple-hearted  youth!  ’  he 
said  aloud  bitterly.  ‘Why,  I  believed  in  some  ideal  love  which  was  to 
keep  her  faithful  to  me  for  the  whole  year  of  my  absence!  Like  the  faith¬ 
ful  dove  in  the  fable,  she  was  to  pine  away  in  my  absence  from  her!  And 


WARANDPEACE  727 

t  was  all  so  much  simpler.  ...  It  is  all  so  horribly  simple  and  loath- 
some ! 

‘My  father,  too,  laid  out  Bleak  Hills,  and  thought  it  was  his  place,  his 
and,  his  air,  his  peasants.  But  Napoleon  came  along,  and  without  even 
mowing  of  his  existence,  swept  him  away  like  a  chip  out  of  his  path, 
md  his  Bleak  Hills  laid  in  the  dust,  and  all  his  life  with  it  brought  to 
lought.  Princess  Marya  says  that  it  is  a  trial  sent  from  above.  What  is 
he  trial  for,  since  he  is  not  and  never  will  be?  He  will  never  come  back 
igain!  He  is  not!  So  for  whom  is  it  a  trial?  Fatherland,  the  spoiling  of 
Moscow!  But  to-morrow  I  shall  be  killed;  and  not  by  a  Frenchman  even, 
naybe,  but  by  one  of  our  own  men,  like  the  soldier  who  let  off  his  gun 
dose  to  my  ear  yesterday ;  and  the  French  will  come  and  pick  me  up  by 
ny  head  and  my  heels  and  pitch  me  into  a  hole  that  I  may  not  stink 
mder  their  noses;  and  new  conditions  of  life  will  arise,  and  I  shall  know 
lothing  of  them,  and  I  shall  not  be  at  all.’ 

He  gazed  at  the  row  of  birch-trees  with  their  motionless  yellows  and 
greens,  and  the  white  bark  shining  in  the  sun.  ‘To  die  then,  let  them  kill 
ne  to-morrow,  let  me  be  no  more  ...  let  it  all  go  on,  and  let  me  be  at  an 
;nd.’  He  vividly  pictured  his  own  absence  from  that  life.  And  those  birch- 
.rees,  with  their  light  and  shade,  and  the  curling  clouds  and  the  smoke 
jf  the  fires,  everything  around  seemed  suddenly  transformed  into  some- 
;hing  weird  and  menacing.  A  shiver  ran  down  his  back.  Rising  quickly 
:o  his  feet,  he  went  out  of  the  barn,  and  began  to  walk  about. 

He  heard  voices  behind  the  barn. 

‘Who’s  there?’  called  Prince  Andrey. 

The  red-nosed  Captain  Timohin,  once  the  officer  in  command  of  Dolo- 
nov’s  company,  now  in  the  lack  of  officers  promoted  to  the  command  of 
1  battalion,  came  shyly  into  the  barn.  He  was  followed  by  an  adjutant  and 
the  paymaster  of  the  regiment. 

Prince  Andrey  got  up  hurriedly,  listened  to  the  matters  relating  to 
their  duties  that  the  officers  had  come  to  him  about,  gave  a  few  instruc¬ 
tions,  and  was  about  to  dismiss  them,  when  he  heard  a  familiar,  lisping 
voice  behind  the  barn. 

‘Que  (liable!’  said  the  voice  of  some  one  s'  ..mbling  over  something. 

Prince  Andrey,  peeping  out  of  the  barn,  saw  Pierre,  who  had  just  hit 
against  a  post  lying  on  the  ground,  and  had  almost  fallen  over.  Prince 
Andrey  always  disliked  seeing  people  from  his  own  circle,  especially 
Pierre,  who  reminded  him  of  all  the  painful  moments  he  had  passed 
through  on  his  last  stay  at  Moscow. 

‘Well!’  he  cried.  ‘What  fate  has  brought  you?  I  didn’t  expect  to  see 
you.’ 

While  he  said  this  there  was  in  his  eyes  and  his  whole  face  more  than 
coldness,  positive  hostility,  which  Pierre  noticed  at  once.  He  had  ap- 
croached  the  barn  with  the  greatest  eagerness,  but  now,  on  seeing  Prince 
Andrey’s  face,  he  felt  constrained  and  ill  at  ease. 

‘I  have  come  .  .  .  you  know  .  .  .  simply  ...  I  have  come  .  .  . 
t’s  interesting,’  said  Pierre,  who  had  so  many  times  already  that  day 


728  WARANDPEACE 

repeated  that  word  ‘interesting’  without  meaning  it.  ‘I  wanted  to  see  the 
battle!  ’ 

‘Yes,  yes;  but  your  mason  brethren,  what  do  they  say  of  war?  How 
would  they  avert  it?’  said  Prince  Andrey  sarcastically.  ‘Well,  tell  me 
about  Moscow.  And  my  people?  Have  they  reached  Moscow  at  last?’ 
he  asked  seriously. 

‘Yes.  Julie  Drubetskoy  told  me  so.  I  went  to  call,  but  missed  them. 
They  had  started  for  your  Moscow  estate.’ 


XXV 

The  officers  -would  have  taken  leave,  but  Prince  Andrey,  apparently  un¬ 
willing  to  be  left  alone  with  his  friend,  pressed  them  to  stay  and  have 
some  tea.  Benches  were  set,  and  tea  was  brought.  With  some  astonish¬ 
ment  the  officers  stared  at  Pierre’s  huge,  bulky  figure,  and  heard  his  talk 
of  Moscow,  and  of  the  position  of  our  troops,  which  he  had  succeeded  in 
getting  a  view  of.  Prince  Andrey  did  not  speak,  and  his  face  was  so  for¬ 
bidding  that  Pierre  addressed  his  remarks  more  to  the  simple-hearted 
Timohin  than  to  Bolkonsky. 

‘So  you  understand  the  whole  disposition  of  the  troops?’  Prince  Andrey 
put  in. 

‘Yes.  At  least,  how  do  you  mean?’  said  Pierre.  ‘As  I  am  not  a  military 
man,  I  can’t  say  I  do  fully;  but  still  I  understand  the  general  arrange¬ 
ment.’ 

‘Well,  then,  you  know  more  than  anybody  else,’  said  Prince  Andrey. 

‘Oh!’  said  Pierre  incredulously,  looking  over  his  spectacles  at  Prince 
Andrey.  ‘Well,  and  what  do  you  say  of  the  appointment  of  Kutuzov?’ 
he  asked. 

‘I  was  very  glad  of  his  appointment;  that’s  all  I  know,’  said  Prince 
Andrey. 

‘Well,  tell  me  your  opinion  of  Barclay  de  Tolly.  In  Moscow  they  are 
saying  all  kinds  of  things  about  him.  What  do  you  think  of  him?’ 

‘Ask  them,’  said  Prince  Andrey,  indicating  the  officers. 

With  the  condescendingly  doubtful  smile  with  which  every  one  ad¬ 
dressed  him,  Pierre  looked  at  Timohin. 

‘It  was  a  gleam  of  light  in  the  dark,  your  excellency,  when  his  highness 
took  the  command,’  said  Timohin,  stealing  shy  glances  continually  at 
his  colonel. 

‘Why  so?’  asked  Pierre. 

‘Well,  as  regards  firewood  and  food,  let  me  tell  you.  Why,  all  the  way 
we  retreated  from  Sventsyan  not  a  twig,  nor  a  wisp  of  hay,  nor  anything, 
dare  we  touch.  We  were  retreating,  you  see,  so  he  would  get  it,  wouldn’t 
he,  your  excellency?’  he  said,  turning  to  his  prince,  ‘but  we  mustn’t  dare 
to.  In  our  regiment  two  officers  were  court-martialled  for  such  things. 
Well,  since  his  highness  is  in  command,  it’s  all  straightforward  as  regards 
that.  We  see  daylight  .  . 


729 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Then  why  did  he  forbid  it?’ 

Timohin  looked  round  in  confusion,  at  a  loss  how  to  answer  such  a 
question.  Pierre  turned  to  Prince  Andrey  with  the  same  inquiry. 

‘Why,  so  as  not  to  waste  the  country  we  were  leaving  for  the  enemy,’ 
said  Prince  Andrey,  with  angry  sarcasm.  ‘That’s  a  first  principle:  never 
to  allow  pillage  and  accustom  your  men  to  marauding.  And  at  Smolensk 
too  he  very  correctly  judged  that  the  French  were  the  stronger  and  might 
overcome  us.  But  he  could  not  understand,’  cried  Prince  Andrey  in  a 
voice  suddenly  shrill,  ‘he  could  not  understand  that  for  the  first  time  we 
were  fighting  on  Russian  soil,  that  there  was  a  spirit  in  the  men  such 
as  I  had  never  seen  before,  that  we  had  twice  in  succession  beaten  back 
the  French,  and  that  success  had  multiplied  our  strength  tenfold.  Fie 
ordered  a  retreat,  and  all  our  efforts  and  our  curses  were  in  vain.  He 
had  no  thought  of  treachery;  he  tried  to  do  everything  for  the  best  and 
thought  over  everything  well.  But  for  that  very  reason  he  was  no  good. 
He  is  no  good  now  just  because  he  considers  everything  soundly  and 
accurately  as  every  German  must.  How  can  I  explain  to  you.  .  .  .  Well, 
your  father  has  a  German  valet,  say,  and  he’s  an  excellent  valet  and 
satisfies  all  his  requirements  better  than  you  can  do,  and  all’s  well  and 
good;  but  if  your  father  is  sick  unto  death,  you’ll  send  away  the  valet 
and  wait  on  your  father  yourself  with  your  awkward,  unpractised  hands, 
and  be  more  comfort  to  him  than  a  skilful  man  who’s  a  stranger.  That’s 
how  we  have  done  with  Barclay.  While  Russia  was  well,  she  might  be 
served  by  a  stranger,  and.  an  excellent  minister  he  was,  but  as  soon  as 
she’s  in  danger,  she  wants  a  man  of  her  own  kith  and  kin.  So  you  in  your 
club  have  been  making  him  out  to  be  a  traitor!  They  slander  him  now 
as  a  traitor;  and  afterwards,  ashamed  of  their  false  accusations,  they 
will  suddenly  glorify  him  as  a  hero  or  a  genius,  which  would  be  even 
more  unfair  to  him.  He’s  an  honest  and  conscientious  German  .  .  .’ 

|  ‘They  say  he’s  an  able  general,  though,’  said  Pierre. 

‘I  don’t  know  what’s  meant  by  an  able  general,’  Prince  Andrey  said 
ironically. 

‘An  able  general,’  said  Pierre;  ‘well,  it’s  one  who  foresees  all  contin¬ 
gencies  .  .  .  well,  divines  the  enemy’s  projects.’ 

‘But  that’s  impossible,’  said  Prince  Andrey,  as  though  of  a  matter  long 
ago  settled. 

Pierre  looked  at  him  in  surprise. 

‘But  you  know  they  say,’  he  said,  ‘that  war  is  like  a  game  of  chess.’ 

‘Yes,’  said  Prince  Andrey,  ‘only  with  this  little  difference,  that  in 
chess  you  may  think  over  each  move  as  long  as  you  please,  that  you 
are  not  limited  as  to  time,  and  with  this  further  difference  that  a  knight 
is  always  stronger  than  a  pawn  and  two  pawns  are  always  stronger  than 
one,  while  in  war  a  battalion  is  sometimes  stronger  than  a  division,  and 
sometimes  weaker  than  a  company.  No  one  can  ever  be  certain  of  the 
relative  strength  of  armies.  Believe  me,’  he  said,  ‘if  anything  did  depend 
on  the  arrangements  made  by  the  staff,  I  would  be  there,  and  helping  to 
make  them,  but  instead  of  that  I  have  the  honour  of  serving  here  in 


730  WARANDPEACE 

the  regiment  with  these  gentlemen  here,  and  I  consider  that  the  day 
really  depends  upon  us  to-morrow  and  not  on  them.  .  .  .  Success  nevet 
has  depended  and  never  will  depend  on  position,  on  arms,  nor  even  or 
numbers;  and,  least  of  all,  on  position.’ 

‘On  what  then?’ 

‘On  the  feeling  that  is  in  me  and  him,’  he  indicated  Timohin,  ‘and  every 
soldier.’  •• 

Prince  Andrey  glanced  at  Timohin,  who  was  staring  in  alarm  and 
bewilderment  at  his  colonel.  In  contrast  to  his  usual  reserved  taciturnity 
Prince  Andrey  seemed  excited  now.  Apparently  he  could  not  refrain  from 
expressing  the  ideas  that  suddenly  rose  to  his  mind.  ‘The  battle  is  won 
by  the  side  that  has  firmly  resolved  to  win.  Why  did  we  lose  the  battle 
of  Austerlitz?  Our  losses  were  almost  equalled  by  the  French  losses;  but 
we  said  to  ourselves  very  early  in  the  day  that  we  were  losing  the  battle, 
and  we  lost  it.  And  we  said  so  because  we  had  nothing  to  fight  for  then; 
we  wanted  to  get  out  of  fighting  as  quick  as  we  could.  “We  are  defeated; 
so  let  us  run!  ”  and  we  did  run.  If  we  had  not  said  that  till  evening,  God 
knows  what  might  not  have  happened.  But  to-morrow  we  shan’t  say  that 
You  talk  of  our  position,  of  the  left  flank  being  weak,  and  the  right  flank 
too  extended,’  he  went  on;  ‘all  that’s  nonsense;  that’s  all  nothing.  But 
what  awaits  us  to-morrow?  A  hundred  millions  of  the  most  diverse  con 
tingencies,  which  will  determine  on  the  instant  whether  they  run  or  we  do; 
whether  one'  man  is  killed  and  then  another;  but  all  that’s  being  done 
now  is  all  mere  child’s  play.  The  fact  is  that  these  people  with  whom  you 
have  been  inspecting  the  positions  do  nothing  towards  the  progress  oi 
things;  they. are  a  positive  hindrance.  They  are  entirely  taken  up  wit! 
their  own  petty  interests.’ 

‘At  such  a  moment?’  said  Pierre  reproachfully. 

‘At  such  a  moment,’  repeated  Prince  Andrey.  ‘To  them  this  is  simply 
a  moment  on  which  one  may  score  off  a  rival  and  win  a  cross  or  ribbor 
the  more.  To  my  mind  what  is  before  us  to-morrow  is  this:  a  hundred 
thousand  Russian  and  a  hundred  thousand  French  troops  have  met  tc 
fight,  and  the  fact  is  that  these  two  hundred  thousand  men  will  fight,  and 
the  side  that  fights  most  desperately  and  spares  itself  least  will  conquer 
And  if  you  like,  I’ll  tell  you  that  whatever  happens,  and  whatever  mess 
they  make  up  yonder,  we  shall  win  the  battle  to-morrow;  whatever  hap¬ 
pens  we  shall  win  the  victory.’ 

‘Your  excellency,  that’s  the  truth  of  it,  the  holy  truth,’  put  in  Timohin; 
‘who  would  spare  himself  now!  The  soldiers  in  my  battalion,  woulc 
you  believe  it,  wouldn’t  drink  their  vodka;  this  isn’t  an  ordinary  day 
they  say.’ 

All  were  silent. 

The  officers  rose.  Prince  Andrey  went  with  them  out  of  the  barn,  giving 
the  last  instructions  to  the  adjutant.  When  the  officers  had  gone,  Pierre 
came  nearer  to  Prince  Andrey,  and  was  just  about  to  begin  talking  wher 
they  heard  the  tramp  of  hoofs  not  far  away  on  the  road,  and  glancing 
in  that  direction  Prince  Andrey  recognised  Woltzogen  and  Klausewitz 


WARANDPEACE  731 

iccompanied  by  a  Cossack.  They  rode  close  by  them,  still  talking,  and 
Pierre  and  Prince  Andrey  could  not  help  overhearing  the  following 
)hrases  in  German: 

‘The  war  ought  to  be  carried  on  over  a  wide  extent  of  country.  I  cannot 
ufficiently  strongly  express  that  view  of  the  matter,’  one  said  in  German. 

‘Oh  yes,’  said  another  voice,  ‘since  the  object  is  to  wear  out  the  enemy, 
me  must  not  consider  the  losses  of  private  persons.’ 

‘Certainly  not,’  acquiesced  the  first  voice. 

‘Carried  into  a  wide  extent  of  country,’  Prince  Andrey  repeated  with 
.  wrathful  snort,  when  they  had  ridden  by.  ‘In  that  open  country  I  had 
.  father  and  son  and  sister  at  Bleak  Hills.  He  doesn’t  care  about  that, 
fhat’s  just  what  I  was  saying  to  you:  these  excellent  Germans  won’t 
dn  the  battle  to-morrow,  they  will  only  make  a  mess  of  it,  so  far  as  they 
re  able,  because  they  have  nothing  in  their  German  noddles  but  calcula- 
ions  that  are  not  worth  a  rotten  egg,  and  they  haven’t  in  their  hearts 
he  one  thing  that’s  wanted  for  to-morrow,  that  Timohin  has.  They  have 
;iven  all  Europe  up  to  him,  and  now  they  have  come  to  teach  us — fine 
eachers!’  he  added,  his  voice  growing  shrill  again. 

‘So  you  think  the  battle  to-morrow  will  be  a  victory,’  said  Pierre. 

‘Yes,  yes,’  said  Prince  Andrey  absently.  ‘There’s  one  thing  I  would  do, 
f  I  were  in  power,’  he  began  again.  ‘I  wouldn’t  take  orisoners.  What 
ense  is  there  in  taking  prisoners?  That’s  chivalry.  The  French  have 
iestroyed  my  home  and  are  coming  to  destroy  Moscow;  they  have  out- 
aged  and  are  outraging  me  at  every  second.  They  are  my  enemies,  they 
re  all  criminals  to  my  way  of  thinking.  And  so  thinks  Timohin,  and  all 
he  army  with  him.  They  must  be  put  to  death.  Since  they  are  my 
nemies,  they  can’t  be  my  friends,  whatever  they  may  have  said  at  Tilsit.’ 

‘Yes,  yes,’  said  Pierre,  looking  with  shining  eyes  at  Prince  Andrey.  ‘I 
ntirely  agree  with  you!  ’ 

The  question  that  had  been  disturbing  Pierre  all  that  day,  since  the 
dozhaisk  hill,  now  struck  him  as  perfectly  clear  and  fully  solved.  He 
aw  now  all  the  import  and  all  the  gravity  of  the  war  and  the  impending 
iattle.  All  he  had  seen  that  day,  all  the  stern,  grave  faces  of  which  he 
ad  had  glimpses,  appeared  to  him  in  a  new  light  now.  He  saw,  to  borrow 

term  from  physics,  the  latent  heat  of  patriotism  in  all  those  men  he 
ad  seen,  and  saw  in  it  the  explanation  of  the  composure  and  apparent 
:vity  with  which  they  were  all  preparing  for  death.  ‘We  ought  not  to 
ike  prisoners,’  said  Prince  Andrey.  ‘That  change  alone  would  transform 
le  whole  aspect  of  war  and  would  make  it  less  cruel.  But  playing  at  war, 
lat’s  what’s  vile;  and  playing  at  magnanimity  and  all  the  rest  of  it. 
hat  magnanimity  and  sensibility  is  like  the  magnanimity  and  sensibility 
f  the  lady  who  turns  sick  at  the  sight  of  a  slaughtered  calf — she  is  so 
indhearted  she  can’t  see  blood — but  eats  fricasseed  veal  with  a  very 
bod  appetite.  They  talk  of  the  laws  of  warfare,  of  chivalry,  of  flags  of 
;uce,  and  humanity  to  the  wounded,  and  so  on.  That’s  all  rubbish.  I 
iw  enough  in  1805  of  chivalry  and  flags  of  truce:  they  duped  us,  and  we 
aped  them.  They  plunder  other  people’s  homes,  issue  false  money,  and. 


732  WARANDPEACE 

worse  than  all,  kill  my  children,  my  father,  and  then  talk  of  the  laws 
of  warfare,  and  generosity  to  a  fallen  foe.  No  prisoners ;  and  go  to  give  and 
to  meet  death!  Any  one  who  has  come  to  think  this  as  I  have,  through 
the  same  sufferings  .  . 

Prince  Andrey,  who  had  thought  that  he  did  not  care  whether  they  took 
Moscow  as  they  had  taken  Smolensk,  was  suddenly  pulled  up  in  his  speech 
by  a  nervous  catch  in  his  throat.  He  walked  to  and  fro  several  times  ir 
silence,  but  his  eyes  blazed  with  feverish  brilliance  and  his  lip  quivered 
as  he  began  to  speak  again. 

‘If  there  were  none  of  this  playing  at  generosity  in  warfare,  we  should 
never  go  to  war,  except  for  something  worth  facing  certain  death  for 
as  now.  Then  there  would  not  be  wars  because  Pavel  Ivanitch  had  insulted 
Mihail  Ivanitch.  But  if  there  is  war  as  now,  let  it  be  really  war.  Anc 
then  the  intensity  of  warfare  would  be  something  quite  different.  All 
these  Westphalians  and  Plessians  Napoleon  is  leading  against  us  woulc 
not  have  come  to  fight  us  in  Russia,  and  we  should  not  have  gone  to  wai 
in  Austria  and  in  Prussia  without  knowing  what  for.  War  is  not  a  polite 
recreation,  but  the  vilest  thing  in  life,  and  we  ought  to  understand  that 
and  not  play  at  war.  We  ought  to  accept  it  sternly  and  solemnly  as  s 
fearful  necessity.  It  all  comes  to  this:  have  done  with  lying,  and  if  it’s 
war,  then  it’s  war  and  not  a  game,  or  else  warfare  is  simply  the  favourite 
pastime  of  the  idle  and  frivolous.  .  .  .  The  military  is  the  most  honoured 
calling.  And  what  is  war,  what  is  needed  for  success  in  war,  what  are 
the  morals  of  the  military  world?  The  object  of  warfare  is  murder;  the 
means  employed  in  warfare — spying,  treachery,  and  the  encouragement 
of  it,  the  ruin  of  a  country,  the  plundering  of  its  inhabitants  and  robbery 
for  the  maintenance  of  the  army,  trickery  and  lying,  which  are  calleo: 
military  strategy;  the  morals  of  the  military  class — absence  of  all  inde 
pendence,  that  is,  discipline,  idleness,  ignorance,  cruelty,  debauchery 
and  drunkenness.  And  in  spite  of  all  that,  it  is  the  highest  class,  respectec 
by  every  one.  All  sovereigns,  except  the  Chinese,  wear  a  military  uniform 
and  give  the  greatest  rewards  to  the  man  who  succeeds  in  killing  mosl 
people.  .  .  .  They  meet  together  to  murder  one  another,  as  we  shall  dc 
to-morrow;  they  slaughter  and  mutilate  tens  of  thousands  of  men,  anc 
then  offer  up  thanksgiving  services  for  the  number  of  men  they  have 
killed  (and  even  add  to  it  in  the  telling),  and  glorify  the  victory,  suppos¬ 
ing  that  the  more  men  have  been  slaughtered  the  greater  the  achievement 
How  God  can  look  down  from  above  and  hear  them!’  shrieked  Prince 
Andrey  in  a  shrill,  piercing  voice.  ‘Ah,  my  dear  boy,  life  has  been  a  bittei 
thing  for  me  of  late.  I  see  that  I  have  come  to  understand  too  much.  Anc 
it  is  not  good  for  man  to  taste  of  the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and 
evil.  .  .  .  Ah,  well,  it’s  not  for  long!’  he  added.  ‘But  you  are  getting 
sleepy  and  it’s  time  I  was  in  bed  too.  Go  back  to  Gorky,’  said  Prino 
Andrey  suddenly. 

‘Oh  no!’  answered  Pierre,  gazing  with  eyes  full  of  scared  sympathy 
at  Prince  Andrey. 

‘You  must  be  off;  before  a  battle  one  needs  to  get  a  good  sleep,’  re 


W  A  R  A  N  D  P  E  A  C  E  733 

peated  Prince  Andrey.  He  went  quickly  up  to  Pierre,  embraced  and 
kissed  him.  ‘Good-bye,  be  off,’  he  cried,  ‘whether  we  see  each  other  again 
or  not  .  .  .’  and  turning  hurriedly,  he  went  off  into  the  barn. 

It  was  already  dark,  and  Pierre  could  not  distinguish  whether  the 
expression  of  his  face  was  exasperated  or  affectionate. 

Pierre  stood  for  some  time  in  silence,  hesitating  whether  to  go  after 
him  or  to  return  to  Gorky.  ‘No;  he  does  not  want  me!’  Pierre  made  up 
his  mind,  ‘and  I  know  this  is  our  last  meeting!’  He  heaved  a  deep  sigh 
and  rode  back  to  Gorky. 

Prince  Andrey  lay  down  on  a  rug  in  the  barn,  but  he  could  not  sleep. 

He  closed  his  eyes.  One  set  of  images  followed  another  in  his  mind. 
On  one  mental  picture  he  dwelt  long  and  joyfully.  He  vividly  recalled 
one  evening  in  Petersburg.  Natasha  with  an  eager,  excited  face  had  been 
telling  him  how  in  looking  for  mushrooms  the  previous  summer  she  had 
lost  her  way  in  a  great  forest.  She  described  incoherently  the  dark  depths 
pf  the  forest,  and  her  feelings,  and  her  talk  with  a  bee-keeper  she  met, 
ind  every  minute  she  broke  off  in  her  story,  saying:  ‘No,  I  can’t,  I’m 
lot  describing  it  properly;  no,  you  won’t  understand  me,’  although  Prince 
Andrey  tried  to  assure  her  that  he  understood  and  did  really  understand 
ill  she  wanted  to  convey  to  him.  Natasha  was  dissatisfied  with  her  own 
words;  she  felt  that  they  did  not  convey  the  passionately  poetical  feeling 
;he  had  known  that  day  and  tried  to  give  expression  to.  ‘It  was  all  so  ex¬ 
quisite,  that  old  man,  and  it  was  so  dark  in  the  forest  .  .  .  and  such  a 
find  look  in  his  .  .  .  no,  I  can’t  describe  it,’  she  had  said,  flushed  and 
•noved. 

Prince  Andrey  smiled  now  the  same  happy  smile  he  had  smiled  then, 
gazing  into  her  eyes.  ‘I  understood  her,’  thought  Prince  Andrey,  ‘and  more 
ban  understood  her:  that  spiritual  force,  that  sincerity,  that  openness  of 
loul,  the  very  soul  of  her,  which  seemed  bound  up  with  her  body,  the 
■ery  soul  it  was  I  loved  in  her  .  .  .  loved  so  intensely,  so  passionately  . .  .’ 
,nd  all  at  once  he  thought  how  his  love  had  ended.  ‘He  cared  nothing 
or  all  that.  He  saw  nothing  of  it,  had  no  notion  of  it.  He  saw  in  her  a 
pretty  and  fresh  young  girl  with  whom  he  did  not  deign  to  unite  his  life 
ermanently.  And  I?  .  .  .  And  he  is  still  alive  and  happy.’ Prince  Andrey 
imped  up  as  though  suddenly  scalded,  and  began  walking  to  and  fro 
efore  the  barn  again. 


XXVI 


:>N  the  25th  of  August,  on  the  eve  of  the  battle  of  Borodino,  the  prefect 
f  the  French  Emperor’s  palace,  M.  de  Beausset,  and  Colonel  Fabvier, 
rrived,  the  former  from  Paris,  and  the  latter  from  Madrid,  at  Napoleon’s 
incampment  at  Valuev. 

After  changing  into  a  court  uniform  M.  de  Beausset  ordered  the  package 
|e  had  brought  for  the  Emperor  to  be  carried  before  him,  and  walked 
ito  the  first  compartment  of  Napoleon's  tent,  where  he  busied  himself 
hile  conversing  with  the  aides-de-camp  in  unpacking  the  box. 


734  WAR  AND  PEACE 

Fabvier  stood  talking  with  generals  of  his  acquaintance  in  the  entrance 
of  the  tent. 

The  Emperor  Napoleon  had  not  yet  left  his  bedroom,  he  was  finishing 
his  toilet.  With  snorts  and  grunts  of  satisfaction,  he  was  turning  first 
his  stout  back  and  then  his  plump,  hirsute  chest  towards  the  flesh-brush 
with  which  a  valet  was  rubbing  him  down.  Another  valet,  holding  a  bottle 
with  one  finger  on  it,  was  sprinkling  eau  de  cologne  on  the  Emperor’s 
pampered  person  with  an  expression  which  seemed  to  say  that  he  alone 
knew  where  and  how  much  eau  de  cologne  must  be  sprinkled.  Napoleon’s 
short  hair  was  wet  and  matted  on  his  brow.  But  his  face,  though  puffy 
and  yellow,  expressed  physical  satisfaction. 

‘Go  on,  hard,  go  on  .  .  .’  he  said,  shrugging  and  clearing  his  throat, 
to  the  valet  brushing  him.  An  adjutant,  who  had  come  into  the  bedroom 
to  report  to  the  Emperor  the  number  of  prisoners  taken  in  the  last  engage¬ 
ment,  was  standing  at  the  door,  after  giving  his  message,  awaiting  per¬ 
mission  to  withdraw.  Napoleon,  frowning,  glanced  up  from  under  his 
brows  at  the  adjutant.  ‘No  prisoners,’  he  repeated  the  adjutant’s  words 
‘They  are  working  their  own  destruction.  So  much  the  worse  for  the 
Russian  army,’  said  he.  ‘Harder,  brush  harder,’  he  said,  hunching  his 
fat  shoulders  before  the  valet.  ‘Good.  Let  Beausset  come  in  and  Fabviei 
too,’  he  said  to  the  adjutant,  nodding. 

‘I  obey,  sire,’  and  the  adjutant  disappeared. 

The  two  valets  rapidly  dressed  his  majesty,  and  in  the  blue  uniform 
of  the  guards  he  walked  into  the  reception-room  with  firm,  rapid  steps 

Beausset  meanwhile  was  in  great  haste  setting  up  the  present  he  hac 
brought  from  the  Empress  on  two  chairs  just  before  the  Emperor  as  he 
entered.  But  the  Emperor  had  been  so  unaccountably  rapid  over  getting 
dressed  and  coming  in  that  he  had  not  time  to  have  the  surprise  ready 
for  him. 

Napoleon  at  once  noticed  what  they  were  about,  and  guessed  they  wen 
not  ready.  He  did  not  want  to  deprive  them  of  the  pleasure  of  preparing 
an  agreeable  surprise  for  him.  He  pretended  not  to  see  M.  de  Beausset 
and  beckoned  Fabvier  to  him.  Napoleon,  frowning  sternly,  listened  ir 
silence  to  what  Fabvier  was  saying  of  the  gallantry  and  devotion  of  hi; 
army,  fighting  before  Salamanca,  at  the  other  end  of  Europe;  they  had 
he  said,  but  one  dream — to  be  worthy  of  their  Emperor,  and  one  fear— 
to  displease  him.  The  result  of  the  battle  had  been  disastrous.  Napoleoi 
made  ironical  remarks  during  Fabvier’s  account  of  it,  as  though  he  hac 
not  expected  it  to  be  otherwise  in  his  absence. 

‘I  must  make  up  for  it  at  Moscow,’  said  Napoleon.  ‘A  tantot,’  he  added 
and  summoned  Beausset,  who  had  by  this  time  succeeded  in  preparing 
his  effect,  had  stood  something  on  the  chairs  and  thrown  a  cover  over  it 

Beausset  made  a  courtier’s  low  bow,  such  as  only  the  old  retainers  o 
the  Bourbons  knew  how  to  make,  and  approached  him,  handing  hin 
a  letter. 

Napoleon  addressed  him  gaily  and  pinched  him  by  the' ear. 

‘You  have  been  quick,  delighted  to  see  you.  Well,  what  is  Paris  saying? 


WARANDPEACE  735 

he  said,  his  look  of  sternness  suddenly  changing  to  the  most  cordial  ex¬ 
pression. 

‘Sire,  all  Paris  is  regretting  your  absence,’  answered  Beausset,  as  in 
duty  bound.  But  though  Napoleon  knew  Beausset  was  bound  to  say  this 
or  something  like  it,  though  at  his  lucid  moments  he  knew  it  was  all  false, 
he  was  glad  to  hear  this  from  him.  He  condescended  to  pinch  his  ear 
again. 

‘I  am  very  sorry  to  have  made  you  to  travel  so  far/  he  said. 

‘Sire,  I  expected  to  find  you  at  least  at  the  gates  of  Moscow/  said 
Beausset. 

Napoleon  smiled,  and  lifting  his  head  absently  looked  round  to  the 
right.  An  adjutant  approached  obsequiously  with  a  gold  snuffbox  and 
offered  it.  Napoleon  took  it. 

‘Yes,  it’s  a  happy  chance  for  you/  he  said,  putting  the  open  snuffbox 
to  his  nose.  ‘You  are  fond  of  travelling,  and  in  three  days  you  will  see 
Moscow.  You  probably  did  not  expect  to  see  the  Asiatic  capital.  You  will 
have  a  delightful  journey.’ 

Beausset  bowed  with  gratitude  for  this  interest  in  his  tastes  for  travel 
(of  which  he  had  till  that  moment  been  unaware). 

‘Ah!  what’s  this?’  said  Napoleon,  observing  that  all  the  courtiers  were 
gazing  at  something  concealed  under  a  covering.  Beausset  with  courtier¬ 
like  agility  retired  two  steps  with  a  half  turn,  not  showing  his  back,  and 
at  the  same  moment  twitched  off  the  covering,  saying:  ‘A  present  to  your 
majesty  from  the  Empress.’ 

It  was  a  portrait,  painted  in  brilliant  colours  by  Gerard,  of  the  child 
of  Napoleon  and  the  daughter  of  the  Austrian  Emperor,  the  little  boy 
whom  every  one  for  some  unknown  reason  called  the  King  of  Rome. 

The  very  pretty,  curly-headed  child,  with  eyes  like  the  Christ  with 
the  Sistine  Madonna,  had  been  portrayed  playing  cup  and  ball.  The  ball 
represented  the  terrestrial  globe  and  the  cup  in  the  other  hand  was  a 
sceptre. 

Though  it  was  not  altogether  clear  what  the  painter  had  intended  to 
express  by  representing  the  so-called  King  of  Rome  tossing  the  terrestrial 
globe  on  a  sceptre,  the  allegory  apparently  seemed  to  Napoleon,  as  it  had 
to  every  one  who  had  seen  it  in  Paris,  quite  clear  and  extremely  pleasing. 

‘The  King  of  Rome!’  he  said,  pointing  with  a  graceful  gesture  to  the 
portrait.  ‘Admirable!’  With  the  characteristic  Italian  facility  for  chang¬ 
ing  his  expression  at  will,  he  went  up  to  the  portrait  and  assumed  an 
air  of  pensive  tenderness.  He  felt  that  what  he  might  say  or  do  at  that 
moment  would  be  historical.  And  it  struck  him  that  the  best  line  he 
could  take  at  that  moment,  at  the  height  of  his  grandeur — so  great  that 
his  child  was  playing  cup  and  ball  with  the  earth — would  be  to  display, 
in  contrast  with  that  grandeur,  the  simplest,  fatherly  tenderness.  His 
eyes  were  veiled  by  emotion;  he  moved  up,  looked  round  for  a  chair  (a 
chair  seemed  to  spring  up  under  him),  and  sat  down,  facing  the  portrait. 
At  a  single  gesture  from  him  all  withdrew  on  tip-toe,  leaving  the  great 
man  to  himself  and  his  feelings.  After  sitting  there  a  little  while  and 


736  WAR  AND  PEACE 

passing  his  hngers,  he  could  not  have  said  why,  over  the  rough  surface 
of  the  painting,  he  got  up  and  again  sent  for  Beausset  and  the  officer 
on  duty.  He  gave  orders  for  the  portrait  to  be  carried  out  in  front  of  his 
tent,  so  that  the  Old  Guard,  standing  about  his  tent,  might  not  be  de¬ 
prived  of  the  happiness  of  seeing  the  King  of  Rome,  the  son  and  heir 
of  their  adored  Emperor. 

While  he  sat  at  breakfast  with  M.  de  Beausset — whom  he  had  honoured 
by  an  invitation  to  join  him — he  heard,  as  he  had  expected,  enthusiastic 
shouts  from  the  soldiers  and  officers  of  the  Old  Guard,  who  had  run  up 
to  see  the  portrait. 

‘Vive  VEmpereurl  Vive  le  roi  de  Rome!  Vive  V  Empereur !'  shouted 
enthusiastic  voices. 

After  breakfast,  in  Beausset's  presence,  Napoleon  dictated  his  procla¬ 
mation  to  the  army. 

‘Courte  et  energique!’  Napoleon  pronounced  it,  when  he  had  read 
over  the  proclamation  that  he  had  dictated  straight  off  without  correc¬ 
tions.  It  was  as  follows: 

‘Soldiers!  This  is  the  battle  you  have  so  greatly  desired.  Victory  is  in 
your  hands.  It  is  essential  for  us;  it  will  give  us  everything  we  need: 
comfortable  quarters  and  a  speedy  return  to  our  own  country.  Behave  as 
you  behaved  at  Austerlitz,  Friedland,  Vitebsk,  and  Smolensk.  May  pos¬ 
terity  recall  with  pride  your  achievement  on  this  day!  And  may  they 
say  of  each  of  you:  he  was  at  the  great  battle  before  Moscow!  ’ 

‘Before  Moscow,’  repeated  Napoleon,  and  inviting  M.  de  Beausset, 
so  fond  of  travel,  to  accompany  him  on  his  ride,  he  went  out  of  the  tent 
to  the  saddled  horses  awaiting  them  outside. 

‘Your  majesty  is  too  kind,’  said  Beausset,  in  response  to  the  invitation 
to  accompany  the  Emperor.  He"  was  very  sleepy.  He  could  not  ride  well, 
and  was  afraid  of  horses. 

But  Napoleon  nodded  to  the  traveller,  and  Beausset  had  to  mount. 
When  Napoleon  came  out  of  the  tent  the  shouts  of  the  Guards  before 
his  son’s  portrait  were  redoubled.  Napoleon  frowned. 

‘Take  him  away,’  he  said,  with  a  gracefully  majestic  gesture,  pointing 
to  the  portrait.  ‘It  is  too  early  yet  for  him  to  look  upon  the  field  of  battle.’ 

Beausset,  dropping  his  eyelids,  and  bowing  his  head,  heaved  a  deep 
sigh,  to  testify  how  well  he  was  able  to  appreciate  and  comprehend  the 
Emperor’s  words. 


XXVII 

The  whole  of  that  day,  the  25th  of  August,  Napoleon  spent,  so  his  his¬ 
torians  relate,  on  horseback,  inspecting  the  locality,  criticising  the  plans 
submitted  to  him  by  his  marshals,  and  giving  commands  in  person  to 
his  generals. 

The  original  line  of  the  Russian  disposition,  along  the  Kolotcha,  had 
been  broken  through,  and,  in  consequence  of  the  taking  of  the  Shevardino 
redoubt  on  the  previous  day,  part  of  that  line — the  left  flank — had  been 


WAR  AND  PEACE  737 

drawn  further  back.  That  part  of  the  line  had  not  been  strengthened, 
was  no  longer  protected  by  the  river,  and  more  open  and  level  ground  lay 
before  it.  It  was  obvious  to  any  man,  military  or  non-military,  that  it 
was  that  part  of  the  line  that  the  French  should  attack.  One  would  have 
thought  that  no  great  deliberation  would  be  necessary  to  reach  this  con¬ 
clusion  ;  tha<  all  the  care  and  anxiety  of  the  Emperor  and  his  marshals 
were  unnecessary,  and  that  there  was  absolutely  no  need  of  that  peculiar 
high  degree  of  talent  called  genius,  which  they  are  so  fond  of  ascribing 
to  Napoleon.  But  the  historians,  who  described  the  battle  afterwards,  and 
the  men  surrounding  Napoleon  at  the  time,  and  he  himself,  thought 
otherwise. 

Napoleon  rode  about  the  field,  gazing  with  a  profound  air  at  the  coun¬ 
try,  wagging  his  head  approvingly  or  dubiously  to  himself,  and  without 
communicating  to  the  generals  around  him  the  profound  chain  of  reason¬ 
ing  that  guided  him  in  his  decisions,  conveyed  to  them  merely  the  final 
conclusions  in  the  form  of  commands.  Upon  the  suggestion  being  made 
by  Davoust,  now  styled  Duke  of  Eckmiihl,  for  turning  the  Russian  left 
flank,  Napoleon  said  there  was  no  need  to  do  this,  without  explaining 
why  there  was  no  need.  But  to  the  proposal  of  General  Compans  (who 
was  to  attack  the  advanced  earthworks),  to  lead  his  division  through 
the  forest,  Napoleon  signified  his  assent,  although  the  so-called  Duke  of 
Elchingen,  that  is,  Ney,  ventured  to  observe  that  to  move  troops  through 
woodland  is  risky,  and  might  break  up  the  formation  of  the  division. 

After  examining  the  nature  of  the  country  opposite  the  Shevardino 
redoubt,  Napoleon  pondered  a  little  while  in  silence  and  pointed  to  the 
spots  where  two  batteries  were  to  be  placed  by  the  morrow  for  action 
against  the  Russian  fortifications,  and  the  spots  where,  in  a  line  with 
them,  the  field  artillery  was  to  be  arranged. 

After  giving  these  and  other  commands,  he  went  back  to  his  quarters, 
and  the  disposition  of  the  troops  was  written  down  from  his  dictation. 

This  disposition,  of  which  the  French  speak  with  enthusiasm,  and 
other  historians  with  profound  respect,  consisted  of  the  following  in¬ 
structions: 

‘Two  new  batteries,  to  be  placed  during  the  night  on  the  plain  occupied 
by  the  Duke  of  Eckmiihl,  will  open  fire  at  dawn  on  the  two  opposite 
batteries  of  the  enemy. 

‘At  the  same  time  General  Pernetti,  in  command  of  the  artillery  of  the 
ist  corps,  with  thirty  cannon  of  Compans’s  division,  and  all  the  howitzers 
of  Desaix  and  Friant’s  division,  will  move  forwards,  open  fire,  and  shower 
shells  on  the  enemy’s  battery,  against  which  there  will  be  at  once  in 
action: 

24  cannons  of  the  artillery  of  the  Guards, 

30  cannons  of  Compans’s  division,  and 
8  cannons  of  Friant  and  Desaix’s  division 

In  all  62  cannons. 

“General  Fouche,  in  command  of  the  artillery  of  the  3rd  corps,  will 


738  WAR  AND  PEACE 

place  all  the  sixteen  howitzers  of  the  3rd  and  8th  corps  at  the  flanks  of 
the  batter}^,  told  off  to  bombard  the  left  fortification,  making  forty  guns 
in  all  aimed  against  it. 

‘General  Sorbier  is  to  be  in  readiness  to  advance  on  the  word  being 
given,  with  all  the  howitzers  of  the  artillery  of  the  Guards  against  either 
of  the  enemy’s  fortifications. 

‘During  the  cannonade  Prince  Poniatovsky  is  to  advance  to  the  village 
in  the  wood,  and  to  turn  the  enemy’s  position. 

‘General  Compans  will  cross  the  wood  to  gain  possession  of  the  first 
fortification. 

‘After  the  attack  has  begun  on  these  lines,  further  commands  will  be 
given  in  accordance  with  the  enemy’s  movements. 

‘The  cannonade  on  the  left  flank  will  begin  as  soon  as  the  cannons 
of  the  right  wing  are  heard.  The  sharpshooters  of  Morand’s  division  and 
of  the  viceroy’s  division  will  open  a  hot  fire  on  seeing  the  beginning  of  the 
attack  of  the  right  wing. 

‘The  viceroy  will  take  possession  of  the  village  of  Borodino,  and  cross 
by  its  three  bridges,  advancing  to  the  same  height  with  Morand’s  and 
Gerard’s  divisions,  which  under  his  leadership  will  advance  to  the  re^ 
doubt  and  come  into  line  with  the  other  troops  of  the  army. 

‘All  this  is  to  be  done  in  good  order  ( le  tout  se  jera  avec  ordre  el 
methode),  preserving  as  far  as  possible  troops  in  reserve. 

‘The  imperial  camp,  near  Mozhaisk,  September  6,  1812.’ 

These  instructions — which  strike  one  as  exceedingly  confused  and  ob¬ 
scure,  if  one  ventures  to  throw  off  the  superstitious  awe  for  Napoleon’s 
genius  in  treating  of  his  disposition  of  his  troops — may  be  condensed  into 
four  points — four  commands.  Not  one  of  those  instructions  was  or  could 
be  carried  out. 

In  the  first  place  the  instruction  is  given:  That  the  batteries  placed  on 
the  spot  selected  by  Napoleon,  with  the  cannons  of  Pernetti  and  Fouche, 
which  were  to  join  them,  in  all  one  hundred  and  two  cannons,  were  to  open  [ 
fire  and  shell  the  Russian  earthworks  and  redoubts.  This  could  not  be 
done,  since  from  the  spots  fixed  on  by  Napoleon  the  shells  did  not  carry 
so  far  as  the  Russian  earthworks,  and  these  one  hundred  and  two  cannons 
fired  in  the  air  till  such  time  as  the  nearest  officer  in  command  ordered 
them  to  advance,  in  opposition  to  Napoleon’s  instructions. 

The  second  instruction  given  is  that  Poniatovsky,  advancing  to  the 
village  in  the  wood,  should  turn  the  Russian  left  flank.  This  was  not, 
and  could  not  be  done,  as  Poniatovsky,  on  advancing  to  the  village  in  the 
wood,  found  Tutchkov  there  barring  his  way,  and  did  not,  and  could 
not,  turn  the  Russian  position. 

The  third  instruction  is:  General  Compans  will  move  into  the  wood  to 
take  possession  of  the  first  Russian  fortification.  Compans’s  division  did 
not  take  the  first  fortification,  but  was  beaten  back,  because,  as  it  came 
out  of  the  wood,  it  had  to  form  under  a  fire  of  grapeshot,  of  which  Napo¬ 
leon  knew  nothing. 


WARANDPEACE  739 

The  fourth  instruction  is:  That  the  viceroy  will  lake  possession  of 
the  village  (Borodino) ,  and  crossing  by  its  three  bridges,  and  following 
to  the  same  high  ground  as  Morand’s  and  Friant’s  divisions  (nothing  is 
said  of  whence  and  when  they  were  to  advance),  which  under  his  leader¬ 
ship  will  advance  to  the  redoubt  and  form  in  a  line  with  the  other  troops. 
As  far  as  one  can  make  out,  not  so  much  from  this  confused  paragraph, 
as  from  the  attempts  made  by  the  viceroy  to  carry  out  the  orders  given 
him,  he  was  to  advance  through  Borodino  from  the  left  to  the  redoubt, 
and  the  divisions  of  Morand  and  Friant  were  to  advance  simultaneously 
from  the  front.  All  this,  like  the  other  instructions,  was  impossible  to 
carry  out.  After  passing  through  Borodino  the  viceroy  was  beaten  back 
at  the  Kolotcha,  and  could  advance  no  further.  The  divisions  of  Morand 
and  Friant  did  not  take  the  redoubt,  but  were  driven  back,  and  at  the 
end  of  the  day  the  redoubt  was  captured  by  cavalry  (in  an  action 
probably  unforeseen  by  Napoleon,  and  not  heard  of  by  him). 

And  not  one  of  the  instructions  given  was,  or  could  be,  carried  into 
effect.  But  in  the  disposition  was  the  statement,  that  after  the  battle  had 
begun,  further  instructions  would  be  given  in  accordance  with  the  enemy’s 
movements;  and  so  it  might  be  supposed  that  all  necessary  instructions 
had  been  given  by  Napoleon  during  the  battle.  But  this  was  not,  and  could 
not  be,  the  case,  because,  during  the  whole  battle,  Napoleon  was  so  far 
from  the  scene  of  action  that  (as  it  turned  out  later)  he  knew  nothing 
of  the  course  of  the  battle,  and  not  a  single  instruction  given  by  him 
during  the  fight  could  possibly  be  executed. 


XXVIII 

Many  historians  assert  that  the  French  failed  at  Borodino  because  Napo¬ 
leon  had  a  cold  in  his  head;  that  if  he  had  not  had  a  cold  the  orders 
given  by  him  before  and  during  the  battle  would  have  been  even  more 
remarkable  for  their  genius,  and  Russia  would  have  been  lost  and  the  face 
of  the  world  would  have  been  changed.  To  historians,  who  can  maintain 
that  Russia  was  transformed  at  the  will  of  one  man — Peter  the  Great — 
and  that  France,  from  a  republic,  became  an  empire,  and  that  the  French 
army  marched  into  Russia  at  the  will  of  one  man — Napoleon — the  con¬ 
clusion  that  Russia  has  remained  a  power  because  Napoleon  had  a  bad 
cold  on  the  26th  of  August  may  seem  indisputable  and  convincing.  Had 
it  depended  on  Napoleon’s  will  to  fight,  or  not  to  fight,  at  Borodino,  or 
had  it  depended  on  his  will  whether  he  gave  this  order  or  that,  it  is  evi¬ 
dent  that  a  cold,  affecting  the  manifestation  of  his  will,  might  be  the 
saving  of  Russia,  and  consequently  the  valet,  who  forgot  to  put  on  Na¬ 
poleon’s  waterproof  boots  on  the  24th,  would  be  the  saviour  of  Russia. 
On  that  method  of  reasoning  such  a  deduction  is  inevitable;  as  inevitable 
as  the  contention  which  Voltaire  maintains  in  jest  (unconscious  what 
he  was  ridiculing)  that  the  Massacre  of  St.  Bartholomew  was  due  to  an 
attack  of  dyspepsia  from  which  Charles  ix.  was  suffering.  But  for  minds 


740  WARANDPEACE 

that  cannot  admit  that  Russia  was  transformed  at  the  will  of  one  man — • 
Peter  the  Great — and  that  the  French  empire  was  created,  and  the  war 
with  Russia  begun,  at  the  will  of  one  man — Napoleon — such  a  conten¬ 
tion  will  seem  not  merely  unsound  and  irrational,  but  contrary  to  the 
whole  nature  of  humanity.  The  question,  What  constitutes  the  cause  of 
historical  events?  will  suggest  to  them  another  answer,  resting  on  the 
idea  that  the  course  of  earthly  events  is  predestined  from  on  high,  de¬ 
pends  on  the  combination  of  all  the  wills  of  the  men  taking  part  in  those 
events,  and  that  the  predominant  influence  of  Napoleon  in  those  events 
is  purely  external  and  fictitious. 

Strange  at  first  sight  as  appears  the  proposition  that  the  Massacre  of 
St.  Bartholomew,  the  order  for  which  was  given  by  Charles  ix.,  was  not  the 
result  of  his  will ,  and  that  it  was  only  in  his  fancy  that  the  command 
he  had  given  was  the  cause  of  it,  and  that  the  Borodino  slaughter  of 
eighty  thousand  mien  was  not  due  to  Napoleon’s  will  (though  he  gave 
the  order  for  the  commencement  of  the  battle),  and  that  it  was  only  his 
fancy  that  it  was  his  doing,  strange  as  this  proposition  appears,  yet 
human  dignity,  that  tells  us  that  every  one  of  us  is  neither  more  nor 
less  a  man  than  Napoleon,  bids  us  admit  that  solution  of  the  question, 
and  historical  researches  abundantly  confirm  the  proposition. 

At  the  battle  of  Borodino  Napoleon  did  not  fire  at  any  one,  nor  kill 
any  one.  All  that  was  done  by  his  soldiers.  Therefore  it  was  not  he  who 
killed  those  men.  The  soldiers  of  the  French  army  went  out  to  slay  their 
fellow-men  at  Borodino,  not  owing  to  Napoleon’s  commands,  but  through 
their  own  desire  to  do  so.  The  whole  army — French,  Italians,  Germans, 
Poles — hungry,  ragged,  and  exhausted  by  the  march,  felt  at  the  sight 
of  an  army,  barring  their  way  to  Moscow:  the  wine  is  drawn,  it  must  be 
drunk.  Had  Napoleon  forbidden  them  at  that  point  to  fight  the  Rus¬ 
sians,  they  would  have  killed  him,  and  have  proceeded  to  fight  the  Rus- 
sions,  because  it  was  inevitable  for  them. 

When  they  heard  Napoleon’s  proclamation  offering  them  as  consola¬ 
tion  for  maiming  and  death  the  reminder  that  posterity  would  say  that 
they  had  been  at  the  battle  before  Moscow,  they  shouted,  ‘Vive  I’Empe- 
reur,’  just  as  they  shouted  ‘Vive  VEmpereur’  at  the  sight  of  the  picture  of 
the  little  boy  playing  cup  and  ball  with  the  earth,  and  just  as  they 
shouted  ‘Vive  VEmpereur’  at  every  absurdity  that  was  said.  There  was 
nothing  left  for  them  to  do  but  to  shout  ‘Vive  VEmpereur !’  and  to  fight 
so  as  to  get  food  and  rest  as  conquerors  in  Moscow.  Therefore  it  was  not 
owing  to  Napoleon’s  commands  that  they  killed  their  fellow-men. 

And  it  was  not  Napoleon  who  ordained  the  course  of  the  battle,  be¬ 
cause  none  of  his  instructions  were  put  into  execution,  and  he  knew  noth¬ 
ing  of  what  was  passing  before  him.  Therefore  the  manner  in  which 
these  men  slaughtered  one  another  did  not  depend  on  Napoleon’s  will,  but 
proceeded  independently  of  him,  from  the  wills  of  the  hundreds  of  thou¬ 
sands  of  men  who  took  part  in  the  affair.  It  only  seemed  to  Napoleon  that 
all  this  was  due  to  his  will.  And  therefore  the  question  whether  Napoleon 


W  A  R  A  N  D  P  E  A  C  E  74* 

had  or  had  not  a  cold  in  his  head  is  of  no  more  interest  to  history  than  the 
cold  of  the  lowest  soldier  of  the  commissariat. 

The  contention  of  some  writers,  that  Napoleon’s  cold  was  the  reason 
of  his  previous  instructions  and  commands  during  the  battle  being  weaker 
than  usual,  is  completely  groundless. 

The  instructions  that  have  been  reproduced  here  are  by  no  means 
inferior,  are  indeed  superior,  to  many  similar  arrangements  by  which 
he  had  gained  victories  in  the  past.  His  supposed  instructions  during  the 
day  were  also  in  no  way  inferior  to  the  commands  he  had  given  in  previ¬ 
ous  battles,  but  were  much  the  same  as  usual.  But  these  instructions  are 
supposed  to  be  inferior,  simply  because  Borodino  was  the  first  battle  in 
which  Napoleon  was  not  victorious.  The  finest  and  profoundest  combina¬ 
tions  seem  very  poor,  and  every  military  student  can  criticise  them  with 
a  consequential  air,  when  the  battle  has  not  been  won  by  means  of  them; 
and  the  stupidest  combinations  will  seem  exceedingly  ingenious,  and 
serious  writers  will  fill  volumes  in  proving  their  excellence,  when  the 
battle  that  followed  chances  to  have  been  a  victory. 

The  plan  composed  by  Weierother  at  Austerlitz  was  a  model  of  perfec¬ 
tion  in  its  own  line,  but  it  has  yet  been  condemned,  and  condemned  for 
its  very  perfection,  for  its  over-minuteness  in  detail. 

At  Borodino  Napoleon  played  his  part  as  the  representative  of  su¬ 
preme  power  as  well,  or  even  better,  than  he  had  done  at  previous  battles. 
He  did  nothing  likely  to  hinder  the  progress  of  the  battle;  he  yielded  to 
the  most  sensible  advice;  he  was  not  confused,  did  not  contradict  himself, 
did  not  lose  his  presence  of  mind,  nor  run  away  from  the  field  of  battle, 
but  with  his  great  tact  and  military  experience,  he  performed  calmly 
and  with  dignity  his  role  of  appearing  to  be  in  supreme  control  of  it  all. 


XXIX 

On  returning  from  a  second  careful  inspection  of  the  lines,  Napoleon 
said. 

‘The  pieces  are  on  the  board,  the  game  will  begin  to-morrow.’ 

He  ordered  some  punch,  and  sending  for  Beausset  began  talking  of 
Paris  with  him,  discussing  various  changes  he  intended  to  make  in  the 
Empress’s  household,  and  surprising  the  prefect  by  his  memory  of  the 
minutest  details  of  court  affairs. 

He  showed  interest  in  trifles,  jested  at  Beausset’s  love  of  travel,  and 
chatted  carelessly,  as  some  renowned,  skilful  and  confident  surgeon  will 
often  chat  playfully  while  he  tucks  up  his  sleeves  and  puts  on  his  apron, 
and  the  patient  is  being  bound  down  on  the  operating-table.  ‘I  have  the 
whole  business  at  my  finger-tips,  and  it’s  all  clear  and  definite  in  my  head. 
When  I  have  to  set  to  work,  I  will  do  it  as  no  one  else  could,  but  now  I  can 
jest,  and  the  more  serenely  I  jest  the  more  calm  and  confidence  and 
admiration  for  my  genius  you  ought  to  feel.’ 

After  emptying  a  second  glass  of  punch,  Napoleon  went  to  seek  repose 


742  WAR  AND  F  E  A  C  E 

before  the  grave  business  which,  as  he  imagined,  lay  before  him  next  day. 

He  was  so  preoccupied  with  what  lay  before  him  that  he  could  not 
sleep,  and  in  spite  of  his  cold,  which  got  worse  with  the  damp  of  evening,  1 
he  got  up  at  three  o’clock,  went  out  into  the  principal  compartment  of  the 
tent,  sneezing  violently.  He  asked  whether  the  Russians  had  not  re-  • 
treated.  He  was  told  that  the  enemy’s  fires  were  still  in  the  same  places.  He 
nodded  approval. 

The  adjutant  on  duty  came  into  the  tent. 

‘Well,  Rapp,  do  you  think  we  shall  do  good  business  to-day?’  he  said 
to  him. 

‘Without  doubt,  sire!’  answered  Rapp. 

Napoleon  looked  at  him. 

‘Do  you  remember  what  you  did  me  the  honour  to  say  at  Smolensk?’ 
said  Rapp:  ‘the  wine  is  drawn,  it  must  be  drunk.’ 

Napoleon  frowned,  and  sat  for  a  long  while  in  silence,  his  head  in  his 
hand. 

‘This  poor  army,  it  has  greatly  diminished  since  Smolensk.  La  fortune  ■ 
est  une  franche  courtisane,  Rapp.  I  have  always  said  so,  and  I  begin  to 
feel  it;  but  the  Guard,  Rapp,  the  Guard  is  intact?’  he  said  inquiringly. 

‘Yes,  sire,’  replied  Rapp. 

Napoleon  took  a  lozenge,  put  it  in  his  mouth,  and  looked  at  his  watch. 
He  was  not  sleepy,  and  morning  was  still  far  off;  and  there  were  no 
instructions  to  be  drawn  up  to  get  through  the  time,  for  all  had  been 
already  given,  and  were  even  now  being  put  into  execution. 

‘Have  the  biscuits  and  the  rice  been  distributed  to  the  regiments  of  the 
Guard?’  Napoleon  asked  severely. 

‘Yes,  Sire.’ 

‘The  rice,  too?’ 

Rapp  answered  that  he  had  given  the  Emperor’s  orders  about  the  rice ; 
but  Napoleon  shook  his  head  with  a  dissatisfied  air,  as  though  he  doubted 
whether  his  command  had  been  carried  out.  A  servant  came  in  with 
punch.  Napoleon  ordered  another  glass  for  Rapp,  and  took  a  few  sips 
from  his  own  in  silence.  ‘I  have  neither  taste  nor  smell,’  he  said,  sniffing 
at  the  glass.  ‘I  am  sick  of  this  cold.  They  talk  about  medicine.  What  is 
medicine,  when  they  can’t  cure  a  cold?  Corvisart  gave  me  these  lozenges, 
but  they  do  no  good.  What  can  they  cure?  They  can’t  cure  anything. 
Our  body  is  a  machine  for  living.  It  is  organised  for  that,  it  is  its  nature; 
leave  life  to  it  unhindered,  let  life  defend  itself  in  it;  it  will  do  more  than 
if  you  paralyse  it,  encumbering  it  with  remedies.  Our  body  is  a  perfect 
watch,  meant  to  go  for  a  certain  time;  the  watchmaker  has  not  the  power 
of  opening  it,  he  can  only  handle  it  in  fumbling  fashion,  blindfold.  Our 
body  is  a  machine  for  living,  that’s  all.’  And  apparently  because  he  had 
dropped  into  making  definitions,  which  he  had  a  weakness  for  doing, 
he  suddenly  hazarded  one  on  a  fresh  subject.  ‘Do  you  know,  Rapp,  what 
the  military  art  consists  in?’  he  asked.  ‘It  is  the  art  of  being  stronger  than 
the  enemy  at  a  given  moment.  That  is  all.’ 

Rapp  made  no  reply. 


WAR  AND  PEACE  743 

‘To-morrow  we  shall  have  to  do  with  Kutuzov,’  said  Napoleon.  ‘We 
shall  see!  Do  you  remember,  he  was  in  command  at  Braunau,  and  never 
once  in  three  weeks  mounted  a  horse  to  inspect  his  entrenchments.  We 
shall  see!  ’ 

He  looked  at  his  watch.  It  was  still  only  four  o’clock.  He  was  not 
sleepy;  the  punch  was  finished,  and  there  was  still  nothing  to  do.  He  got 
up,  walked  up  and  down,  put  on  a  warm  coat  and  hat  and  went  out  of 
the  tent.  The  night  was  dark  and  damp;  a  slight  drizzle  was  falling 
almost  inaudibly.  Close  by  in  the  French  Guard,  the  camp-fires  burned 
dimly,  and  far  away  they  were  blazing  brightly  through  the  smoke  along 
the  Russian  line.  The  air  was  still,  and  a  faint  stir  and  tramp  could  be  dis¬ 
tinctly  heard  from  the  French  troops  beginning  to  move  to  occupy  the 
position. 

Napoleon  walked  to  and  fro  before  the  tent,  looked  at  the  fires,  listened 
to  the  tramp,  and  passed  by  a  tall  guardsman  in  a  fur  cap,  a  sentinel  at 
his  tent,  who  drew  himself  up  like  a  black  post  on  seeing  the  Emperor 
The  latter  stood  still,  facing  him. 

‘Since  what  year  have  you  served?’  he  asked,  with  that  affectation 
of  military  bluntness  and  geniality  with  which  he  always  addressed  the 
soldiers.  The  soldier  answered. 

‘Ah!  one  of  the  veterans!  Have  you  all  had  rice  in  the  regiment?’ 

‘Yes,  your  majesty.’ 

Napoleon  nodded  and  walked  away. 

At  half-past  five  Napoleon  rode  to  the  village  of  Shevardino. 

It  began  to  get  light;  the  sky  cleared,  only  a  single  storm  cloud  lay 
on  the  eastern  horizon.  The  deserted  camp-fires  burned  down  in  the 
pale  light  of  morning. 

A  solitary,  deep  cannon  shot  boomed  out  on  the  right,  hovered  in  the 
air,  and  died  away  in  the  stillness.  Several  minutes  passed.  A  second, 
and  a  third  shot  was  heard,  the  air  was  full  of  vibration;  a  fourth  and  a 
fifth  boomed  out  majestically,  closely  on  the  right. 

The  first  shots  had  not  died  away,  when  others  rang  out,  and  more 
and  more,  their  notes  blending  and  overtaking  one  another. 

Napoleon  rode  with  his  suite  to  the  Shevardino  redoubt,  and  dis¬ 
mounted  there.  The  game  had  begun. 


XXX 

t 

Pierre,  on  returning  to  Gorky  from  seeing  Prince  Andrey,  gave  direc¬ 
tions  to  his  postillion  to  have  horses  ready  and  to  call  him  early  next 
morning,  and  promptly  fell  fast  asleep  in  the  corner  behind  a  screen 
which  Boris  had  put  at  his  disposal. 

When  Pierre  was  fully  awake  next  morning,  there  was  no  one  in  the 
hut.  The  panes  were  rattling  in  the  little  windows.  The  postillion  was  at 
his  side,  shaking  him.  ‘Your  excellency,  your  excellency,  your  excellency 
.  .  .’  the  groom  kept  saying  persistently,  shaking  him  by  the  shoulder, 


744  WAR  AND  PEACE 

without  even  looking  at  him,  apparently  having  lost  all  hope  of  evei 
waking  him  up. 

‘Eh,  has  it  begun?  Is  it  time?’  said  Pierre,  waking  up. 

‘Listen  to  the  bring,  your  excellency,’  said  the  postillion,  an  old  sol 
dier;  ‘all  the  gentlemen  are  gone  already;  his  highness  set  off  long  ago. 

Pierre  dressed  in  haste,  and  ran  out  into  the  porch.  It  was  a  bright 
fresh,  dewy,  cheerful  morning.  The  sun  had  just  broken  through  the 
cloud  that  had  screened  it,  and  its  rays  filtered  through  the  rent  clouds 
and  over  the  roofs*  of  the  street  opposite  on  to  the  dew-drenched  dust 
of  the  road,  on  to  the  fences  and  the  windows  of  the  houses,  and  Pierre’s 
horses  standing  by  the  cottage.  The  roar  of  the  cannon  could  be  heard 
more  distinctly  in  the  open  air.  An  adjutant  galloped  down  the  street, 
followed  by  a  Cossack. 

‘It’s  time,  count,  it’s  time!’  cried  the  adjutant.  Pierre  gave  orders 
that  he  should  be  followed  with  a  horse,  and  walked  along  the  street, 
to  the  knoll  from  which  he  had  viewed  the  field  of  battle  the  day  before. 
On  this  knoll  was  a  crowd  of  officers,  and  Pierre  heard  the  French  chatter 
of  the  staff,  and  saw  Kutuzov’s  grey  head  sunk  in  his  shoulders,  and 
his  white  cap,  with  red  braiding  on  it.  Kutuzov  was  looking  through  a 
field-glass  along  the  high-road  before  him. 

Mounting  the  steps  of  the  approach  to  the  mound,  Pierre  glanced 
before  him,  and  felt  a  thrill  of  delight  at  the  beauty  of  the  spectacle. 
It  was  the  same  scene  that  he  had  admired  from  that  mound  the  day 
before.  But  now  the  whole  panorama  was  filled  with  troops  and  the 
smoke  of  the  guns,  and  in  the  pure  morning  air  the  slanting  rays  of  the 
sun,  behind  Pierre  on  the  left,  shed  on  it  a  brilliant  light  full  of  gold  and 
pink  tones,  and  broken  up  by  long,  dark  shadows.  The  distant  forests 
that  bounded  the  scene  lay  in  a  crescent  on  the  horizon,  looking  as 
though  carved  out  of  some  precious  yellow-green  stone,  and  through 
their  midst  behind  Valuev  ran  the  great  Smolensk  road,  all  covered  with 
troops.  In  the  foreground  lay  golden  fields  and  copses  glittering  in  the 
sun.  Everywhere,  to  right,  to  left,  and  in  front  were  soldiers.  The  whole 
scene  was  inspiriting,  impressive,  and  unexpected;  but  what  struck 
Pierre  most  of  all  was  the  aspect  of  the  field  of  battle  itself,  of  Borodino, 
and  the  hollow  on  both  sides  of  the  Kolotcha. 

About  the  Kolotcha,  in  Borodino,  and  both  sides  of  it,  especially  to 
the  left  where  the  Voina  runs  through  swampy  ground  into  the  Kolotcha, 
a  mist  still  hung  over  the  scene,  melting,  parting,  shimmering  with  light 
in  the  bright  sunshine,  and  giving  fairy-like  beauty  to  the  shapes  seen 
through  it.  The  smoke  of  the  guns  mingled  with  this  mist,  and  every¬ 
where  gleams  of  sunlight  sparkled  in  it  from  the  water,  from  the  dew, 
from  the  bayonets  of  the  soldiers  crowding  on  the  river  banks  and  in 
Borodino.  Through  this  mist  could  be  seen  a  white  church,  here  and 
there  roofs  of  cottages  in  Borodino,  and  fitful  glimpses  came  of  compact 
masses  of  soldiers,  and  green  ammunition-boxes  and  cannons.  And  the 
whole  scene  moved,  or  seemed  to  move,  as  the  mist  and  smoke  trailed 
over  the  wide  plain.  In  this  low  ground  about  Borodino  in  the  mist, 


WARANDPEACE  74S 

and  above  it,  and  especially  along  the  whole  line  to  the  left,  in  the  copses, 
in  the  meadows  below,  and  on  the  tops  of  the  heights,  clouds  of  smoke 
were  incessantly  springing  out  of  nothing,  now  singly,  now  several  at 
once,  then  at  longer  intervals,  then  in  rapid  succession.  These  clouds  of 
smoke,  puffing,  rolling,  melting  into  one  another,  and  sundering  apart, 
trailed  all  across  the  wide  plain.  These  puffs  of  smoke,  and  the  reports 
that  followed  them,  were,  strange  to  say,  what  gave  the  chief  charm 
to  the  scene. 

‘PoooffI’  suddenly  there  flew  up  a  round,  compact  ball  of  smoke, 
with  shades  of  purple,  grey,  and  milk-white  in  it,  and  ‘booomt’  followed 
the  roar  of  the  cannon  a  minute  later. 

‘Pooff-pooff!’  two  clouds  of  smoke  rose,  meeting  and  mingling  into 
one;  and  ‘boom-boom,’  the  sound  repeated  what  the  eye  had  seen. 

Pierre  looked  round  at  the  first  puff  of  smoke,  which  he  had  seen  a 
second  before  a  round,  compact  ball,  and  already  in  its  place  were 
wreaths  of  smoke  trailing  away  to  one  side,  and  pooff  .  .  .  (then  a 
pause)  pooff-pooff— three  more  flew  up,  and  another  four  at  once,  and  at 
the  same  intervals  after  each  other  boom  .  .  .  boom-boom-boom, 
rang  out  the  sonorous,  resolute,  unfailing  sounds.  At  one  moment  it 
seemed  that  those  clouds  of  smoke  were  scudding  across  the  plain,  at 
the  next,  that  they  were  stationary,  and  the  copses,  fields,  and  glittering 
bayonets  were  flying  by  them.  From  the  left  side  these  great  clouds  of 
smoke  were  incessantly  flying  over  the  fields  and  bushes,  with  the 
stately  roar  resounding  after  each  of  them.  Still  nearer,  in  the  low 
meadows  and  copses,  there  darted  up  from  the  musket-fire  tiny  puffs 
that  hardly  formed  into  balls  of  smoke,  and  each  of  these,  too,  had  its 
tiny  report  echoing  after  it.  Tra-ta-ta-ta  sounded  the  crack  of  the  mus¬ 
kets  at  frequent  intervals,  but  thin  and  irregular  in  comparison  with 
the  rhythmic  roar  of  the  cannon. 

Pierre  longed  to  be  there  in  the  midst  of  the  smoke,  the  glittering 
bayonets,  the  movement,  and  the  noise.  He  looked  round  at  Kutuzov 
and  his  suite  to  compare  his  own  impression  with  that  of  others.  All 
like  him  were  looking  before  them  at  the  field,  and,  he  fancied,  with 
the  same  feeling.  Every  face  now  was  lighted  up  by  that  latent  heat 
of  feeling  that  Pierre  had  noticed  the  day  before,  and  understood  per¬ 
fectly  after  his  talk  with  Prince  Andrey. 

‘Go,  my  dear  fellow,  go,  and  Christ  be  with  you!’  said  Kutuzov, 
never  taking  his  eyes  off  the  field  of  battle,  to  a  general  standing  beside 
him.  The  general,  who  received  this  order,  ran  by  Pierre  down  the  descent 
from  the  mound. 

‘To  ride  across!  .  .  .’  the  general  said  coldly  and  severely,  in  answer 
to  a  question  from  one  of  the  staff. 

‘And  I  too,  I  too/  thought  Pierre,  and  he  went  in  the  same  direction. 

The  general  mounted  a  horse,  led  up  to  him  by  a  Cossack.  Pierre  went 
up  to  the  groom,  who  was  holding  his  horses.  Asking  him  which  was  the 
quietest,  Pierre  got  on  it,  clutched  at  the  horse’s  mane,  pressed  his  heels 
into  the  beast's  stomach,  and  feeling  that  his  spectacles  were  slipping 


746  WAR  AND  PEACE 

off,  and  that  he  was  incapable  of  letting  go  of  the  mane  and  the  reins, 
he  galloped  after  the  general,  followed  by  smiles  from  the  staff  officers 
staring  at  him  from  the  mound. 


XXXI 

The  general  after  whom  Pierre  galloped  trotted  downhill,  turned  off 
sharply  to  the  left,  and  Pierre,  losing  sight  of  him,  galloped  into  the  mid¬ 
dle  of  a  battalion  of  infantry  marching  ahead  of  him.  He  tried  to  get 
away  from  them,  turning  to  left  and  to  right;  but  there  were  soldiers 
everywhere,  all  with  the  same  anxious  faces,  preoccupied  with  some  un¬ 
seen,  but  evidently  serious,  business.  They  all  looked  with  the  same 
expression  of  annoyed  inquiry  at  the  stout  man  in  the  white  hat,  who 
was,  for  some  unknown  reason,  trampling  them  under  his  horse’s  feet. 

‘What  does  he  want  to  ride  into  the  middle  of  a  battalion  for?’  one 
man  shouted  at  him.  Another  gave  his  horse  a  shove  with  the  butt-end 
of  his  gun;  and  Pierre,  leaning  over  on  the  saddle-bow,  and  scarcely  able 
to  hold  in  his  rearing  horse,  galloped  out  to  where  there  was  open  space 
in  front  of  the  soldiers. 

Ahead  of  him  he  saw  a  bridge,  and  at  the  bridge  stood  the  soldiers 
firing.  Pierre  rode  towards  them.  Though  he  did  not  know  it,  he  rode  up 
to  the  bridge  over  the  Kolotcha,  between  Gorky  and  Borodino,  which  was 
attacked  by  the  French  in  one  of  the  first  actions.  Pierre  saw  there  was 
a  bridge  in  front  of  him,  and  that  the  soldiers  were  doing  something  in 
the  smoke  on  both  sides  of  the  bridge,  and  in  the  meadow  among  the 
new-mown  hay  he  had  noticed  the  day  before.  But  in  spite  of  the  unceas¬ 
ing  fire  going  on  there,  he  had  no  notion  that  this  was  the  very  centre 
of  the  battle.  Pie  did  not  notice  the  bullets  whizzing  on  all  sides,  and 
the  shells  flying  over  him ;  he  did  not  see  the  enemy  on  the  other  side  of 
the  river,  and  it  was  a  long  time  before  he  saw  the  killed  and  wounded, 
though  many  fell  close  to  him.  He  gazed  about  him  with  a  smile  still  on 
his  face. 

‘What’s  that  fellow  doing  in  front  of  the  line?’  some  one  shouted 
at  him  again. 

‘To  the  left,’  ‘to  the  right,’  men  shouted  to  him.  Pierre  turned  to  the 
right,  and  unwittingly  rode  up  to  an  adjutant  of  General  Raevsky’s,  with 
whom  he  was  acquainted.  The  adjutant  glanced  wrathfully  at  Pierre; 
and  he,  too,  was  apparently  about  to  shout  at  him,  but  recognising  him, 
he  nodded. 

‘How  did  you  come  here?’  he  said,  and  galloped  on.  Pierre,  feeling  out 
of  place  and  of  no  use,  and  afraid  of  getting  in  some  one’s  way  again, 
galloped  after  him. 

‘What  is  it,  here?  Can  I  go  with  you?’  he  asked. 

‘In  a  minute,  in  a  minute,’  answered  the  adjutant,  and  galloping  up 
to  a  stout  colonel  in  the  meadow,  he  gave  him  some  message,  and  then 


WARANDPEACE  747 

addressed  Pierre.  ‘What  has  brought  you  here,  count?’  he  said  to  him, 
with  a  smile.  ‘Are  you  still  curious?’ 

‘Yes,  yes,’  said  Pierre.  But  the  adjutant,  turning  his  horse’s  head,  rode 
on  further. 

‘Here  it’s  all  right,’  said  the  adjutant;  ‘but  on  the  left  flank,  in  Bagra¬ 
tion’s  division,  it’s  fearfully  hot.’ 

‘Really?’  said  Pierre.  ‘Where’s  that?’ 

‘Why,  come  along  with  me  to  the  mound;  we  can  get  a  view  from  there. 
But  it’s  still  bearable  at  our  battery,’  said  the  adjutant.  ‘Are  you  com¬ 
ing?’ 

‘Yes,  yes,  I’ll  go  with  you,’  said  Pierre,  looking  about  him,  trying  to 
see  his  groom.  It  was  only  then  for  the  first  time  that  Pierre  saw  wounded 
men,  staggering  along  and  some  borne  on  stretchers.  In  the  meadow  with 
the  rows  of  sweet-scented  hay,  through  which  he  had  ridden  the  day 
before,  there  lay  motionless  across  the  rows  one  soldier  with  his  shako 
off,  and  his  head  thrown  awkwardly  back.  ‘And  why  haven’t  they  taken 
that  one?’  Pierre  was  beginning,  but  seeing  the  adjutant’s  set  face  look¬ 
ing  in  the  same  direction,  he  was  silent. 

Pierre  did  not  succeed  in  finding  his  groom,  and  rode  along  the  hollow 
with  the  adjutant  towards  Raevsky’s  redoubt.  His  horse  dropped  behind 
the  adjutant’s,  and  jolted  him  at  regular  intervals. 

‘You  are  not  used  to  riding,  count,  I  fancy?’  asked  the  adjutant. 

‘Oh  no,  it’s  all  right;  but  it  does  seem  to  be  hopping  along  somehow,’ 
said  Pierre,  with  a  puzzled  look. 

‘Ay!  .  .  .  but  he’s  wounded,’  said  the  adjutant,  ‘the  right  fore-leg 
above  the  knee.  A  bullet,  it  must  have  been.  I  congratulate  you,  count,’ 
he  said,  ‘you  have  had  your  baptism  of  fire  now.’ 

After  passing  in  the  smoke  through  the  sixth  corps  behind  the  artillery, 
which  had  been  moved  forward  and  was  keeping  up  a  deafening  cannon¬ 
ade,  they  rode  into  a  small  copse.  There  it  was  cool  and  still  and  full  of 
the  scents  of  autumn.  Pierre  and  the  adjutant  got  off  their  horses  and 
walked  on  foot  up  the  hill. 

‘Is  the  general  here?’  asked  the  adjutant  on  reaching  the  redoubt. 

‘He  was  here  just  now;  he  went  this  way,’  some  one  answered,  pointing 
to  the  right. 

The  adjutant  looked  round  at  Pierre,  as  though  he  did  not  know  what 
to  do  with  him. 

‘Don’t  trouble  about  me,’  said  Pierre.  ‘I’ll  go  up  on  to  the  mound; 
may  I?’ 

‘Yes,  do;  you  can  see  everything  from  there,  and  it’s  not  so  danger¬ 
ous,  and  I  will  come  to  fetch  you.’ 

Pierre  went  up  to  the  battery,  and  the  adjutant  rode  away.  They  did 
not  see  each  other  again,  and  only  much  later  Pierre  learned  that  that 
adjutant  had  lost  an  arm  on  that  day. 

The  mound — afterwards  known  among  the  Russians  as  the  battery 
mound,  or  Raevsky’s  battery,  and  among  the  French  as  ‘the  great  re¬ 
doubt,’  ‘fatal  redoubt,’  and  ‘central  redoubt’ — was  the  celebrated  spot 


748  WAR  AND  PEACE 

at  which  tens  of  thousands  of  men  were  killed,  and  upon  which  the 
French  looked  as  the  key  of  the  position. 

The  redoubt  consisted  of  a  mound,  with  trenches  dug  out  on  three  sides 
of  it.  In  the  entrenchments  stood  ten  cannons,  firing  through  the  gaps  left 
in  the  earthworks. 

In  a  line  with  the  redoubt  on  both  sides  stood  cannons,  and  these  too 
kept  up  an  incessant  fire.  A  little  behind  the  line  of  cannons  were  troops 
of  infantry.  When  Pierre  ascended  this  mound,  he  had  no  notion  that 
this  place,  encircled  by  small  trenches  and  protected  by  a  few  cannons, 
was  the  most  important  spot  in  the  field. 

He  fancied,  indeed  (simply  because  he  happened  to  be  there),  that  it 
was  a  place  of  no  importance  whatever. 

Pierre  sat  down  on  the  end  of  the  earthwork  surrounding  the  battery 
and  gazed  at  what  was  passing  around  him  with  an  unconscious  smile  of 
pleasure.  At  intervals  Pierre  got  up,  and  with  the  same  smile  on  his  face 
walked  about  the  battery,  trying  not  to  get  in  the  way  of  the  soldiers, 
who  were  loading  and  discharging  the  cannons  and  were  continually 
running  by  him  with  bags  and  ammunition.  The  cannons  were  firing 
continually,  one  after  another,  with  deafening  uproar,  enveloping  all  the 
country  round  in  clouds  of  smoke. 

In  contrast  to  the  painful  look  of  dread  in  the  infantry  soldiers  who 
were  guarding  the  battery,  here  in  the  battery  itself,  where  a  limited  num¬ 
ber  of  men  were  busily  engaged  in  their  work,  and  shut  off  from  the  rest 
of  the  trench,  there  was  a  general  feeling  of  eager  excitement,  a  sort  of 
family  feeling  shared  by  all  alike. 

The  appearance  of  Pierre’s  unmartial  figure  and  his  white  hat  at  first 
impressed  this  little  group  unfavourably.  The  soldiers  cast  sidelong 
glances  of  surprise  and  even  alarm  at  him,  as  they  ran  by.  The  senior 
artillery  officer,  a  tall,  long-legged,  pock-marked  man,  approached  Pierre, 
as  though  he  wanted  to  examine  the  action  of  the  cannon  at  the  end,  and 
stared  inquisitively  at  him. 

A  boyish,  round-faced,  little  officer,  quite  a  child,  evidently  only  just 
out  of  the  cadets’  school,  and  very  conscientious  in  looking  after  the 
two  cannons  put  in  his  charge,  addressed  Pierre  severely. 

‘Permit  me  to  ask  you  to  move  out  of  the  way,  sir,’  he  said.  ‘You  can’t 
stay  here.’ 

The  soldiers  shook  their  heads  disapprovingly  as  they  looked  at  Pierre. 
But  as  the  conviction  gained  ground  among  them  that  the  man  in  the 
white  hat  was  doing  no  harm,  and  either  sat  quietly  on  the  slope  of  the 
earthwork,  or,  making  way  with  a  shy  and  courteous  smile  for  the  sol¬ 
diers  to  pass,  walked  about  the  battery  under  fire  as  calmly  as  though  he 
were  strolling  on  a  boulevard,  their  feeling  of  suspicious  ill-will  began 
to  give  way  to  a  playful  and  kindly  cordiality  akin  to  the  feeling  soldiers 
always  have  for  the  dogs,  cocks,  goats,  and  other  animals  who  share  the 
fortunes  of  the  regiment.  The  soldiers  soon  accepted  Pierre  in  their 
own  minds  as  one  of  their  little  circle,  made  him  one  of  themselves,  and 


W  A  R  A  N  D  P  E  A  C  E  749 

gave  him  a  name:  ‘our  gentleman’  they  called  him,  and  laughed  good- 
humouredly  about  him  among  themselves. 

A  cannon  ball  tore  up  the  earth  a  couple  of  paces  from  Pierre.  Brush¬ 
ing  the  earth  off  his  clothes,  he  looked  about  him  with  a  smile. 

‘And  how  is  it  you’re  not  afraid,  sir,  upon  my  word?’  said  a  broad,  red¬ 
faced  soldier,  showing  his  strong,  white  teeth  in  a  grin. 

‘Why,  are  you  afraid  then?’  asked  Pierre. 

‘Why,  to  be  sure!’  answered  the  soldier.  ‘Why,  she  has  no  mercy  on 
you.  She  smashes  into  you,  and  your  guts  are  sent  flying.  Nobody  could 
help  being  afraid,’  he  said  laughing. 

Several  soldiers  stood  still  near  Pierre  with  amused  and  kindly  faces. 
They  seemed  not  to  expect  him  to  talk  like  any  one  else,  and  his  doing 
so  delighted  them. 

‘It's  our  business — we’re  soldiers.  But  for  a  gentleman — it’s  surpris¬ 
ing.  It’s  queer  in  a  gentleman!  ’ 

‘To  your  places!’  cried  the  little  officer-boy  to  the  soldiers,  who  had 
gathered  round  Pierre.  It  was  evidently  the  first,  or  at  most,  the  second 
time,  this  lad  had  been  on  duty  as  an  officer,  and  so  he  behaved  with  the 
utmost  punctiliousness  and  formality  both  to  the  soldiers  and  his  superior 
officer. 

The  roar  of  cannon  and  the  rattle  of  musketry  was  growing  louder 
all  over  the  field,  especially  on  the  left,  where  Bagration’s  earthworks 
were,  but  from  where  Pierre  was,  hardly  anything  could  be  seen  for 
the  smoke.  Moreover,  watching  the  little  fraternal  group  of  men,  shut 
off  from  all  the  world  on  the  battery,  engrossed  all  Pierre’s  attention.  His 
first  unconscious  delight  in  the  sights  and  sounds  of  the  battlefield  had 
given  way  to  another  feeling,  ever  since  he  had  seen  the  solitary  dead 
soldier  lying  on  the  hayfield.  Sitting  now  on  the  slope  of  the  earthwork, 
he  watched  the  figures  moving  about  him. 

By  ten  o’clock  some  twenty  men  had  been  carried  away  from  the  bat¬ 
tery;  two  cannons  had  been  disabled,  and  more  and  more  frequently 
shells  fell  on  the  battery,  and  cannon  balls  came  with  a  hiss  and  whir, 
flying  out  of  the  distance.  But  the  men  on  the  battery  did  not  seem  to 
notice  this:  merry  chatter  and  jokes  were  to  be  heard  on  all  sides. 

‘Not  this  way,  my  pretty,’  shouted  a  soldier  to  a  grenade  that  came 
whistling  towards  them. 

‘Give  the  infantry  a  turn !  ’  another  added  with  a  chuckle,  as  the  grenade 
flew  across  and  fell  among  the  ranks  of  the  infantry. 

‘What,  see  a  friend  coming,  do  you?’  another  soldier  jeered  at  a  peas¬ 
ant,  who  had  ducked  low  at  the  sight  of  a  flying  cannon  ball. 

Several  soldiers  gathered  together  at  the  earthwork,  looking  at  what 
was  being  done  in  front. 

‘And  they’ve  taken  the  outposts,  see,  they’re  retreating,’  they  said, 
pointing  over  the  earthwork. 

‘Mind  your  own  business,’  the  old  sergeant  shouted  to  them.  ‘If  they 
have  come  back,  it’s  because  they  have  something  to  do  further  back.’ 


75°  WAR  AND  PEACE 

And  the  sergeant,  taking  one  of  the  soldiers  by  the  shoulder,  gave  him 
a  shove  with  his  knee.  There  was  the  sound  of  laughter. 

‘Fifth  cannon,  roll  away!  ’  they  were  shouting  on  one  side. 

‘Now  then,  a  good  pull,  all  together! ’  shouted  the  merry  voices  of  the 
men  charging  the  cannon. 

‘Ay,  she  almost  snatched  “our  gentleman’s”  hat  off,’  the  red-faced, 
jocose  soldier  laughed,  showing  his  teeth.  ‘Hey,  awkward  hussy!’  he 
added  reproachfully  to  a  cannon  ball  that  hit  a  wheel  and  a  man’s  leg. 
‘Now,  you  foxes  there!’  laughed  another,  addressing  the  peasant  militia¬ 
men,  who  were  creeping  in  and  out  among  the  guns  after  the  wounded. 
‘Don’t  you  care  for  our  porridge,  hey?  Ah,  the  crows!  that  pulls  them 
up!  ’  they  shouted  at  the  militiamen,  who  hesitated  at  the  sight  of  the  sol¬ 
dier  whose  leg  had  been  torn  off.  ‘Oo  .  .  .  oo  .  .  .  lad,’  they  criedf 
mimicking  the  peasants,  ‘we  don’t  like  it  at  all,  we  don’t!’ 

Pierre  noticed  that  after  every  ball  that  fell  in  their  midst,  after  every 
loss,  the  general  elation  became  more  and  more  marked. 

The  closer  the  storm  cloud  swooped  down  upon  them,  the  more  bright 
and  frequent  were  the  gleams  of  latent  fire  that  glowed  like  lightning 
flashes  on  those  men’s  faces,  called  up,  as  it  were,  to  meet  and  resist  their 
danger. 

Pierre  did  not  look  in  front  at  the  field  of  battle;  he  took  no  more  in¬ 
terest  in  what  was  going  on  there.  He  was  entirely  engrossed  in  the  con¬ 
templation  of  that  growing  fire,  which  he  felt  was  burning  in  his  own 
soul  too. 

At  ten  o’clock  the  infantry,  who  had  been  in  advance  of  the  battery, 
in  the  bushes  and  about  the  stream  Kamenka,  retreated.  From  the  bat¬ 
tery  they  could  see  them  running  back  past  them,  bearing  their  wounded 
on  their  guns.  A  general  with  a  suite  came  on  to  the  redoubt,  and  after 
talking  to  the  colonel  and  looking  angrily  at  Pierre,  went  away  again, 
ordering  the  infantry  standing  behind  the  battery  guarding  it  to  lie 
down,  so  as  to  be  less  exposed  to  fire.  After  that  a  drum  was  heard  in 
the  ranks  of  the  infantry,  more  to  the  right  of  the  battery,  and  shouts 
gave  the  word  of  command,  and  from  the  battery  they  could  see  the 
ranks  of  infantry  moving  forward. 

Pierre  looked  over  the  earthwork.  One  figure  particularly  caught  his 
eye.  It  was  the  officer,  walking  backwards  with  a  pale,  boyish  face.  He 
held  his  sword  downwards  and  kept  looking  uneasily  round. 

The  rows  of  infantry  soldiers  vanished  into  the  smoke,  but  they  could 
hear  a  prolonged  shout  from  them  and  a  rapid  musketry  fire.  A  few 
minutes  later  crowds  of  wounded  men  and  a  number  of  stretchers  came 
back  from  that  direction.  Shells  fell  more  and  more  often  in  the  battery. 
Several  men  lay  on  the  ground,  not  picked  up.  The  soldiers  bustled  more 
busily  and  briskly  than  ever  about  the  cannons.  No  one  took  any  notice 
of  Pierre  now.  Twice  he  was  shouted  at  angrily  for  being  in  the  way. 
The  senior  officer  strode  rapidly  from  one  cannon  to  another  with  a 
frowning  face.  The  officer-boy,  his  cheeks  even  more  crimson,  gave  the 
soldiers  their  orders  more  scrupulously  than  ever.  The  soldiers  served 


WAR  AND  PEACE  751 

sut  the  charges,  turned  round,  loaded,  and  did  all  their  work  with  exag¬ 
gerated  smartness.  They  moved  as  though  worked  by  springs. 

The  storm  cloud  was  swooping  closer;  and  more  brightly  than  ever 
glowed  in  every  face  that  fire  which  Pierre  was  watching.  He  was  standing 
near  the  senior  officer.  The  little  officer-boy  ran  up,  his  hand  to  his  shako, 
saluting  his  superior  officer. 

‘I  have  the  honour  to  inform  you,  colonel,  only  eight  charges  are  left; 
do  you  command  to  continue  firing?’  he  asked. 

‘Grapeshot!’  the  senior  officer  shouted,  looking  away  over  the  earth¬ 
work. 

Suddenly  something  happened;  the  boy-officer  groaned,  and  whirling 
round  sat  down  on  the  ground,  like  a  bird  shot  on  the  wing.  All  seemed 
strange,  indistinct,  and  darkened  before  Pierre’s  eyes. 

One  after  another  the  cannon  balls  came  whistling,  striking  the  breast¬ 
work,  the  soldiers,  the  cannons.  Pierre,  who  had  scarcely  heard  those 
sounds  before,  now  could  hear  nothing  else.  On  the  right  side  of  the  bat¬ 
tery,  soldiers,  with  shouts  of  ‘hurrah,’  were  running,  not  forward,  it 
seemed  to  Pierre,  but  back. 

A  cannon  ball  struck  the  very  edge  of  the  earthwork,  before  which 
Pierre  was  sitting,  and  sent  the  earth  flying;  a  dark,  round  mass  flashed 
just  before  his  eyes,  and  at  the  same  instant  flew  with  a  thud  into  some¬ 
thing.  The  militiamen,  who  had  been  coming  into  the  battery,  ran  back. 

‘All  with  grapeshot!’  shouted  the  officer. 

The  sergeant  ran  up  to  the  officer,  and  in  a  frightened  whisper  (just 
as  at  a  dinner  the  butler  will  sometimes  tell  the  host  that  there  is  no  more 
of  some  wine  asked  for)  said  that  there  were  no  more  charges. 

‘The  scoundrels,  what  are  they  about?’  shouted  the  officer,  turning  to 
Pierre.  The  senior  officer’s  face  was  red  and  perspiring,  his  piercing 
eyes  glittered.  ‘Run  to  the  reserves,  bring  the  ammunition-boxes!’  he 
shouted  angrily,  avoiding  Pierre  with  his  eyes,  and  addressing  the  soldier. 

‘I’ll  go,’  said  Pierre.  The  officer,  making  no  reply,  strode  across  to  the 
other  side. 

‘Cease  firing  .  .  .  Wait!’  he  shouted. 

The  soldier  who  had  been  commanded  to  go  for  the  ammunition  ran 
against  Pierre. 

‘Ah,  sir,  it’s  no  place  for  you  here,’  he  said,  as  he  ran  away. 

Pierre  ran  after  the  soldier,  avoiding  the  spot  where  the  boy-officer 
was  sitting. 

One  cannon  ball,  a  second  and  a  third  flew  over  him,  hitting  the  ground 
in  front,  on  each  side,  behind  Pierre  as  he  ran  down.  ‘Where  am  I  going?’ 
he  suddenly  wondered,  just  as  he  ran  up  to  the  green  ammunition-boxes. 
He  stopped  short  in  uncertainty  whether  to  go  back  or  forward.  Sud¬ 
denly  a  fearful  shock  sent  him  flying  backwards  on  to  the  ground.  At  the 
same  instant  a  flash  of  flame  dazed  his  eyes,  and  a  roar,  a  hiss,  and  a 
crash  set  his  ears  ringing. 

When  he  recovered  his  senses,  Pierre  found  himself  sitting  on  the 


752  WAR  AND  'PEACE 

ground  leaning  on  his  hands.  The  ammunition-box,  near  which  he  had 
been,  had  gone;  there  were  a  few  charred  green  boards  and  rags  tying 
scattered  about  on  the  scorched  grass.  A  horse  was  galloping  away  with 
broken  fragments  of  the  shafts  clattering  after  it;  while  another  horse 
lay,  like  Pierre,  on  the  ground,  uttering  a  prolonged,  piercing  scream. 


XXXII 

Pterre,  beside  himself  with  terror,  jumped  up  and  ran  back  to  the  bat-  : 
tery  as  the  one  refuge  from  the  horrors  encompassing  him. 

Just  as  Pierre  ran  up  to  the  redoubt,  he  noticed  that  there  was  no  sound 
of  firing  from  the  battery,  but  that  there  were  men  there  doing  something 
or  other.  He  had  not  time  to  make  out  what  men  they  were.  He  caught 
sight  of  the  senior  officer  tying  with  his  back  towards  him  on  the  earth 
wall,  as  though  gazing  intently  at  something  below;  and  he  noticed  one 
soldier,  who,  tearing  himself  away  from  the  men  who  were  holding  him, 
shouted  ‘Mates!’  and  he  saw  something  else  that  was  strange. 

But  before  he  had  time  to  grasp  that  the  colonel  had  been  killed,  that 
the  soldier  shouting  ‘Mates!’  was  a  prisoner,  another  soldier  was  stabbed 
in  the  back  by  a  bayonet  before  his  eyes.  He  had  hardly  run  up  into  the 
redoubt  when  a  thin  man  with  a  yellow,  perspiring  face,  in  a  blue  uni¬ 
form,  ran  up  to  him  with  a  sword  in  his  hand,  shouting  something.  Pierre, 
instinctively  defending  himself,  as  they  came  full  tilt  against  each  other, 
put  out  his  hands  and  clutched  the  man  (it  was  a  French  officer)  by  the 
shoulder  and  the  throat.  The  officer,  dropping  his  sword,  seized  Pierre  by 
the  collar. 

For  several  seconds  both  gazed  with  frightened  eyes  at  each  other’s 
unfamiliar-looking  faces,  and  both  were  bewildered,  not  knowing  what  j 
they  were  doing  or  what  they  were  to  do.  ‘Am  I  taken  prisoner  or  am  I 
taking  him  prisoner?’  each  of  them  was  wondering.  But  the  French  officer  < 
was  undoubtedly  more  disposed  to  believe  he  was  taken  prisoner,  because 
Pierre’s  powerful  hand,  moved  by  instinctive  terror,  was  tightening  its 
grip  on  his  throat.  The  Frenchman  tried  to  speak,  when  suddenly  a 
cannon  ball  flew  with  a  fearful  whiz  close  over  their  heads,  and  it  seemed 
to  Pierre  that  the  Frenchman’s  head  had  been  carried  off  by  it,  so  swiftly 
had  he  ducked  it. 

Pierre,  too,  ducked  and  let  go  with  his  hands.  Giving  no  more  thought 
to  the  question  which  was  taken  prisoner,  the  Frenchman  ran  back  to 
the  battery,  while  Pierre  dashed  downhill,  stumbling  over  the  dead  and 
wounded,  who  seemed  to  him  to  be  clutching  at  his  feet. 

But  before  he  had  reached  the  bottom  he  was  met  by  dense  crowds  of 
Russian  soldiers,  who,  stumbling  against  each  other  and  tripping  up, 
were  running  in  wild  merriment  towards  the  battery.  (This  was  the  attack 
of  which  Yermolov  claimed  the  credit,  declaring  that  it  was  only  his 
valour  and  good  luck  that  made  this  feat  of  arms  possible;  it  was  the 


WAR  AND  PEACE  753 

attack  in  which  he  is  supposed  to  have  strewn  the  redoubt  with  the  St. 
George’s  crosses  that  were  in  his  pocket.) 

The  French,  who  had  captured  the  battery,  fled.  Our  soldiers  pursued 
them  so  far  beyond  the  battery  that  they  were  with  difficulty  stopped. 
They  were  bringing  the  prisoners  down  from  the  battery,  among  them  a 
wounded  French  general,  surrounded  by  officers.  Crowds  of  wounded, 
both  French  and  Russians — among  them  men  Pierre  recognised — walked, 
or  crawled,  or  were  borne  on  stretchers  from  the  battery,  their  faces  dis¬ 
torted  by  suffering. 

Pierre  went  up  into  the  battery,  where  he  had  spent  over  an  hour;  and 
found  no  one  left  of  that  little  fraternal  group  that  had  accepted  him  as 
one  of  themselves.  There  were  many  dead  there,  whom  he  had  not  seen 
before.  But  several  he  recognised.  The  boy-officer  was  still  sitting  huddled 
up  in  a  pool  of  blood  at  the  edge  of  the  earth  wall.  The  red-faced,  merry 
soldier  was  still  twitching  convulsively;  but  they  did  not  carry  him  away. 

Pierre  ran  down  the  slope. 

‘Oh,  now  they  will  stop  it,  now  they  will  be  horrified  at  what  they  have 
done!’  thought  Pierre,  aimlessly  following  the  crowds  of  stretchers  mov¬ 
ing  off  the  battlefield. 

But  the  sun  still  stood  high  behind  the  veil  of  smoke,  and  in  front, 
and  even  more  so  to  the  left,  about  Semyonovskoye,  there  was  still  a 
turmoil  seething  in  the  smoke;  and  the  roar  of  cannon  and  musketry, 
far  from  slackening,  grew  louder  and  more  desperate,  like  a  man  putting 
all  his  force  into  one  deafening  outcry  as  a  last  despairing  effort. 


XXXIII 

The  chief  action  of  the  battle  of  Borodino  was  fought  on  the  space  seven 
thousand  feet  in  width  between  Borodino  and  Bagration’s  fleches.  Out¬ 
side  that  region,  on  one  side  there  was  the  action  on  the  part  of  Uvarov's 
cavalry  in  the  middle  of  the  day;  on  the  other  side,  behind  Utitsa,  there 
was  the  skirmish  between  Poniatovsky  and  Tutchkov;  but  those  two 
actions  were  detached  and  of  little  importance  in  comparison  with  what 
took  place  in  the  centre  of  the  battlefield.  The  chief  action  of  the  day 
was  fought  in  the  simplest  and  the  most  artless  fashion  on  the  open  space, 
visible  from  both  sides,  between  Borodino  and  the  fleches  by  the  copse. 

The  battle  began  with  a  cannonade  from  several  hundreds  of  guns  on 
both  sides.  Then,  when  the  whole  plain  was  covered  with  smoke,  on  the 
French  side  the  two  divisions  of  Desaix  and  Compans  advanced  on  the 
right  upon  the  fleches,  and  on  the  left  the  viceroy’s  regiments  advanced 
upon  Borodino.  The  fleches  were  a  verst  from  the  Shevardino  redoubt, 
where  Napoleon  was  standing;  but  Borodino  was  more  than  two  versts 
further,  in  a  straight  line,  and  therefore  Napoleon  could  not  see  what  was 
passing  there,  especially  as  the  smoke,  mingling  with  the  fog,  completely 
hid  the  whole  of  that  part  of  the  plain.  The  soldiers  of  Desaix’s  division. 


7S4  WARANDPEACE 

advancing  upon  the  fleches,  were  in  sight  till  they  disappeared  from  view 
in  the  hollow  that  lay  between  them  and  the  fleches.  As  soon  as  they 
dropped  down  into  the  hollow,  the  smoke  of  the  cannon  and  muskets  on  , 
the  fleches  became  so  thick  that  it  concealed  the  whole  slope  of  that  side  ! 
of  the  hollow.  Through  the  smoke  could  be  caught  glimpses  of  something 
black,  probably  men,  and  sometimes  the  gleam  of  bayonets.  But  whether 
they  were  stationary  or  moving,  whether  they  were  French  or  Russian, 
could  not  be  seen  from  Shevardino. 

The  sun  had  risen  brightly,  and  its  slanting  rays  shone  straight  in 
Napoleon’s  face  as  he  looked  from  under  his  hand  towards  the  fleches. 
The  smoke  hung  over  the  fleches,  and  at  one  moment  it  seemed  as  though 
it  were  the  smoke  that  was  moving,  at  the  next,  the  troops  moving  in  the 
smoke.  Sometimes  cries  could  be  heard  through  the  firing;  but  it  was 
impossible  to  tell  what  was  being  done  there. 

Napoleon,  standing  on  the  redoubt,  was  looking  through  a  field-glass, 
and  in  the  tiny  circle  of  the  glass  saw  smoke  and  men,  sometimes  his  own, 
sometimes  Russians.  But  where  what  he  had  seen  was,  he  could  not  tell 
when  he  looked  again  with  the  naked  eye. 

He  came  down  from  the  redoubt,  and  began  walking  up  and  down 
before  it. 

At  intervals  he  stood  still,  listening  to  the  firing  and  looking  intently 
at  the  battlefield. 

It  was  not  simply  impossible  from  below,  where  he  was  standing,  and 
from  the  redoubt  above,  where  several  of  his  generals  were  standing,  | 
to  make  out  what  was  passing  at  the  fleches;  but  on  the  fleches  them¬ 
selves,  occupied  now  together,  now  alternately  by  French  and  Russians, 
living,  dead,  and  wounded,  the  frightened  and  frantic  soldiers  had  no 
idea  what  they  were  doing.  For  several  hours  together,  in  the  midst  of 
incessant  cannon  and  musket  fire,  Russians  and  French,  infantry  and 
cavalry,  had  captured  the  place  in  turn;  they  rushed  upon  it,  fell,  fired, 
came  into  collision,  did  not  know  what  to  do  with  each  other,  screamed, 
and  ran  back  again. 

From  the  battlefield  adjutants  were  continually  galloping  up  to  Napo¬ 
leon  with  reports  from  his  marshals  of  the  progress  of  the  action.  But  all 
those  reports  were  deceptive ;  both  because  in  the  heat  of  battle  it  is  im¬ 
possible  to  say  what  is  happening  at  any  given  moment,  and  because 
many  of  the  adjutants  never  reached  the  actual  battlefield,  but  simply 
repeated  what  they  heard  from  others,  and  also  because,  while  the  adju¬ 
tant  was  galloping  the  two  or  three  versts  to  Napoleon,  circumstances 
had  changed,  and  the  news  he  brought  had  already  become  untrue.  Thus 
an  adjutant  came  galloping  from  the  viceroy  with  the  news  that  Borodino 
had  been  taken  and  the  bridge  on  the  Kolotcha  was  in  the  hands  of  the 
French.  The  adjutant  asked  Napoleon  should  the  troops  cross  the  bridge. 
Napoleon’s  command  was  to  form  on  the  further  side  and  wait;  but  long 
before  he  gave  that  command,  when  the  adjutant  indeed  had  only  just 
started  from  Borodino,  the  bridge  had  been  broken  down  and  burnt  by 


WAR  AND  PEACE  755 

the  Russians  in  the  very  skirmish  Pierre  had  taken  part  in  at  the  begin- 
ling  of  the  day. 

An  adjutant,  galloping  up  from  the  fleches  with  a  pale  and  frightened 
face,  brought  Napoleon  word  that  the  attack  had  been  repulsed,  and 
Compans  wounded  and  Davoust  killed;  while  meantime  the  fleches  had 
been  captured  by  another  division  of  the  troops,  and  Davoust  was  alive 
md  well,  except  for  a  slight  bruise.  Upon  such  inevitably  misleading  re¬ 
ports  Napoleon  based  his  instructions,  which  had  mostly  been  carried 
Dut  before  he  made  them,  or  else  were  never,  and  could  never,  be  carried 
}ut  at  all. 

The  marshals  and  generals  who  were  closer  to  the  scene  of  action,  but, 
like  Napoleon,  not  actually  taking  part  in  it,  and  only  at  intervals  riding 
within  bullet  range,  made  their  plans  without  asking  Napoleon,  and  gave 
their  orders  from  where  and  in  what  direction  to  fire,  and  where  the 
:avalry  were  to  gallop  and  the  infantry  to  run.  But  even  their  orders,  like 
Napoleon’s,  were  but  rarely,  and  to  a  slight  extent,  carried  out. 

For  the  most  part  what  happened  was  the  opposite  of  what  they  com- 
nanded  to  be  done.  The  soldiers  ordered  to  advance  found  themselves 
under  grapeshot  fire,  and  ran  back.  The  soldiers  commanded  to  stand 
still  in  one  place  seeing  the  Russians  appear  suddenly  before  them,  either 
-an  away  or  rushed  upon  them;  and  the  cavalry  unbidden  galloped  in 
ifter  the  flying  Russians.  In  this  way  two  cavalry  regiments  galloped 
icross  the  Semyonovskoye  hollow,  and  as  soon  as  they  reached  the  top 
af  the  hill,  turned  and  galloped  headlong  back  again.  The  infantry,  in  the 
same  way,  moved  sometimes  in  the  direction  opposite  to  that  in  which 
they  were  commanded  to  move. 

All  decisions  as  to  when  and  where  to  move  the  cannons,  when  to  send 
infantry  to  fire,  when  to  send  cavalry  to  trample  down  the  Russian  infan¬ 
try — all  such  decisions  were  made  by  the  nearest  officers  in  the  ranks, 
without  any  reference  to  Ney,  Davoust,  and  Murat,  far  less  to  Napoleon 
himself.  They  did  not  dread  getting  into  trouble  for  nonfulfilment  of 
orders,  nor  for  assuming  responsibility,  because  in  battle  what  is  at  stake 
is  what  is  most  precious  to  every  man — his  own  life;  and  at  one  time  it 
seems  as  though  safety  is  to  be  found  in  flying  back,  sometimes  in  flying 
forward;  and  these  men  placed  in  the  very  thick  of  the  fray  acted  in 
accordance  with  the  temper  of  the  moment. 

In  reality  all  these  movements  forward  and  back  again  hardly  im- 
oroved  or  affected  the  position  of  the  troops.  All  their  onslaughts  on  one 
mother  did  little  harm;  the  harm,  the  death  and  disablement  was  the 
work  of  the  cannon  balls  and  bullets,  that  were  flying  all  about  the  open 
space,  where  those  men  ran  to  and  fro.  As  soon  as  they  got  out  of  that 
jxposed  space,  over  which  the  balls  and  bullets  were  flying,  their  superior 
officer  promptly  formed  them  in  good  order,  and  restored  discipline,  and 
jnder  the  influence  of  that  discipline  led  them  back  under  fire  again; 
md  there  again,  under  the  influence  of  the  terror  of  death,  they  lost  all 
liscipline,  and  dashed  to  and  fro  at  the  chance  promptings  of  the  crowd. 


756 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


XXXIV 

Napoleon’s  generals,  Davoust,  Ney,  and  Murat,  who  were  close  to  that 
region  of  fire,  and  sometimes  even  rode  into  it,  several  times  led  immense 
masses  of  orderly  troops  into  that  region.  But  instead  of  what  had  invari¬ 
ably  happened  in  all  their  previous  battles,  instead  of  hearing  that  the 
enemy  were  in  flight,  the  disciplined  masses  of  troops  came  back  in  undis¬ 
ciplined,  panic-stricken  crowds.  They  formed  them  in  good  order  again, 
but  their  number  was  steadily  dwindling.  In  the  middle  of  the  day  Murat 
sent  his  adjutant  to  Napoleon  with  a  request  for  reinforcements. 

'  Napoleon  was  sitting  under  the  redoubt,  drinking  punch,  when  Murat’s 
adjutant  galloped  to  him  with  the  message  that  the  Russians  would  be 
routed  if  his  majesty  would  let  them  have  another  division. 

‘Reinforcements?’  said  Napoleon,  with  stern  astonishment,  staring, 
as  though  failing  to  comprehend  his  words,  at  the  handsome,  boyish 
adjutant,  who  wore  his  black  hair  in  floating  curls,  like  Murat’s  own. 
‘Reinforcements!’  thought  Napoleon.  ‘How  can  they  want  reinforce¬ 
ments  when  they  have  half  the  army  already,  concentrated  against  one 
weak,  unsupported  flank  of  the  Russians!  ’ 

‘Tell  the  King  of  Naples,’  said  Napoleon  sternly,  ‘that  it  is  not  midday, 
and  I  don’t  yet  see  clearly  over  my  chess-board.  You  can  go.’ 

The  handsome,  boyish  adjutant  with  the  long  curls  heaved  a  deep! 
sigh,  and  still  holding  his  hand  to  his  hat,  galloped  back  to  the  slaughter. 

Napoleon  got  up,  and  summoning  Caulaincourt  and  Berthier,  began] 
conversing  with  them  of  matters  not  connected  with  the  battle. 

In  the  middle  of  the  conversation,  which  began  to  interest  Napoleon 
Berthier’s  eye  was  caught  by  a  general,  who  was  galloping  on  a  steaming] 
horse  to  the  redoubt,  followed  by  his  suite.  It  was  Beliard.  Dismounting 
from  his  horse,  he  walked  rapidly  up  to  the  Emperor,  and,  in  a  louc 
voice,  began  boldly  explaining  the  absolute  necessity  of  reinforcements. 
He  swore  on  his  honour  that  the  Russians  would  be  annihilated  if  the 
Emperor  would  let  them  have  another  division. 

Napoleon  shrugged  his  shoulders,  and  continued  walking  up  and  down 
without  answering.  Beliard  began  loudly  and  eagerly  talking  with  the 
generals  of  the  suite  standing  round  him. 

‘You  are  very  hasty,  Beliard,’  said  Napoleon,  going  back  again  to  him 
‘It  is  easy  to  make  a  mistake  in  the  heat  of  the  fray.  Go  and  look  agair 
and  then  come  to  me.’  Before  Beliard  was  out  of  sight  another  messenger 
came  galloping  up  from  another  part  of  the  battlefield. 

‘Well,  what  is  it  now?’  said  Napoleon,  in  the  tone  of  a  man  irritated  j 
by  repeated  interruptions. 

‘Sire,  the  prince  .  .  .’  began  the  adjutant. 

‘Asks  for  reinforcements?’  said  Napoleon,  with  a  wrathful  gesture.  Thf 
adjutant  bent  his  head  affirmatively  and  was  proceeding  to  give  his  mes¬ 
sage,  but  the  Emperor  turned  and  walked  a  couple  of  steps  away 
stepped,  turned  back,  and  beckoned  to  Berthier.  ‘We  must  send  the  re- 


WAR  AND  PEACE  757 

serves,’  he  said  with  a  slight  gesticulation.  ‘Whom  shall  we  send  there? 
what  do  you  think?’  he  asked  Berthier,  that  ‘gosling  I  have  made  an  eagle,’ 
as  he  afterwards  called  him. 

‘Claparede’s  division,  sire,’  said  Berthier,  who  knew  all  the  divisions, 
regiments,  and  battalions  by  heart. 

Napoleon  nodded  his  head  in  assent. 

The  adjutant  galloped  off  to  Claparede’s  division.  And  a  few  moments 
later  the  Young  Guards,  stationed  behind  the  redoubt,  were  moving  out. 
Napoleon  gazed  in  that  direction  in  silence. 

‘No,’  he  said  suddenly  to  Berthier,  ‘I  can’t  send  Claparede.  Send 
Friant’s  division.’ 

Though  there  was  no  advantage  of  any  kind  in  sending  Friant’s  division 
rather  than  Claparede’s,  and  there  was  obvious  inconvenience  and  delay 
now  in  turning  back  Claparede  and  despatching  Friant,  the  order  was 
carried  out.  Napoleon  did  not  see  that  jn  relation  to  his  troops  he  played 
the  part  of  the  doctor,  whose  action  in  hindering  the  course  of  nature  with 
his  nostrums  he  so  truly  gauged  and  condemned. 

Friant’s  division  vanished  like  the  rest  into  the  smoke  of  the  battlefield. 
Adjutants  still  kept  galloping  up  from  every  side,  and  all,  as  though  in 
collusion,  said  the  same  thing.  All  asked  for  reinforcements;  all  told  of 
the  Russians  standing  firm  and  keeping  up  a  hellish  fire,  under  which 
the  French  troops  were  melting  away. 

Napoleon  sat  on  a  camp-stool,  plunged  in  thought.  M.  de  Beausset,  the 
reputed  lover  of  travel,  had  been  fasting  since  early  morning,  and  ap¬ 
proaching  the  Emperor,  he  ventured  respectfully  to  suggest  breakfast 
to  his  majesty. 

‘I  hope  that  I  can  already  congratulate  your  majesty  on  a  victory,’ 
tie  said. 

Napoleon  shook  his  head.  Supposing  the  negative  to  refer  to  the  victory 
inly  and  not  to  the  breakfast,  M.  de  Beausset  permitted  himself  with 
•espectful  playfulness  to  observe  that  there  was  no  reason  in  the  world 
that  could  be  allowed  to  interfere  with  breakfast  when  breakfast  was 
possible. 

‘Go  to  the  .  .  .’  Napoleon  jerked  out  gloomily,  and  he  turned  his 
back  on  him.  A  saintly  smile  of  sympathy,  regret,  and  ecstasy  beamed  on 
M.  de  Beausset’s  face  as  he  moved  with  his  swinging  step  back  to  the 
Ther  generals. 

Napoleon  was  experiencing  the  bitter  feeling  of  a  lucky  gambler,  who, 
ifter  recklessly  staking  his  money  and  always  winning,  suddenly  finds, 
precisely  when  he  has  carefully  reckoned  up  all  contingencies,  that  the 
nore  he  considers  his  course,  the  more  certain  he  is  of  losing. 

The  soldiers  were  the  same,  the  generals  the  same,  there  had  been  the 
same  preparations,  the  same  disposition,  the  same  proclamation,  ‘ court 
it  encrgique.’  He  was  himself  the  same, — he  knew  that;  he  knew  that  he 
was  more  experienced  and  skilful  indeed  now  than  he  had  been  of  old. 
The  enemy  even  was  the  same  as  at  Austerlitz  and  Friedland.  But  the 
rresistible  wave  of  his  hand  seemed  robbed  of  its  might  by  magic. 


758  WARANDPEACE 

All  the  old  manoeuvres  that  had  invariably  been  crowned  with  success:’ 
the  concentration  of  the  battery  on  one  point,  and  the  advance  of  the  re¬ 
serves  to  break  the  line,  and  the  cavalry  attack  of  ‘men  of  iron,’  all  these: 
resources  had  been  employed;  and  far  from  victory  being  secure,  from  all 
sides  the  same  tidings  kept  pouring  in  of  killed  or  wounded  generals,  of 
reinforcements  needed,  of  the  troops  being  in  disorder,  and  the  Russians 
impossible  to  move. 

Hitherto,  after  two  or  three  orders  being  given,  two  or  three  phrases 
delivered,  marshals  and  adjutants  had  galloped  up  with  radiant  faces  and 
congratulations,  announcing  the  capture  as  trophies  of  whole  corps  of 
prisoners,  of  bundles  of  flags  and  eagles,  of  cannons  and  stores,  and  Murat 
had  asked  leave  to  let  the  cavalry  go  to  capture  the  baggage.  So  it  hadi 
been  at  Lodi,  Marengo,  Arcole,  Jena,  Austerlitz,  Wagram,  and  so  on,  and 
so  on.  But  now  something  strange  was  coming  over  his  men. 

In  spite  of  the  news  of  the  capture  of  the  fleches,  Napoleon  saw  that 
things  were  not  the  same,  not  at  all  the  same  as  at  previous  battles.  He 
saw  that  what  he  was  feeling,  all  the  men  round  him,  experienced  in  mili¬ 
tary  matters,  were  feeling  too.  All  their  faces  were  gloomy  ;  all  avoided 
each  others’  eyes.  It  was  only  a  Beausset  who  could  fail  to  grasp  the  im¬ 
port  of  what  was  happening.  Napoleon  after  his  long  experience  of  wai 
knew  very  well  all  that  was  meant  by  an  unsuccessful  attack  after  eighl 
hours’  straining  every  possible  effort.  He  knew  that  this  was  almost 
equivalent  to  a  defeat,  and  that  the  merest  chance  might  now,  in  the 
critical  point  the  battle  was  in,  be  the  overthrow  of  himself  and  hi; 
troops. 

When  he  went  over  in  his  own  mind  all  this  strange  Russian  campaign 
in  which  not  a  single  victory  had  been  gained,  in  which  not  a  flag,  nor  z 
cannon,  nor  a  corps  had  been  taken  in  two  months,  when  he  looked  at  the 
concealed  gloom  in  the  faces  round  him,  and  heard  reports  that  the 
Russians  still  held  their  ground — a  terrible  feeling,  such  as  is  experiencec 
in  a  nightmare,  came  over  him,  and  all  the  unlucky  contingencies  oc 
curred  to  him  that  might  be  his  ruin.  The  Russians  might  fall  upon  hi; 
left  wing,  might  break  through  his  centre;  a  stray  ball  might  even  kil  l 
himself.  All  that  was  possible.  In  his  former  battles  he  had  only  consideree 
the  possibilities  of  success,  now  an  immense  number  of  unlucky  chance 
presented  themselves,  and  he  expected  them  all.  Yes,  it  was  like  a  night 
mare,  when  a  man  dreams  that  an  assailant  is  attacking  him,  and  in  hi: 
dream  he  lifts  up  his  arm  and  deals  a  blow  with  a  force  at  his  assailant  tha  I 
he  knows  must  crush  him,  and  feels  that  his  arm  falls  limp  and  powerless  I 
as  a  rag,  and  the  horror  of  inevitable  death  comes  upon  him  in  his  help 
lessness. 

The  news  that  the  Russians  were  attacking  the  left  flank  of  the  Frencl 
army  aroused  that  horror  in  Napoleon.  He  sat  in  silence  on  a  camp-stoo 
under  the  redoubt,  his  elbows  on  his  knees,  and  his  head  sunk  in  his  hands 
Berthier  came  up  to  him  and  suggested  that  they  should  inspect  the  line 
to  ascertain  the  position  of  affairs. 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


759 


‘What?  What  do  you  say?’  said  Napoleon.  ‘Yes,  tell  them  to  bring  my 
horse.’  He  mounted  a  horse  and  rode  to  Semyonovskoye. 

In  the  slowly  parting  smoke,  over  the  whole  plain  through  which  Na¬ 
poleon  rode,  men  and  horses,  singly  and  in  heaps,  were  lying  in  pools  of 
blood.  Such  a  fearful  spectacle,  so  great  a  mass  of  killed  in  so  small  a 
space,  had  never  been  seen  by  Napoleon  nor  any  of  his  generals.  The  roar 
of  the  cannon  that  had  not  ceased  for  ten  hours,  exhausted  the  ear  and 
gave  a  peculiar  character  to  the  spectacle  (like  music  accompanying  living 
pictures).  Napoleon  rode  up  to  the  height  of  Semyonovskoye,  and  through 
the  smoke  he  saw  ranks  of  soldiers  in  uniforms  of  unfamiliar  hues.  They 
were  the  Russians. 

The  Russians  stood  in  serried  ranks  behind  Semyonovskoye  and  the 
redoubt,  and  their  guns  kept  up  an  incessant  roar  and  smoke  all  along 
their  lines.  It  was  not  a  battle.  It  was  a  prolonged  massacre,  which  could 
be  of  no  avail  either  to  French  or  Russians.  Napoleon  pulled  up  his  horse, 
and  sank  again  into  the  brooding  reverie  from  which  Berthier  had  roused 
him.  He  could  not  stay  that  thing  that  was  being  done  before  him  and 
about  him,  and  that  was  regarded  as  being  led  by  him  and  as  depending 
on  him,  that  thing  for  the  first  time,  after  ill  success,  struck  him  as  super¬ 
fluous  and  horrible.  One  of  the  generals,  riding  up  to  Napoleon,  ventured 
to  suggest  to  him  that  the  Old  Guards  should  advance  into  action.  Ney 
and  Berthier,  standing  close  by,  exchanged  glances  and  smiled  con¬ 
temptuously  at  the  wild  suggestion  of  this  general. 

Napoleon  sat  mute  with  downcast  head. 

‘Eight  hundred  leagues  from  France,  I  am  not  going  to  let  my  Guard 
be  destroyed,’  he  said,  and  turning  his  horse,  he  rode  back  to  Shevardino. 


XXXV 


Kutuzov,  with  his  grey  head  hanging,  and  his  heavy,  corpulent  frame 
sunk  into  a  heap,  was  sitting  on  a  bench  covered  with  a  rug,  in  the  same 
place  in  which  Pierre  had  seen  him  in  the  morning.  He  issued  no  orders, 
and  simply  gave  or  withheld  his  assent  to  what  was  proposed  to  him. 

‘Yes,  yes,  do  so,’  he  would  say  in  reply  to  various  suggestions.  ‘Yes, 
yes,  go  across,  my  dear  boy,  and  see,’  he  would  cry  first  to  one  and  then 
to  another  of  the  adjutants  near  him;  or,  ‘No,  better  not;  we’d  better 
wait  a  bit,’  he  would  say.  He  listened  to  the  reports  brought  him,  and  gave 
orders,  when  they  were  asked  for.  But  as  he  heard  the  reports,  he  seemed 
to  take  little  interest  in  the  import  of  the  words  spoken;  something  else 
in  the  expression  of  the  face,  in  the  tone  of  the  voice  of  the  speaker, 
seemed  to  interest  him  more.  From  long  years  of  military  experience 


had  learned,  and  with  the  wisdom  of  old  age  he  had  recognised,  that  one 
man  cannot  guide  hundreds  of  thousands  of  men  struggling  with  death; 
that  the  fate  of  battles  is  not  decided  by  the  orders  given  by  the  com- 
mander-in-chief,  nor  the  place  in  which  the  troops  are  stationed,  nor  the 
number  of  cannons,  nor  of  killed,  but  by  that  intangible  force  called  the 


760  WARANDPEACE 

spirit  of  the  army,  and  he  followed  that  force  and  led  it  as  far  as  it  lay  in 
his  power. 

TTie  general  expression  of  Kutuzov’s  face  was  concentrated,  quiet  at¬ 
tention  and  intensity,  with  difficulty  overcoming  his  weak  and  aged  body. 

At  eleven  o’clock  they  brought  him  the  news  that  the  French  had  been 
driven  back  again  from  the  fleches  they  had  captured,  but  that  Bagration 
was  wounded.  Kutuzov  groaned,  and  shook  his  head. 

‘Ride  over  to  Prince  Pyotr  Ivanovitch  and  find  out  exactly  about  it,’ 
he  said  to  one  of  the  adjutants,  and  then  he  turned  to  the  Prince  of 
Wiirtemberg,  who  was  standing  behind  him: 

‘Will  your  highness  be  pleased  to  take  the  command  of  the  first  army?’ 

Soon  after  the  prince’s  departure — so  soon  that  he  could  not  yet  have  < 
reached  Semyonovskoye — his  adjutant  came  back  with  a  message  from 
him  asking  Kutuzov  for  more  troops. 

Kutuzov  frowned,  and  sent  Dohturov  orders  to  take  the  command  of 
the  first  army,  and  begged  the  prince  to  come  back,  saying  that  he  found 
he  could  not  get  on  without  him  at  such  an  important  moment.  When  news 
was  brought  that  Murat  had  been  taken  prisoner,  and  the  members  of  the 
staff  congratulated  Kutuzov,  he  smiled. 

‘Wait  a  little,  gentlemen,’  he  said.  ‘The  battle  is  won,  and  Murat’s  being 
taken  prisoner  is  nothing  very  extraordinary.  But  we  had  better  defer 
our  rejoicings.’  Still  he  sent  an  adjutant  to  take  the  news  to  the  troops. 

When  Shtcherbinin  galloped  up  from  the  left  flank  with  the  report  of 
the  capture  of  the  fleche,  and  Semyonovskoye  by  the  French,  Kutuzov, 
guessing  from  the  sounds  of  the  battlefield  and  Shtcherbinin’s  face,  that  ! 
the  news  was  bad,  got  up  as  though  to  stretch  his  legs,  and  taking 
Shtcherbinin  by  the  arm  drew  him  aside. 

‘You  go,  my  dear  boy,’  he  said  to  Yermolov,  ‘and  see  whether  something 
can’t  be  done.’ 

Kutuzov  was  in  Gorky,  the  centre  of  the  Russian  position.  The  attack 
on  our  left  flank  had  been  several  times  repulsed.  In  the  centre  the  French 
did  not  advance  beyond  Borodino.  Uvarov’s  cavalry  had  sent  the  French 
flying  from  the  left  flank. 

At  three  o’clock  the  attacks  of  the  French  ceased.  On  the  faces  of  all 
who  came  from  the  battlefield,  as  well  as  of  those  standing  round  him, 
Kutuzov  read  an  expression  of  effort,  strained  to  the  utmost  tension.  He 
was  himself  satisfied  with  the  success  of  the  day  beyond  his  expectations,  il 
But  the  old  man’s  physical  force  was  failing  him.  Several  times  his  head  : 
sank,  as  though  he  were  falling,  and  he  dropped  asleep.  Dinner  was 
brought  him. 

The  adjutant-general,  Woltzogen,  the  man  whom  Prince  Andrey  had 
overheard  saying  that  the  war  ought  to  be  ‘ini  Ranm  verle'gen,’  and  whom 
Bagration  so  particularly  detested,  rode  up  to  Kutuzov  while  he  was  at 
dinner.  Woltzogen  had  come  from  Barclay  to  report  on  the  progress  of 
the  fight  on  the  left  flank.  The  sagacious  Barclay  de  Tolly,  seeing  crowds 
of  wounded  men  running  back,  and  the  ranks  in  disorder,  and  weighing 
all  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  made  up  his  mind  that  the  battle  war- 


WARANDPEACE  761 

lost,  and  sent  his  favourite  adjutant  to  the  commander-in-chief  to  tell 
him  so. 

Kutuzov  was  with  difficulty  chewing  roast  chicken,  and  his  eyes  were 
screwed  up  with  a  more  cheerful  expression  as  he  glanced  at  Woltzogen. 

With  a  half-contemptuous  smile  Woltzogen  walked  carelessly  up  to 
Kutuzov,  scarcely  touching  the  peak  of  his  cap. 

He  behaved  to  his  highness  with  a  certain  affected  negligence,  which 
aimed  at  showing  that  he,  as  a  highly  trained  military  man,  left  it  to  the 
Russians  to  make  a  prodigy  of  this  useless  old  person,  and  was  himself  well 
aware  what  kind  of  a  man  he  had  to  deal  with.  ‘The  “old  gentleman” — this 
was  how  Kutuzov  was  always  spoken  of  in  Woltzogen ’s  German  circle — ‘is 
making  himself  quite  comfortable,’  he  thought;  and  glancing  severely  at 
the  dishes  before  Kutuzov,  he  began  reporting  to  the  old  gentleman 
Barclay’s  message  and  his  own  impressions  and  views.  ‘Every  point  of 
our  position  is  in  the  enemy’s  hands,  and  they  cannot  be  driven  back,  be¬ 
cause  there  are  not  the  troops  to  do  it;  the  men  run  away  and  there’s  no 
possibility  of  stopping  them,’  he  submitted. 

Kutuzov,  stopping  short  in  his  munching,  stared  at  Woltzogen  in 
amazement,  as  though  not  understanding  what  was  said  to  him.  Wolt¬ 
zogen,  noticing  the  old  gentleman’s  excitement,  said  with  a  smile: 

‘I  did  not  consider  I  had  a  right  to  conceal  from  your  highness  what  I 
saw.  .  .  .  The  troops  are  completely  routed.  .  .  .’ 

‘You  saw?  You  saw?  .  .  .’  cried  Kutuzov,  getting  up  quickly,  and 
stepping  up  to  Woltzogen.  ‘How  .  .  .  how  dare  you!  .  .  .’  making  a 
menacing  gesture  with  his  trembling  hands,  he  cried,  with  a  catch  in  his 
breath:  ‘How  dare  you,  sir,  tell  me  that?  You  know  nothing  about  it.  Tell 
General  Barclay  from  me  that  his  information  is  incorrect,  and  that  I, 
the  commander-in-chief,  know  more  of  the  course  of  the  battle  than  he 
does.’ 

Woltzogen  would  have  made  some  protest,  but  Kutuzov  interrupted 
him. 

‘The  enemy  has  been  repulsed  on  the  left  and  defeated  on  the  right 
Rank.  If  you  have  seen  amiss,  sir,  do  not  permit  yourself  to  speak  of  what 
you  do  not  understand.  Kindly  return  to  General  Barclay  and  inform 
him  of  my  unhesitating  intention  to  attack  the  French  to-morrow,’  said 
Kutuzov  sternly. 

All  were  silent,  and  nothing  was  to  be  heard  but  the  heavy  breathing  of 
the  gasping,  old  general.  ‘Repulsed  at  all  points,  for  which  I  thank  God 
and  our  brave  men.  The  enemy  is  defeated,  and  to-morrowT  we  will  drive 
him  out  of  the  holy  land  of  Russia!’  said  Kutuzov,  crossing  himself;  and 
all  at  once  he  gave  a  sob  from  the  rising  tears. 

Woltzogen,  shrugging  his  shoulders,  and  puckering  his  lips,  walked 
away  in  silence,  marvelling  ‘iiber  diese  Eingenommenheit  des  alten  Herrn  ’ 

‘Ah,  here  he  is,  my  hero!  ’  said  Kutuzov,  as  a  stoutish,  handsome,  black¬ 
haired  general  came  up  the  hillside.  It  was  Raevsky,  who  had  spent  the 
whole  day  at  the  most  important  part  of  the  battlefield. 


762  WARANDPEACE 

Raevsky  reported  that  the  men  were  standing  their  ground  firmly,  and 
that  the  French  were  not  venturing  a  further  attack. 

When  he  had  heard  him  out,  Kutuzov  said  in  French:  ‘You  do  not 
think,  like  some  others,  that  we  are  obliged  to  retreat?’ 

‘On  the  contrary,  your  highness,  in  indecisive  actions  it  is  always  the 
most  obstinate  who  remains  victorious/  answered  Raevsky;  ‘and  my 
opinion  .  .  .’ 

‘Kaisarov/  Kutuzov  called  to  his  adjutant,  ‘sit  down  and  write  the 
order  for  to-morrow.  And  you/  he  turned  to  another,  ‘ride  along  the  line 
and  announce  that  to-morrow  we  attack.’ 

While  he  was  talking  to  Raevsky  and  dictating  the  order,  Woltzogen 
came  back  from  Barclay  and  announced  that  General  Barclay  de  Tolly 
would  be  glad  to  have  a  written  confirmation  of  the  order  given  by  the 
field-marshal. 

Kutuzov,  without  looking  at  Woltzogen,  ordered  an  adjutant  to  make 
out  this  written  order,  which  the  former  commander-in-chief  very  pru¬ 
dently  wished  to  have  to  screen  himself  from  all  responsibility.  And 
through  the  undefinable,  mysterious  link  that  maintains  through  a  whole 
army  the  same  temper,  called  the  spirit  of  the  army,  and  constituting  the 
chief  sinew  of  war,  Kutuzov’s  words,  his  order  for  the  battle  next  day, 
were  transmitted  instantaneously  from  one  end  of  the  army  to  the  other. 

The  words  and  the  phrases  of  the  order  were  by  no  means  the  same 
when  they  reached  the  furthest  links  in  the  chain.  There  was,  indeed,  not 
a  word  in  the  stories  men  were  repeating  to  one  another  from  one  end  of 
the  army  to  the  other,  that  resembled  what  Kutuzov  had  actually  said; 
but  the  drift  of  his  words  spread  everywhere,  because  what  Kutuzov  had 
said  was  not  the  result  of  shrewd  considerations,  but  the  outflow  of  a  feel¬ 
ing  that  lay  deep  in  the  heart  of  the  commander-in-chief,  and  deep  in  the 
heart  of  every  Russian. 

And  learning  that  to-morrow  we  were  to  attack  the  enemy,  hearing 
from  the  higher  spheres  of  the  army  the  confirmation  of  what  they  wanted 
to  believe,  the  worn-out,  wavering  men  took  comfort  and  courage  again. 


XXXVI 

Prince  Andrey’s  regiment  was  in  the  reserves,  which  were  until  two 
o’clock  stationed  behind  Semyonovskoye  in  complete  inaction,  under  a 
hot  artillery  fire.  Before  two  o’clock  the  regiment,  which  had  already  lost 
over  two  hundred  men,  was  moved  forward  into  the  trampled  oat-field,  in 
that  space  between  Semyonovskoye  and  the  battery  redoubt,  on  which 
thousands  of  men  were  killed  that  day,  and  on  which,  about  two  o’clock, 
there  was  directed  the  concentrated  fire  of  several  hundreds  of  the  enemy’s 
cannons. 

Not  leaving  that  spot,  nor  discharging  a  single  round  of  ammunition,  . 
the  regiment  lost  here  another  third  of  its  men.  In  front,  and  especially  on  ; 
the  right  side,  the  cannons  kept  booming  in  the  smoke  that  never 


WARANDPEACE  763 

lifted,  and  from  the  mysterious  region  of  the  smoke  that  hid  all  the 
country  in  front,  there  came  flying  swiftly  hissing  cannon  balls  and  slowly 
whizzing  grenades.  Sometimes,  as  though  to  give  them  a  breathing  space, 
for  a  whole  quarter  of  an  hour  all  the  cannon  balls  and  grenades  flew  over 
them,  but  at  other  times,  in  the  course  of  a  single  minute,  several  men  out 
of  the  regiment  would  be  swept  off,  and  they  were  busy  the  whole  time 
dragging  away  the  dead  and  carrying  off  the  wounded. 

With  every  fresh  stroke  the  chances  of  life  grew  less  and  less  for  those 
who  were  not  yet  killed.  The  regiment  was  divided  into  battalions  three 
hundred  paces  apart;  but  in  spite  of  that,  all  the  regiment  was  under  the 
influence  of  the  same  mood.  All  the  men  of  the  regiment  were  alike  gloomy 
and  silent.  At  rare  intervals  there  was  the  sound  of  talk  in  the  ranks,  but 
that  sound  was  hushed  every  time  the  falling  thud  and  the  cry  of  ‘stretch¬ 
ers!  ’  was  heard.  For  the  greater  part  of  the  time,  by  command  of  the  offi¬ 
cers,  the  men  sat  on  the  ground.  One,  taking  off  his  shako,  carefully  loos¬ 
ened  and  then  drew  up  the  folds  of  it;  another,  crumbling  the  dry  clay  in 
his  hands,  rubbed  up  his  bayonet  with  it;  another  shifted  and  fastened 
the  buckle  of  his  shoulder  straps;  while  another  carefully  undid,  and  did 
up  again,  his  leg  bandages,  and  changed  his  boots.  Some  built  little  houses 
of  clods  of  the  ploughed  field,  or  plaited  straws  of  stubble.  All  of  them 
appeared  entirely  engrossed  in  these  pursuits.  When  men  were  killed  or 
wounded,  when  the  stretchers  trailed  by,  when  our  troops  retreated,  when 
immense  masses  of  the  enemy  came  into  view  through  the  smoke,  no  one 
took  any  notice  of  these  circumstances.  When  our  artillery  or  cavalry 
advanced,  when  our  infantry  could  be  seen  moving,  approving  observa¬ 
tions  could  be  heard  on  all  sides.  But  quite  extraneous  incidents  that  had 
nothing  to  do  with  the  battle  were  what  attracted  most  notice ;  as  though 
the  attention  of  these  morally  overstrained  men  found  a  rest  in  the  com¬ 
monplace  incidents  of  everyday  life.  Some  batteries  of  artillery  passed  in 
front  of  their  line.  In  one  of  the  ammunition  carriages  a  horse  had  put 
its  leg  through  the  traces. 

‘Hey!  look  at  the  trace-horse!  .  .  .  Take  her  leg  out!  She’ll  fall!  .  .  . 
Hey!  they  don’t  see!  .  .  .’  Shouts  rose  from  the  ranks  all  through  the 
regiment. 

Another  time  the  attention  of  all  was  attracted  by  a  little  brown  dog, 
with  its  tail  in  the  air,  who  had  come  no  one  knew  from  where,  and  was 
running  about  fussily  in  front  of  the  ranks.  All  at  once  a  cannon  ball  fell 
near  it,  and  it  squealed  and  dashed  away  with  its  tail  between  its  legs! 
Roars  and  shrieks  of  laughter  rang  out  from  the  whole  regiment.  But  dis¬ 
tractions  of  this  kind  did  not  last  more  than  a  minute,  and  the  men  had 
been  eight  hours  without  food  or  occupation,  with  the  terror  of  death 
never  relaxing  for  an  instant,  and  their  pale  and  haggard  faces  grew  paler 
and  more  haggard. 

Prince  Andrey,  pale  and  haggard  like  every  one  else  in  the  regiment, 
walked  to  and  fro  in  the  meadow  next  to  the  oat-field  from  one  boundary¬ 
line  to  the  other,  with  his  hands  clasped  behind  his  back,  and  his  eyes  fixed 
on  the  ground.  There  was  no  need  for  him  to  give  orders,  and  nothing  for 


764  WARANDPEACE 

him  to  do.  Everything  was  done  of  itself.  The  killed  were  dragged  behind 
the  line;  the  wounded  were  removed,  and  the  ranks  closed  up.  If  any 
soldiers  ran  away,  they  made  haste  to  return  at  once.  At  first  Prince 
Andrey,  thinking  it  his  duty  to  keep  up  the  spirits  of  the  men,  and  set 
them  an  example,  had  walked  about  among  the  ranks.  But  soon  he  felt 
that  there  was  nothing  he  could  teach  them.  All  his  energies,  like  those 
of  every  soldier,  were  unconsciously  directed  to  restraining  himself  from 
contemplating  the  horror  of  his  position.  He  walked  about  the  meadow, 
dragging  one  leg  after  the  other,  making  the  grass  rustle,  and  watching  the 
dust,  which  covered  his  boots.  Then  he  strode  along,  trying  to  step  on  the 
traces  of  the  footsteps  of  the  mowers  on  the  meadow ;  or  counting  his  steps, 
calculated  how  many  times  he  would  have  to  walk  from  one  boundary  rut 
to  another  to  make  a  verst;  or  cut  off  the  flowers  of  wormwood  growing 
in  the  rut,  and  crushing  them  in  his  hands,  sniffed  at  the  bitter-sweet, 
pungent  odour.  Of  all  the  thoughts  of  the  previous  day  not  a  trace  re¬ 
mained.  He  thought  of  nothing  at  all.  Pie  listened  wearily  to  the  sounds 
that  were  ever  the  same,  the  whiz  of  the  shells  above  the  booming  of  the 
cannon,  looked  at  the  faces  of  the  men  of  the  first  battalion,  which  he  had 
gazed  at  to  weariness  already,  and  waited.  ‘Here  it  comes  .  .  .  this  one’s 
for  us  again!  ’  he  thought,  listening  to  the  whiz  of  something  flying  out  of 
the  region  of  smoke. ‘One,  another !  More!  Fallen’  .  .  .  He  stopped  short 
and  looked  towards  the  ranks.  ‘No;  it  has  flown  over.  But  that  one  has 
fallen!  ’  And  he  fell  to  pacing  up  and  down  again,  trying  to  reach  the  next 
boundary  in  sixteen  steps. 

A  whiz  and  a  thud!  Five  paces  from  him  the  dry  soil  was  thrown  up, 
as  a  cannon  ball  sank  into  the  earth.  A  chill  ran  down  his  back.  He  looked 
at  the  ranks.  Probably  a  number  had  been  struck:  the  men  had  gathered 
in  a  crowd  in  the  second  battalion. 

‘M.  l’aide-de-camp,’  he  shouted,  ‘tell  the  men  not  to  crowd  together.’ 

The  adjutant,  having  obeyed  this  instruction,  was  approaching  Prince 
Andrey.  From  the  other  side  the  major  in  command  of  the  battalion  came 
riding  up. 

‘Look  out!’  rang  out  a  frightened  cry  from  a  soldier,  and  like  a  bird, 
with  swift,  whirring  wings  alighting  on  the  earth,  a  grenade  dropped  with 
a  dull  thud  a  couple  of  paces  from  Prince  Andrey,  near  the  major’s  horse.  ! 
The  horse,  with  no  question  of  whether  it  were  right  or  wrong  to  show 
fear,  snorted,  reared,  almost  throwing  the  major,  and  galloped  away.  The  I 
horse’s  Error  infected  the  men. 

‘Lie  mown!’  shouted  the  adjutant,  throwing  himself  on  the  ground. 
Prince  Andrey  stood  in  uncertainty.  The  shell  was  smoking  and  rotating! 
like  a  top  between  him  and  the  recumbent  adjutant,  near  a  bush  of  worm¬ 
wood  in  the  rut  between  the  meadow  and  the  field. 

‘Can  this  be  death?’  Prince  Andrey  wondered,  with  an  utterly  new; 
wistful  feeling,  looking  at  the  grass,  at  the  wormwood  and  at  the  thread 
of  smoke  coiling  from  the  rotating  top.  ‘I  can’t  die,  I  don’t  want  to  die,  I 
love  life,  I  love  this  grass  and  earth  and  air  .  . 


WAR  AND  PEACE  765 

He  thought  this,  and  yet  at  the  same  time  he  did  not  forget  that  people 
were  looking  at  him. 

‘For  shame,  M.  l’aide-de-camp! ’  he  said  to  the  adjutant;  ‘what  sort 
of  .  .  He  did  not  finish.  Simultaneously  there  was  a  tearing,  crashing 
sound,  like  the  smash  of  broken  crockery,  a  puff  of  stifling  fumes,  and 
Prince  Andrey  was  sent  spinning  over,  and  flinging  up  one  arm,  fell  on 
his  face. 

Several  officers  ran  up  to  him.  A  great  stain  of  blood  was  spreading 
over  the  grass  from  the  right  side  of  his  stomach. 

The  militiamen  stood  with  the  stretchers  behind  the  officers.  Prince 
Andrey  lay  on  his  chest,  with  his  face  sunk  in  the  grass;  he  was  still 
breathing  in  hard,  hoarse  gasps. 

‘Well,  why  are  you  waiting,  come  along!’ 

The  peasants  went  up  and  took  him  by  the  shoulders  and  legs,  but  he 
moaned  piteously,  and  they  looked  at  one  another,  and  laid  him  down 
again. 

‘Pick  him  up,  lay  him  on,  it’s  all  the  same!’  shouted  some  one.  They 
lifted  him  by  the  shoulders  again  and  laid  him  on  the  stretcher. 

‘Ah,  my  God!  my  God!  what  is  it?  .  .  .  The  stomach!  It’s  all  over 
then!  Ah,  my  God!’  could  be  heard  among  the  officers.  ‘It  almost  grazed 
my  ear,’  the  adjutant  was  saying.  The  peasants,  with  the  stretcher  across 
their  shoulders,  hurried  along  the  path  they  had  trodden  to  the  ambulance 
station. 

‘Keep  step!  .  .  .  Aie!  .  .  .  these  peasants!’  cried  an  officer,  seizing 
them  by  the  shoulders,  as  they  jogged  along,  jolting  the  stretcher. 

‘Drop  into  it,  Fyodor,  eh?’  said  the  foremost  peasant. 

‘That’s  it,  first-rate,’  said  the  hindmost,  falling  into  step. 

‘Your  excellency?  Eh,  prince?’  said  the  trembling  voice  of  Timohin,  as 
he  ran  up  and  peeped  over  the  stretcher. 

Prince  Andrey  opened  his  eyes,  and  looked  at  the  speaker  from  the 
stretcher,  through  which  his  head  had  dropped,  and  closed  his  eyelids 
again. 

The  militiamen  carried  Prince  Andrey  to  the  copse,  where  there  were 
vans  and  an  ambulance  station.  The  ambulance  station  consisted  of  three 
tents,  pitched  at  the  edge  of  a  birch  copse.  In  the  wood  stood  the  ambu¬ 
lance  waggons  and  horses.  The  horses  in  nose-bags  were  munching  oats, 
and  the  sparrows  flew  up  to  them  and  picked  up  the  grains  they  dropped. 
Some  crows,  scenting  blood,  flitted  to  and  fro  among  the  birches,  cawing 
impatiently.  For  more  than  five  acres  round  the  tents  there  were  sitting  or 
lying  men  stained  with  blood,  and  variously  attired.  They  were  sur¬ 
rounded  by  crowds  of  dejected-looking  and  intently  observant  soldiers, 
who  had  come  with  stretchers.  Officers,  trying  to  keep  order,  kept  driving 
them  away  from  the  place;  but  it  was  of  no  use.  The  soldiers,  heedless 
of  the  officers,  stood  leaning  against  the  stretchers,  gazing  intently  at  what 
was  passing  before  their  eyes,  as  though  trying  to  solve  some  difficult 
orobletn  in  this  spectacle.  From  the  tents  came  the  sound  of  loud,  angry 


766  WAR  AND  PEACE 

wailing,  and  piteous  moans.  At  intervals  a  doctor’s  assistant  ran  out  for 
water,  or  to  point  out  those  who  were  to  be  taken  in  next.  The  wounded, 
awaiting  their  turn  at  the  tent,  uttered  hoarse  groans  and  moans,  wept, 
shouted,  swore,  or  begged  for  vodka.  Several  were  raving  in  delirium. 
Prince  Andrey,  as  a  colonel,  was  carried  through  the  crowd  of  wounded 
not  yet  treated,  and  brought  close  up  to  one  of  the  tents,  where  his  bearers 
halted  awaiting  instructions.  Prince  Andrey  opened  his  eyes,  and  for  a 
long  while  could  not  understand  what  was  passing  around  him.  The 
meadow,  the  wormwood,  the  black,  whirling  ball,  and  his  passionate  rush 
of  love  for  life  came  back  to  his  mind.  A  couple  of  paces  from  him  stood 
a  tall,  handsome,  dark-haired  sergeant,  with  a  bandaged  head,  leaning 
against  a  branch.  He  had  been  wounded  in  the  head  and  in  the  leg,  and 
was  talking  loudly,  attracting  general  attention.  A  crowd  of  wounded  men 
and  stretcher-bearers  had  gathered  round  him,  greedily  listening  to  his 
words. 

‘We  regularly  hammered  him  out,  so  he  threw  up  everything;  we  took 
the  king  himself,’  the  soldier  was  shouting,  looking  about  him  with  fever¬ 
ishly  glittering  black  eyes.  ‘If  only  the  reserves  had  come  up  in  the  nick 
of  time,  my  dear  fellow,  there  wouldn’t  have  been  a  sign  of  him  left,  for 
I  can  tell  you  .  .  .’ 

Prince  Andrey,  like  all  the  men  standing  round  the  speaker,  gazed  at 
him  with  bright  eyes,  and  felt  a  sense  of  comfort.  ‘But  isn’t  it  all  the  same 
now?’  he  thought,  ‘What  will  be  there,  and  what  has  been  here?  Why  was 
I  so  sorry  to  part  with  life?  There  was  something  in  this  life  that  I  didn’t 
understand,  and  don’t  understand.’ 


XXXVII 

One  of  the  doctors  came  out  of  the  tent  with  a  blood-stained  apron,  and 
small,  blood-stained  hands,  in  one  of  which  he  had  a  cigar,  carefully 
held  between  his  thumb  and  little  finger,  that  it  might  not  be  stained 
too.  This  doctor  threw  his  head  up,  and  looked  about  him,  but  over  the 
level  of  the  wounded  crowd.  He  was  evidently  longing  for  a  short  respite. 
After  turning  his  head  from  right  to  left  for  a  few  minutes,  he  sighed  and 
dropped  his  eyes  again. 

‘All  right,  immediately,’  he  said  in  reply  to  an  assistant,  who  pointed 
him  out  Prince  Andrey,  and  he  bade  the  bearers  carry  him  into  the  tent. 

A  murmur  rose  in  the  crowd  of  wounded  men  waiting. 

‘Even  in  the  next  world  it’s  only  the  gentry  who  will  have  a  good 
time,’  said  one. 

Prince  Andrey  was  carried  in,  and  laid  on  a  table  that  had  just  been 
cleared,  and  was  being  rinsed  over  by  an  assistant.  He  could  not  make  i 
out  distinctly  what  was  in  the  tent.  The  pitiful  groans  on  all  sides,  and 
the  excruciating  pain  in  his  thigh,  his  stomach,  and  his  back  distracted 
his  attention.  Everything  he  saw  around  melted  for  him  into  a  single 
general  impression  of  naked,  blood-stained,  human  flesh,  which  seemed 


WAR  AND  PEACE  7f7 

to  fill  up  the  whole  low-pitched  tent,  as,  a  few  weeks  before,  on  that 
hot  August  day,  the  bare  human  flesh  had  filled  up  the  dirty  pond  along 
the  Smolensk  road.  Yes,  it  was  the  same  flesh,  the  same  chair  a  canon, 
the  sight  of  which  had  aroused  in  him  then  a  horror,  that  seemed 
prophetic  of  what  he  felt  now. 

There  were  three  tables  in  the  tent.  Two  were  occupied,  on  the  third 
they  laid  Prince  Andrey.  For  some  time  he  was  left  alone,  an  involuntary 
witness  of  what  was  being  done  at  the  other  tables.  On  the  table  nearest 
sat  a  Tatar,  probably  of  a  Cossack  regiment,  judging  from  the  uniform 
that  had  been  thrown  down  close  by.  Four  soldiers  were  holding  him.  A 
doctor  in  spectacles  was  cutting  something  in  his  brown,  muscular  back. 

‘Ooh!  ooh!  ooh!  .  .  the  Tatar,  as  it  were,  grunted,  and  all  of  a 
sudden,  throwing  up  his  broad,  swarthy,  sun-burned  face,  and  showing 
his  white  teeth,  he  began  wriggling,  twitching,  and  shrieking  a  piercingly 
shrill,  prolonged  scream.  On  the  other  table,  round  which  a  number  of 
persons  were  standing,  a  big,  stout  man  lay  on  his  back,  with  his  head 
flung  back.  The  colour  and  curliness  of  the  hair  and  the  shape  seemed 
strangely  familiar  to  Prince  Andrey.  Several  assistants  were  holding  him, 
and  weighing  on  his  chest.  One  white,  plump  leg  was  incessantly  moving 
with  a  rapid,  spasmodic  twitching.  This  man  was  sobbing  and  choking 
convulsively.  Two  doctors — one  was  pale  and  trembling — were  mutely 
engaged  in  doing  something  with  the  other  red,  gory  leg.  Having  finished 
with  the  Tatar,  over  whom  a  cloak  was  thrown,  the  doctor  in  spectacles 
came  up  to  Prince  Andrey,  wiping  his  hands. 

He  glanced  at  his  face,  and  hurriedly  turned  away.  ‘Undress  him! 
Why  are  you  dawdling?’  he  shouted  angrily  to  the  assistant. 

His  earliest,  remotest  childhood  came  back  to  Prince  Andrey,  when 
the  assistant,  with  tucked-up  sleeves,  hurriedly  unbuttoned  his  buttons, 
and  took  off  his  clothes.  The  doctor  bent  close  down  over  the  wound, 
felt  it,  and  sighed  deeply.  Then  he  made  a  sign  to  some  one.  And  the  ex¬ 
cruciating  pain  inside  his  stomach  made  Prince  Andrey  lose  conscious¬ 
ness.  When  he  regained  consciousness,  the  broken  splinters  of  his  thigh¬ 
bone  had  been  removed,  the  bits  of  ragged  flesh  had  been  cut  off,  and 
the  wound  bound  up.  Water  was  sprinkled  on  his  face.  As  soon  as  Prince 
Andrey  opened  his  eyes,  the  doctor  bent  over  him,  kissed  him  on  the 
lips  without  speaking,  and  hurried  away. 

After  the  agony  he  had  passed  through,  Prince  Andrey  felt  a  blissful 
peace,  such  as  he  had  not  known  for  very  long.  All  the  best  and  happiest 
moments  of  his  life,  especially  his  earliest  childhood,  when  he  had  been 
undressed  and  put  to  bed,  when  his  nurse  had  sung  lullabies  over  him, 
when,  burying  his  head  in  the  pillows,  he  had  felt  happy  in  the  mere 
consciousness  of  life,  rose  before  his  imagination,  not  like  the  past  even, 
but  as  though  it  were  the  actual  present. 

The  doctors  were  busily  engaged  with  the  wounded  man,  whose  head 
had  seemed  somehow  familiar  to  Prince  Andrey:  they  were  lifting  him 
up  and  trying  to  soothe  him. 

‘Show  it  to  me  .  .  .  ooo!  o!  ooo!’  he  could  hear  his  frightened,  ab- 


76S  WARANDPEACE 

jectly  suffering  moans,  broken  by  sobs.  Hearing  his  moans,  Prince 
Andrey  wanted  to  cry.  Either  because  he  was  dying  thus  without  glory, 
or  because  he  was  sorry  to  part  with  life,  or  from  these  memories  of  a 
childhood  that  could  never  return,  or  because  he  was  in  pain,  or  because 
others  were  suffering,  and  that  man  was  moaning  so  piteously,  he  longed 
to  weep  childlike,  good,  almost  happy,  tears. 

They  showed  the  wounded  man  the  leg  that  had  been  amputated, 
wearing  a  boot,  and  covered  with  dry  gore.  ‘O!  oooo!’  he  sobbed  like  a 
woman.  The  doctor  who  had  been  standing  near  him,  screening  his  face, 
moved  away. 

‘My  God!  How’s  this?  Why  is  he  here?’  Prince  Andrey  wondered. 

In  the  miserable,  sobbing,  abject  creature,  whose  leg  had  just  been 
cut  off,  he  recognised  Anatole  Kuragin.  It  was  Anatole  they  were 
holding  up  in  their  arms  and  offering  a  glass  of  water,  the  edge  of  which 
he  could  not  catch  with  his  trembling,  swollen  lips.  Anatole  drew  a 
sobbing,  convulsive  breath.  ‘Yes,  it  is  he;  yes,  that  man  is  somehow 
closely  and  painfully  bound  up  with  me,’  thought  Prince  Andrey,  with 
no  clear  understanding  yet  of  what  was  before  him.  ‘What  is  the  con¬ 
nection  between  that  man  and  my  childhood,  my  life?’  he  asked  himself, 
unable  to  find  the  clue.  And  all  at  once  a  new,  unexpected  memory  from 
that  childlike  world  of  purity  and  love  rose  up  before  Prince  Andrey. 
He  remembered  Natasha,  as  he  had  seen  her  for  the  first  time  at  the 
ball  in  1810,  with  her  slender  neck  and  slender  arms,  and  her  frightened, 
happy  face,  ready  for  ecstatic  enjoyment,  and  a  love  and  tenderness 
awoke  in  his  heart  for  her  stronger  and  more  loving  than  ever.  He  re¬ 
called  now  the  bond  that  existed  between  him  and  this  man,  who  was 
looking  vaguely  at  him  through  the  tears  that  filled  his  swollen  eyes. 
Prince  Andrey  remembered  everything,  and  a  passionate  pity  and  love 
for  that  suffering  man  filled  his  happy  heart. 

Prince  Andrey  could  restrain  himself  no  more  and  wept  tears  of  love 
and  tenderness  over  his  fellow-men,  over  himself,  and  over  their  errors 
and  his  own.  ‘Sympathy,  love  for  our  brothers,  for  those  who  love  us, 
love  for  those  who  hate  us,  love  for  our  enemies;  yes,  the  love  that  God 
preached  upon  earth,  that  Marie  sought  to  teach  me,  and  I  did  not 
understand,  that  is  why  I  am  sorry  to  part  with  life,  that  is  what  was 
left  me  if  I  had  lived.  But  now  it  is  too  late.  I  know  that!’ 


XXXVIII 

The  fearful  spectacle  of  the  battlefield,  heaped  with  dead  and  wounded, ;  i 
in  conjunction  with  the  heaviness  of  his  head,  the  news  that  some 
twenty  generals  he  knew  well  were  among  the  killed  or  wounded,  and 
the  sense  of  the  impotence  of  his  once  mighty  army,  made  an  unexpected 
impression  on  Napoleon,  who  was  usually  fond  of  looking  over  the  dead 
and  wounded,  proving  thereby,  as  he  imagined,  his  dauntless  spirit.  On! 
that  day,  the  awful  spectacle  of  the  battlefield  overcame  this  dauntless? 


WAR  AND  PEACE  769 

spirit,  which  he  looked  upon  as  a  merit  and  a  proof  of  greatness.  He 
hastened  away  from  the  field  of  battle  and  returned  to  Shevardino.  With 
a  yellow,  puffy,  heavy  face,  dim  eyes,  a  red  nose,  and  a  husky  voice,  he 
sat  on  a  camp-stool,  looking  down  and  involuntarily  listening  to  the 
sounds  of  the  firing.  With  sickly  uneasiness  he  awaited  the  end  of  this 
action,  in  which  he  considered  himself  the  prime  mover,  though  he  could 
not  have  stopped  it.  The  personal,  human  sentiment  for  one  brief  mo¬ 
ment  gained  the  ascendant  over  the  artificial  phantasm  of  life,  that  he 
had  served  so  long.  He  imagined  in  his  own  case  the  agonies  and  death 
he  had  seen  on  the  battlefield.  The  heaviness  of  his  head  and  chest  re¬ 
minded  him  of  the  possibility  for  him  too  of  agony  and  death.  At  that 
minute  he  felt  no  longing  for  Moscow,  for  victory  or  for  glory.  (What 
need  had  he  for  more  glory?)  The  one  thing  he  desired  now  was  repose, 
tranquillity,  and  freedom.  But  when  he  was  on  the  height  above  Sem- 
yonovskoye,  the  officer  in  command  of  the  artillery  proposed  to  him  to 
bring  several  batteries  up  on  to  that  height  to  increase  the  fire  on  the 
Russian  troops  before  Knyazkovo.  Napoleon  assented,  and  gave  orders 
that  word  should  be  brought  him  of  the  effect  produced  by  this  battery. 

An  adjutant  came  to  say  that  by  the  Emperor’s  orders  two  hundred 
guns  had  been  directed  upon  the  Russians,  but  that  they  were  still  hold¬ 
ing  their  ground. 

‘Our  fire  is  mowfing  them  down  in  whole  rows,  but  they  stand  firm,’ 
said  the  adjutant. 

‘They  want  more  of  it!’  said  Napoleon  in  his  husky  voice. 

‘Sire?’  repeated  the  adjutant,  who  had  not  caught  the  words. 

‘They  want  even  more!’  Napoleon  croaked  hoarsely,  frowning.  ‘Well, 
let  them  have  it  then.’ 

Already,  without  orders  from  him,  what  he  did  not  really  want  was 
being  done,  and  he  gave  the  order  to  do  it  simply  because  he  thought 
the  order  was  expected  of  him.  And  he  passed  back  again  into  his  old 
artificial  world,  peopled  by  the  phantoms  of  some  unreal  greatness,  and 
again  (as  a  horse  running  in  a  rolling  wheel  may  imagine  it  is  acting  on 
its  own  account)  he  fell  back  into  submissively  performing  the  cruel, 
gloomy,  irksome,  and  inhuman  part  destined  for  him. 

And  not  for  that  hour  and  day  only  were  the  mind  and  conscience 
darkened  in  that  man,  on  whom  the  burden  of  all  that  was  being  done 
lay  even  more  heavily  than  on  all  the  others  who  took  part  in  it.  Never, 
down  to  the  end  of  his  life,  had  he  the  least  comprehension  of  good,  of 
beauty,  of  truth,  of  the  significance  of  his  own  acts,  which  were  too  far 
opposed  to  truth  and  goodness,  too  remote  from  everything  human  for 
him  to  be  able  to  grasp  their  significance.  He  could  not  disavow  his  own 
acts,  that  were  lauded  by  half  the  world,  and  so>  he  was  forced  to  dis¬ 
avow  truth  and  goodness  and  everything  human. 

Not  on  that  day  only,  as  he  rode  about  the  battlefield,  piled  with 
corpses  and  mutilated  men  (the  work,  as  he  supposed,  of  his  will)  he 
reckoned  as  he  gazed  at  them  how  many  Russians  lay  there  for  each 
Frenchman,  and  cheated  himself  into  finding  matter  for  rejoicing  in  the 


770  WARANDPEACE 

belief  that  there  were  five  Russians  for  every  Frenchman.  Not  on  that 
day  only  he  wrote  to  Paris  that  ‘le  champ  de  bataille  a  ete  snperbe,’  be¬ 
cause  there  were  fifty  thousand  corpses  on  it.  Even  in  St.  Helena,  in  the 
peaceful  solitude  where  he  said  he  intended  to  devote  his  leisure  to  an 
account  of  the  great  deeds  he  had  done,  he  wrote: 

‘The  Russian  war  ought  to  have  been  the  most  popular  of  modern 
times:  it  was  the  war  of  good  sense  and  real  interests,  of  the  repose  and 
security  of  all:  it  was  purely  pacific  and  conservative. 

‘It  was  for  the  great  cause,  the  end  of  uncertainties  and  the  beginning 
of  security.  A  new  horizon,  new  labours  were  unfolding,  all  full  of 
welfare  and  prosperity  for  all.  The  European  system  was  established;: 
all  that  remained  was  to  organise  it. 

‘Satisfied  on  these  great  points  and  tranquil  everywhere,  I  too  should 
have  had  my  congress  and  my  holy  alliance.  These  are  ideas  stolen  from 
me.  In  this  assembly  of  great  sovereigns,  we  could  have  treated  of  our 
interests  like  one  family  and  have  reckoned,  as  clerk  with  master,  with 
the  peoples. 

‘Europe  would  soon  in  that  way  have  made  in  fact  but  one  people, 
and  every  one,  travelling  all  over  it,  would  always  have  found  himself! 
in  the  common  fatherland.  I  should  have  required  all  the  rivers  to  be 
open  for  the  navigation  of  all;  the  seas  to  be  common  to  all;  and  the 
great  standing  armies  to  be  reduced  henceforth  simply  to  the  bodyguard 
of  the  sovereigns. 

‘Returning  to  France,  to  the  bosom  of  the  great,  strong,  magnificent, 
tranquil,  and  glorious  fatherland,  I  should  have  proclaimed  its  frontiers 
immutable,  all  future  war  purely  defensive,  all  fresh  aggrandisement. 
anti-national.  I  should  have  associated  my  son  in  the  empire;  my  dic¬ 
tatorship  would  have  been  over,  and  his  constitutional  reign  would  have 
begun  .  .  . 

‘Paris  would  have  been  the  capital  of  the  world,  and  the  French  the 
envy  of  the  nations!  .  .  . 

‘My  leisure  then  and  my  old  age  would  have  been  consecrated,  in 
company  with  the  Empress,  and  during  the  royal  apprenticeship  of  my 
son,  to  visiting  in  leisurely  fashion  with  our  own  horses,  like  a  genuine 
country  couple,  every  corner  of  the  empire,  receiving  complaints,  redress-j 
ing  wrongs,  scattering  monuments  and  benefits  on  all  sides.’ 

He,  predestined  by  Providence  to  the  gloomy,  slavish  part  of  execu¬ 
tioner  of  the  peoples,  persuaded  himself  that  the  motive  of  his  acts  had : 
been  the  welfare  of  the  peoples,  and  that  he  could  control  the  destinies1 
of  millions,  and  make  their  prosperity  by  the  exercise  of  his  power. 

‘Of  the  four  hundred  thousand  men  who  crossed  the  Vistula,’  he  wrote 
later  of  the  Russian  war^  ‘half  were  Austrians,  Prussians,  Saxons,  Poles,; 
Bavarians,  Wiirtembergers,  Mecklenburgers,  Spaniards,  Italians,  Nea¬ 
politans.  The  Imperial  army,  properly  so-called,  was  one  third  composed 


WARANDPEACE  771 

of  Dutch,  Belgians,  inhabitants  of  the  Rhineland,  Piedmontese,  Swiss, 
Genevese,  Tuscans,  Romans,  inhabitants  of  the  thirty-second  military 
division,  of  Bremen,  Hamburg,  etc.  It  reckoned  barely  a  hundred  and 
forty  thousand  men  speaking  French.  The  Russian  expedition  cost  France 
itself  less  than  fifty  thousand  men.  The  Russian  army  in  the  retreat  from 
Vilna  to  Moscow  in  the  different  battles  lost  four  times  as  many  men 
as  the  French  army.  The  fire  in  Moscow  cost  the  lives  of  one  hundred 
thousand  Russians,  dead  of  cold  and  want  in  the  woods;  lastly,  in  its 
march  from  Moscow  to  the  Oder,  the  Russian  army,  too,  suffered  from 
the  inclemency  of  the  season:  it  only  reckoned  fifty  thousand  men  on 
reaching  Vilna,  and  less  than  eighteen  thousand  at  Kalisch.’ 

He  imagined  that  the  war  with  Russia  was  entirely  due  to  his  will, 
and  the  horror  of  what  was  done  made  no  impression  on  his  soul.  He 
boldly  assumed  the  whole  responsibility  of  it  all ;  and  his  clouded  intel¬ 
lect  found  justification  in  the  fact  that  among  the  hundreds  of  thousands 
of  men  who  perished,  there  were  fewer  Frenchmen  than  Hessians  and 
Bavarians. 


XXXIX 

Some  tens  of  thousands  of  men  lay  sacrificed  in  various  postures  and 
uniforms  on  the  fields  and  meadows  belonging  to  the  Davidov  family 
and  the  Crown  serfs,  on  those  fields  and  meadows  where  for  hundreds  of 
years  the  peasants  of  Borodino,  Gorky,  Shevardino,  and  Semyonovskoye 
had  harvested  their  crops  and  grazed  their  cattle.  At  the  ambulance  sta¬ 
tions  the  grass  and  earth  were  soaked  with  blood  for  two  acres  round. 
Crowds  of  men,  wounded  and  unwounded,  of  various  arms,  with  panic- 
stricken  faces,  dragged  themselves,  on  one  side  back  to  Mozhaisk,  on  the 
other  to  Valuev.  Other  crowds,  exhausted  and  hungry,  were  led  forward 
by  their  officers.  Others  still  held  their  ground,  and  went  on  firing. 

Over  all  the  plain,  at  first  so  bright  and  gay  with  its  glittering  bayonets 
and  puffs  of  smoke  in  the  morning  sunshine,  there  hung  now  a  dark 
cloud  of  damp  mist  and  smoke,  and  a  strange,  sour  smell  of  saltpetre  and 
blood.  Storm  clouds  had  gathered,  and  a  drizzling  rain  began  to  fall  on 
the  dead,  on  the  wounded,  on  the  panic-stricken,  and  exhausted,  and 
hesitating  soldiers.  It  seemed  to  say:  'Enough,  enough;  cease.  .  .  .  Con¬ 
sider.  What  are  you  doing?’ 

To  the  men  on  both  sides,  alike  exhausted  from  want  of  food  and  rest, 
the  doubt  began  to  come  whether  they  should  still  persist  in  slaughtering 
one  another;  and  in  every  face  could  be  seen  hesitation,  and  in  every 
heart  alike  there  rose  the  question:  ‘For  what,  for  whom  am  I  to  slay 
and  be  slain?  Slay  whom  you  will,  do  what  you  will,  but  I  have  had 
enough!’  This  thought  took  shape  towards  evening  in  every  heart  alike. 
Any  minute  all  those  men  might  be  horror-stricken  at  what  they  were 
doing,  might  throw  up  everything  and  run  anywhere. 

But  though  towards  the  end  of  the  battle  the  men  felt  all  the  horror 


772  WAR  AND  PEACE 

of  their  actions,  though  they  would  have  been  glad  to  cease,  some  un¬ 
fathomable,  mysterious  force  still  led  them  on,  and  the  artillerymen— 
the  third  of  them  left — soaked  with  sweat,  grimed  with  powder  and 
blood,  and  panting  with  weariness,  still  brought  the  charges,  loaded, 
aimed,  and  lighted  the  match;  and  the  cannon  balls  flew  as  swiftly  and 
cruelly  from  each  side  and  crushed  human  flesh,  and  kept  up  the  fearful 
work,  which  w'as  done  not  at  the  will  of  men,  but  at  the  will  of  Him 
who  sways  men  and  worlds. 

Any  one  looking  at  the  disorder  in  the  rear  of  the  Russian  army  would 
have  said  that  the  French  had  but  to  make  one  slight  effort  more  and 
the  Russian  army  would  have  been  annihilated;  and  any  one  seeing 
the  rear  of  the  French  army  would  have  said  that  the  Russians  need 
but  make  a  slight  effort  more  and  the  French  would  be  overthrown.  But 
neither  French  nor  Russians  made  that  effort,  and  the  flame  of  the 
battle  burnt  slowly  out. 

The  Russians  did  not  make  this  effort,  because  they  were  not  attacking 
the  French.  At  the  beginning  of  the  battle  they  merely  stood  on  the  road 
to  Moscow,  barring  it  to  the  French;  and  they  still  stood  at  the  end  of 
the  battle  as  they  had  at  the  beginning.  But  even  if  it  had  been  the  aim 
of  the  Russians  to  drive  back  the  French,  they  could  not  have  made 
this  final  effort,  because  all  the  Russian  troops  had  been  routed;  there 
was  not  a  single  part  of  the  army  that  had  not  suffered  in  the  battle, 
and  the  Russians,  without  being  driven  from  their  position,  lost  one  half 
of  their  army. 

For  the  French,  with  the  memory  of  fifteen  years  of  victories,  with 
confidence  in  Napoleon’s  all-vanquishing  genius,  with  the  consciousness 
of  having  taken  a  part  of  the  battlefield,  of  having  only  lost  a  fourth  of 
their  men,  and  of  having  a  body  of  twenty  thousand — the  Guards — intact 
— it  would  have  been  an  easy  matter  to  make  this  effort.  The  French, 
attacking  the  Russian  army  with  the  object  of  driving  it  from  its  posi¬ 
tion,  ought  to  have  made  this  effort,  because  as  long  as  the  Russians  still 
barred  the  way  to  Moscow,  as  before  the  battle,  the  aim  of  the  French 
had  not  been  attained,  and  all  losses  and  exertions  had  been  in  vain.  But 
the  French  did  not  make  that  effort.  Some  historians  assert  that  if 
Napoleon  had  only  let  his  Old  Guard  advance,  the  battle  would  have  been 
gained.  To  talk  of  what  might  have  happened  if  Napoleon  had  let  his 
Guard  advance  is  much  the  same  as  to  talk  of  what  would  happen  if 
spring  came  in  autumn.  That  could  not  have  been.  Napoleon  did  not  do 
so,  not  because  he  did  not  want  to,  but  because  it  was  impossible  to  do 
so.  All  the  generals,  officers,  and  soldiers  of  the  French  army  knew  that 
it  was  impossible  to  make  this  final  effort,  because  the  flagging  spirit  of  ! 
the  troops  did  not  allow  of  it. 

It  was  not  Napoleon  alone  who  had  that  nightmare  feeling  that  the 
mighty  arm  was  stricken  powerless:  all  the  generals,  all  the  soldiers  of 
the  French  army,  those  who  fought  and  those  who  did  not,  after  all  their 
experiences  of  previous  battles  (w7hen  after  one-tenth  of  the  effort  the 


WARANDPEACE  773 

enemy  had  always  run),  showed  the  feeling  of  horror  before  this  foe,  who, 
after  losing  one  half  of  the  army,  still  stood  its  ground  as  dauntless  at 
the  end  as  at  the  beginning  of  the  battle.  The  moral  force  of  the  French, 
the  attacking  army,  was  exhausted.  Not  the  victory,  signalised  by  the 
capture  of  rags  on  the  end  of  sticks,  called  flags,  or  of  the  ground  on 
which  the  troops  were  standing,  but  a  moral  victory,  that  which  com¬ 
pels  the  enemy  to  recognise  the  moral  superiority  of  his  opponent,  and 
his  own  impotence,  was  won  by  the  Russians  at  Borodino.  The  French 
invading  army,  like  a  ravening  beast  that  has  received  its  death-wound 
in  its  onslaught,  felt  its  end  near.  But  it  could  not  stop,  no  more  than 
the  Russian  army — of  half  its  strength — could  help  retreating.  After  that 
check,  the  French  army  could  still  drag  on  to  Moscow,  but  there,  with¬ 
out  fresh  effort  on  the  part  of  the  Russian  army,  its  ruin  was  inevitable, 
as  its  life-blood  ebbed  away  from  the  deadly  wound  dealt  it  at  Borodino. 
The  direct  consequence  of  the  battle  of  Borodino  was  Napoleon’s  cause¬ 
less  flight  from  Moscow,  his  return  by  the  old  Smolensk  road,  the  ruin 
of  the  invading  army  of  five  hundred  thousand  men,  and  the  downfall 
of  the  Napoleonic  rule,  on  which,  for  the  first  time  at  Borodino,  was  laid 
the  hand  of  a  foe  of  stronger  spirit. 


PART  XI 


I 

For  the  human  mind  the  absolute  continuity  of  motion  ls  inconceivable. 
The  laws  of  motion  of  any  kind  only  become  comprehensible  to  man 
when  he  examines  units  of  this  motion,  arbitrarily  selected.  But  at  the 
same  time  it  is  from  this  arbitrary  division  of  continuous  motion  into 
discontinuous  units  that  a  great  number  of  human  errors  proceeds. 

We  all  know  the  so-called  sophism  of  the  ancients,  proving  that 
Achilles  would  never  overtake  the  tortoise,  though  Achilles  walked  ten 
times  as  fast  as  the  tortoise.  As  soon  as  Achilles  passes  over  the  space 
separating  him  from  the  tortoise,  the  tortoise  advances  one-tenth  of  that 
space:  Achilles  passes  over  that  tenth,  but  the  tortoise  has  advanced  a 
hundredth,  and  so  on  to  infinity.  This  problem  seemed  to  the  ancients 
insoluble.  The  irrationality  of  the  conclusion  (that  Achilles  will  never 
overtake  the  tortoise)  arises  from  the  arbitrary  assumption  of  discon¬ 
nected  units  of  motion,  when  the  motion  both  of  Achilles  and  the  tortoise 
was  continuous. 

By  taking  smaller  and  smaller  units  of  motion  we  merely  approach  ' 
the  solution  of  the  problem,  but  we  never  attain  it.  It  is  only  by  assum¬ 
ing  an  infinitely  small  magnitude,  and  a  progression  rising  from  it  up  to 
a  tenth,  and  taking  the  sum  of  that  geometrical  progression,  that  we  can 
arrive  at  the  solution  of  the  problem.  A  new  branch  of  mathematics, 
dealing  with  infinitely  small  quantities,  gives  now  in  other  more  complex 
problems  of  dynamics  solutions  of  problems  that  seemed  insoluble. 

This  new  branch  of  mathematics,  unknown  to  the  ancients,  by  assum¬ 
ing  infinitely  small  quantities,  that  is,  such  as  secure  the  chief  condition 
of  motion  (absolute  continuity),  corrects  the  inevitable  error  which  the 
human  intellect  cannot  but  make,  when  it  considers  disconnected  units 
of  motion  instead  of  continuous  motion. 

In  the  investigation  of  the  laws  of  historical  motion  precisely  the 
same  mistake  arises. 

The  progress  of  humanity,  arising  from  an  innumerable  multitude  of 
individual  wills,  is  continuous  in  its  motion. 

The  discovery  of  the  laws  of  this  motion  is  the  aim  of  history.  But  in 
order  to  arrive  at  the  laws  of  the  continuous  motion  due  to  the  sum  of 
all  these  individual  wills,  the  human  mind  assumes  arbitrary,  discon¬ 
nected  units.  The  first  proceeding  of  the  historian  is  taking  an  arbitrary 
series  of  continuous  events  to  examine  it  apart  from  others,  while  in 
reality  there  is  not,  and  cannot  be,  a  beginning  to  any  event,  but  one 
event  flows  without  any  break  in  continuity  from  another.  The  second 

774 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


775 


proceeding  is  to  examine  the  action  of  a  single  person,  a  sovereign,  or  a 
general,  as  though  it  were  equivalent  to  the  sum  of  many  individual 
wills,  though  the  sum  of  individual  wills  never  finds  expression  in  the 
action  of  a  single  historical  personage. 

Historical  science  as  it  advances  is  continually  taking  smaller  and 
smaller  units  for  analysis,  and  in  this  way  strives  to  approximate  the 
truth.  But  however  small  the  units  of  which  history  takes  cognisance, 
we  feel  that  the  assumption  of  a  unit,  disconnected  from  another,  the 
assumption  of  a  beginning  of  any  phenomenon,  and  the  assumption  that 
the  individual  wills  of  all  men  find  expression  in  the  actions  of  a  single 
historical  personage,  are  false  in  themselves.  id  6ouj  ■'we 

Every  conclusion  of  history  can,  without  the  slightest  effort  on  the  part-Pk  4£f 
of  the  critic,  be  dissipated  like  dust,  leaving  no  trace,  simply  through 
criticism  selecting,  as  the  object  of  its  analysis,  a  greater  or  smaller 
disconnected  unit,  which  it  has  a  perfect  right  to  do,  seeing  that  the 
unit  of  history  is  always  selected  arbitrarily. 

Only  by  assuming  an  infinitely  small  unit  for  observation — a  differen¬ 
tial  of  history — that  is,  the  homogeneous  tendencies  of  men,  and  arriv¬ 
ing  at  the  integral  calculus  (that  is,  taking  the  sum  of  those  infinitesimal 
quantities),  can  we  hope  to  arrive  at  the  laws  of  history. 

The  first  fifteen  years  of  the  nineteenth  century  present  the  spectacle 
of  an  extraordinary  movement  of  millions  of  men.  Men  leave  their 
habitual  pursuits;  rush  from  one  side  of  Europe  to  the  other;  plunder, 
slaughter  one  another,  triumph  and  despair;  and  the  whole  current  of 
life  is  transformed  and  presents  a  quickened  activity,  first  moving  at  a 
growing  speed,  and  then  slowly  slackening  again.  What  was  the  cause 
of  that  activity,  or  from  what  laws  did  it  arise?  asks  the  human  in¬ 
tellect. 

The  historians,  in  reply  to  that  inquiry,  lay  before  us  the  sayings 
and  doings  of  some  dozens  of  men  in  one  of  the  buildings  of  the  city 
of  Paris,  summing  up  those  doings  and  sayings  by  one  word — revolution. 

Then  they  give  us  a  detailed  biography  of  Napoleon,  and  of  certain 
persons  favourably  or  hostilely  disposed  to  him;  talk  of  the  influence 
of  some  of  these  persons  upon  others;  and  then  say  that  this  it  is  to  which 
that  activity  is  due,  and  these  are  its  laws. 

But  the  human  intellect  not  only  refuses  to  believe  in  that  explanation, 
but  flatly  declares  that  the  method  of  explanation  is  not  a  correct  one, 
because  in  this  explanation  a  smaller  phenomenon  is  taken  as  the  cause 
of  a  greater  phenomenon.  The  sum  of  men’s  individual  wills  produced 
both  the  revolution  and  Napoleon;  and  only  the  sum  of  those  wills  en¬ 
dured  them  and  then  destroyed  them.  _ 

‘But  whenever  there  have  been  wars,  there  have  been  great  military 
leaders;  whenever  there  have  been  revolutions  in  states,  there  have  been 
great  men,’  says  history.  ‘Whenever  there  have  been  great  military  leaders 
there  have,  indeed,  been  wars,’  replies  the  human  reason;  ‘but  that  does 
not  prove  that  the  generals  were  the  cause  of  the  wars,  and  that  the 


776  WARANDPEACE 

factors  leading  to  warfare  can  be  found  in  the  personal  activity  of  one 

man.’ 

Whenever,  looking  at  my  watch,  I  see  the  hand  has  reached  the  figure 
x,  I  hear  the  bells  beginning  to  ring  in  the  church  close  by.  But  from 
the  fact  that  the  watch  hand  points  to  ten  whenever  the  bells  begin  to 
ring,  I  have  not  the  right  to  infer  that  the  position  of  the  hands  of  my 
watch  is  the  cause  of  the  vibration  of  the  bells. 

Whenever  I  see  a  steam-engine  move,  I  hear  the  whistle,  I  see  the  valve 
open  and  the  wheels  turn ;  but  I  have  no  right  to  conclude  from  that  that 
the  whistle  and  the  turning  of  the  wheels  are  the  causes  of  the  steam- 
engine’s  moving. 

The  peasants  say  that  in  the  late  spring  a  cold  wind  blows  because 
the  oak-buds  are  opening,  and,  as  a  fact,  a  cold  wind  does  blow  every 
spring  when  the  oak  is  coming  out.  But  though  the  cause  of  a  cold  wind’s 
blowing  just  when  the  oaks  are  coming  out  is  unknown  to  me,  I  cannot 
agree  with  the  peasants  that  the  cause  of  the  cold  wind  is  the  opening 
of  the  oak-buds,  because  the  force  of  the  wind  is  altogether  outside  the 
influence  of  the  buds.  I  see  in  this  simply  such  a  coincidence  of  events  as 
is  common  in  every  phenomenon  of  life,  and  I  see  that  however  long  and 
minutely  I  might  examine  the  watch  hand,  the  valve,  and  the  wheel  of 
the  steam-engine  and  the  oak-bud,  I  shall  not  discover  the  cause  of  the 
bells  ringing,  of  the  steam-engine  moving,  and  of  the  spring  wind.  To  do 
that  I  must  completely  change  my  point  of  observation  and  study  the 
laws  of  the  motion  of  steam,  of  the  bells,  and  of  the  wind.  History  must 
do  the  same.  And  efforts  have  already  been  made  in  this  direction. 

For  the  investigation  of  the  laws  of  history,  we  must  completely  change 
the  subject  of  observations,  must  let  kings  and  ministers  and  generals 
alone,  and  study  the  homogeneous,  infinitesimal  elements  by  which 
masses  are  led.  No  one  can  say  how  far  it  has  been  given  to  man  to 
advance  in  that  direction  in  understanding  of  the  laws  of  history.  But. 
it  is  obvious  that  only  in  that  direction  lies  any  possibility  of  discovering 
historical  laws ;  ana  that  the  human  intellect  has  hitherto  not  devoted  to 
that  method  of  research  one  millionth  part  of  the  energy  that  historians 
have  put  into  the  description  of  the  doings  of  various  kings,  ministers, 
and  generals,  and  the  exposition  of  their  own  views  on  those  doings. 


II 

The  armed  forces  of  twelve  different  nationalities  of  Europe  invade 
Russia.  The  Russian  army  and  population  fall  back,  avoiding  a  battle, 
to  Smolensk,  and  from  Smolensk  to  Borodino.  The  French  army  moves 
on  to  Moscow,  its  goal,  with  continually  increasing  impetus.  The  impetus 
of  its  advance  is  increased  as  it  approaches  its  goal,  just  as  the  velocity 
of  a  falling  body  increases  as  it  gets  nearer  the  earth.  Behind  them  thou¬ 
sands  of  versts  of  famine-stricken,  hostile  country;  before  them  some 
dozens  of  versts  between  them  and  their  goal.  Every  soldier  of  Napoleon’s 


WARANDPEACE  777 

army  feels  it,  and  the  expedition  advances  of  itself,  by  the  force  of  its 
own  impetus. 

In  the  Russian  troops  the  spirit  of  fury,  of  hatred  of  the  foe,  burns 
more  and  more  fiercely  during  their  retreat;  it  gathers  strength  and  con¬ 
centration  as  they  draw  back.  At  Borodino  the  armies  meet.  Neither  army 
is  destroyed,  but  the  Russian  army,  immediately  after  the  conflict,  re¬ 
treats  as  inevitably  as  a  ball  rebounds  after  contact  with  another  ball 
flying  with  greater  impetus  to  meet  it.  And  just  as  inevitably  (though 
parting  with  its  force  in  the  contact)  the  ball  of  the  invading  army  is 
carried  for  a  space  further  by  the  energy,  not  yet  fully  spent,  within  it. 

The  Russians  retreat  one  hundred  and  twenty  versts  beyond  Moscow; 
the  French  reach  Moscow  and  there  halt.  For  five  weeks  after  this  there 
is  not  a  single  battle.  The  French  do  not  move.  Like  a  wild  beast  mor¬ 
tally  wounded,  bleeding  and  licking  its  wounds,  for  five  weeks  the  French 
remain  in  Moscow,  attempting  nothing;  and  all  at  once,  with  nothing 
new  to  account  for  it,  they  flee  back ;  they  make  a  dash  for  the  Kaluga 
road  (after  a  victory,  too,  for  they  remained  in  possession  of  the  field 
of  battle  at  Maley  Yaroslavets) ;  and  then,  without  a  single  serious 
engagement,  fly  more  and  more  rapidly  back  to  Smolensk,  to  Vilna,  to  the 
Berezina,  and  beyond  it. 

On  the  evening  of  the  26th  of  August,  Kutuzov  and  the  whole  Russian 
army  were  convinced  that  the  battle  of  Borodino  was  a  victory.  Kutuzov 
wrote  to  that  effect  to  the  Tsar.  He  ordered  the  troops  to  be  in  readiness 
for  another  battle,  to  complete  the  defeat  of  the  enemy,  not  because  he 
wanted  to  deceive  any  one,  but  because  he  knew  that  the  enemy  was  van¬ 
quished,  as  every  one  who  had  taken  part  in  the  battle  knew  it. 

But  all  that  evening  and  next  day  news  was  coming  in  of  unheard-of 
losses,  of  the  loss  of  one-half  of  the  army,  and  another  battle  turned 
out  to  be  physically  impossible. 

It  was  impossible  to  give  battle  when  information  had  not  yet  come 
in,  the  wounded  had  not  been  removed,  the  ammunition  stores  had  not 
been  filled  up,  the  slain  had  not  been  counted,  new  officers  had  not  been 
appointed  to  replace  the  dead,  and  the  men  had  had  neither  food  nor  sleep. 
And  meanwhile,  the  very  next  morning  after  the  battle,  the  French  army 
of  itself  moved  down  upon  the' Russians,  carried  on  by  the  force  of  its 
own  impetus,  accelerated  now  in  inverse  ratio  to  the  square  of  the 
distance  from  its  goal.  Kutuzov’s  wish  was  to  attack  next  day,  and  all 
the  army  shared  this  desire.  But  to  make  an  attack  it  is  not  sufficient  to 
desire  to  do  so;  there  must  also,  be  a  possibility  of  doing  so,  and  this 
possibility  there  was  not.  It  was  impossible  not  to  retreat  one  day’s 
march,  and  then  it  was  as  impossible  not  to  retreat  a  second  and  a  third 
day’s  march,  and  finally,  on  the  1st  of  September,  when  the  army  reached 
Moscow,  despite  the  force  of  the  growing  feeling  in  the  troops,  the  force 
of  circumstances  compelled  those  troops  to  retreat  beyond  Moscow.  And 
the  troops  retreated  one  more  last  day’s  march,  and  abandoned  Moscow 
to  the  enemy. 

Persons  who  are  accustomed  to  suppose  that  plans  of  campaigns  and 


778  WARANDPEACE 

of  battles  are  made  by  generals  in  the  same  way  as  any  of  us  sitting  over 
a  map  in  our  study  make  plans  of  how  we  would  have  acted  in  such  and 
such  a  position,  will  be  perplexed  by  questions  why  Kutuzov,  if  he  had  to 
retreat,  did  not  take  this  or  that  course,  why  he  did  not  take  up  a  position 
before  Fili,  why  he  did  not  at  once  retreat  to  the  Kaluga  road,  leaving 
Moscow,  and  so  on.  Persons  accustomed  to  think  in  this  way  forget,  or 
do  not  know,  the  inevitable  conditions  which  always  limit  the  action  of 
any  commander-in-chief.  The  action  of  a  commander-in-chief  in  the  field 
has  no  sort  of  resemblance  to  the  action  we  imagine  to  ourselves,  sitting 
at  our  ease  in  our  study,  going  over  some  campaign  on  the  map  with  a 
certain  given  number  of  soldiers  on  each  side,  in  a  certain  known  locality, 
starting  our  plans  from  a  certain  moment.  The  general  is  never  in  the 
position  of  the  beginning  of  any  event,  from  which  we  always  contemplate 
the  event.  The  general  is  always  in  the  very  middle  of  a  changing  series 
of  events,  so  that  he  is  never  at  any  moment  in  a  position  to  deliberate 
on  all  the  bearings  of  the  event  that  is  taking  place.  Imperceptibly,  mo¬ 
ment  by  moment,  an  event  takes  shape  in  all  its  bearings,  and  at  every 
moment  in  that  uninterrupted,  consecutive  shaping  of  events  the  com- 
mander-in-chief  is  in  the  centre  of  a  most  complex  play  of  intrigues,  of 
cares,  of  dependence  and  of  power,  of  projects,  counsels,  threats,  and 
conceptions,  with  one  thing  depending  on  another,  and  is  under  the  con¬ 
tinual  necessity  of  answering  the  immense  number  of  mutually  contra¬ 
dictory  inquiries  addressed  to  him. 

We  are,  with  perfect  seriousness,  told  by  those  learned  in  military 
matters  that  Kutuzov  ought  to  have  marched  his  army  towards  the 
Kaluga  road  long  before  reaching  Fili;  that  somebody  did,  indeed,  sug¬ 
gest  such  a  plan.  But  the  commander  of  an  army  has  before  him,  especially 
at  a  difficult  moment,  not  one,  but  dozens  of  plans.  And  each  of  those 
plans,  based  on  the  rules  of  strategy  and  tactics,  contradicts  all  the  rest. 
The  commander’s  duty  would,  one  would  suppose,  be  merely  to  select, 
one  out  of  those  plans;  but  even  this  he  cannot  do.  Time  and  events 
will  not  wait.  It  is  suggested  to  him,  let  us  suppose,  on  the  28th  to  move 
towards  the  Kaluga  road,  but  at  that  moment  an  adjutant  gallops  up 
from  Miloradovitch  to  inquire  whether  to  join  battle  at  once  with  the 
French  or  to  retire.  He  must  be  given  instructions  at  once,  at  the  instant. 
And  the  order  to  retire  hinders  us  from  turning  to  the  Kaluga  road.  And 
then  after  the  adjutant  comes  the  commissariat  commissioner  to  inquire 
where  the  stores  are  to  be  taken,  and  the  ambulance  director  to  ask 
where  the  wounded  are  to  be  moved  to,  and  a  courier  from  Petersburg 
with  a  letter  from  (.he  Tsar,  not  admitting  the  possibility  of  abandoning 
Moscow,  and  the  commander’s  rival,  who  is  trying  to  cut  the  ground 
from  under  his  feet  (and  there  are  always  more  than  one  such)  proposes 
a  new  project,  diametrically  opposed  to  the  plan  of  marching  upon  the 
Kaluga  road.  The  commander’s  own  energies,  too,  require  sleep  and 
support.  And  a  respectable  general,  who  has  been  overlooked  when  deco¬ 
rations  were  bestowed,  presents  a  complaint,  and  the  inhabitants  of  the 
district  implore  protection,  and  the  officer  sent  to  inspect  the  locality 


WARANDPEACE  779 

comes  back  with  a  report  utterly  unlike  that  of  the  officer  sent  on  the 
same  commission  just  previously;  and  a  spy,  and  a  prisoner,  and  a  gen¬ 
eral  who  has  made  a  reconnaissance,  all  describe  the  position  of  the 
enemy’s  army  quite  differently.  Persons  who  forget,  or  fail  to  compre¬ 
hend,  those  inevitable  conditions  under  which  a  commander  has  to  act, 
present  to  us,  for  instance,  the  position  of  the  troops  at  Fili,  and  assume 
that  the  commander-in-chief  was  quite  free  on  the  1st  of  September  to 
decide  the  question  whether  to  abandon  or  to  defend  Moscow,  though, 
with  the  position  of  the  Russian  army,  only  five  versts  from  Moscow, 
there  could  no  longer  be  any  question  on  the  subject.  When  was  that 
question  decided?  At  Drissa,  and  at  Smolensk,  and  most  palpably  of  all 
on  August  the  24th  at  Shevardino,  and  on  the  26th  at  Borodino,  and 
every  day  and  hour  and  minute  of  the  retreat  from  Borodino  to  Fili. 


Ill 

The  Russian  army,  retreating  from  Borodino,  halted  at  Fili.  Yermolov, 
who  had  been  inspecting  the  position,  rode  up  to  the  commander-in-chief. 

‘There  is  no  possibility  of  fighting  in  this  position,’  he  said. 

Kutuzov  looked  at  him  in  wonder,  and  made  him  repeat  the  words  he 
had  just  uttered.  When  he  had  done  so,  he  put  out  his  hand  to  him. 

‘Give  me  your  hand,’  he  said;  and  turning  it  so  as  to  feel  his  pulse, 
he  said:  ‘You  arc  not  well,  my  dear  boy.  Think  what  you  are  saying.’ 

Kutuzov  could  not  yet  take  in  the  idea  of  its  being  possible  to  retreat, 
abandoning  Moscow  without  a  battle. 

On  the  Poklonnaya  Hill,  six  versts  from  Dorogomilovsky  gate,  Kutuzov 
got  out  of  his  carriage  and  sat  down  on  a  bench  by  the  side  of  the  road. 
A  great  crowd  of  generals  gathered  about  him.  Count  Rastoptchin,  who 
had  come  out  from  Moscow,  joined  them.  All  this  brilliant  company 
broke  up  into  several  circles,  and  talked  among  themselves  of  the  advan¬ 
tages  and  disadvantages  of  the  position,  of  the  condition  of  the  troops,  of 
the  plans  proposed,  of  the  situation  of  Moscow — in  fact,  of  military  ques¬ 
tions  generally.  All  felt  that  though  they  had  not  been  summoned  for 
the  purpose,  it  was  really,  if  not  ostensibly,  a  military  council.  All  con¬ 
versation  was  confined  to  public  questions.  If  any  one  did  repeat  or  in¬ 
quire  any  piece  of  personal  news,  it  was  in  a  whisper,  and  the  talk  passed 
at  once  back  to  general  topics.  There  was  not  a  jest,  not  a  laugh,  not 
even  a  smile,  to  be  seen  among  all  these  men.  They  were  all  making  an 
obvious  effort  to  rise  to  the  level  of  the  situation.  And  all  the  groups, 
while  talking  among  themselves,  tried  to  keep  close  to  the  commander- 
in-chief,  whose  bench  formed  the  centre  of  the  whole  crowd,  and  tried 
to  talk  so  that  he  might  hear  them.  The  commander-in-chief  listened,  and 
sometimes  asked  what  had  been  said  near  him,  but  did  not  himself  enter 
into  conversation  or  express  any  opinion.  For  the  most  part,  after  listen¬ 
ing  to  the  talk  of  some  group,  he  turned  away  with  an  air  of  disappoint¬ 
ment,  as  though  they  were  not  speaking  of  anything  he  cared  to  hear 


7S0  WAR  AND  PEACE 

about  at  all.  Some  were  discussing  the  position,  criticising  not  so  much 
the  position  itself  as  the  intellectual  qualifications  of  those  who  had 
selected  it.  Others  argued  that  a  blunder  had  been  made  earlier,  that  a 
battle  ought  to  have  been  fought  two  days  before.  Others  talked  of  the 
battle  of  Salamanca,  which  a  Frenchman,  Crosart,  wearing  a  Spanish 
uniform,  was  describing  to  them.  (This  Frenchman,  who  had  just  ar¬ 
rived,  had  with  one  of  the  German  princes  serving  in  the  Russian  army 
been  criticising  the  siege  of  Saragossa,  foreseeing  a  possibility  of  a 
similar  defence  of  Moscow.)  In  the  fourth  group,  Count  Rastoptchin  was 
saying  that  he,  with  the  Moscow  city  guard,  was  ready  to  die  under  the 
walls  of  the  city,  but  that  still  he  could  not  but  complain  of  the  uncer¬ 
tainty  in  which  he  had  been  left,  and  that  had  he  known  it  earlier,  things 
would  have  been  different.  ...  A  fifth  group  was  manifesting  the  pro¬ 
fundity  of  their  tactical  insight  by  discussing  the  direction  the  troops 
should  certainly  take  now.  A  sixth  group  were  talking  arrant  nonsense. 

Kutuzov’s  face  grew  more  and  more  careworn  and  gloomy.  From  all 
this  talk  Kutuzov  saw  one  thing  only:  the  defence  of  Moscow  was  a 
physical  impossibility  in  the  fullest  sense  of  the  words.  It  was  so  utterly 
impossible  that  even  if  some  insane  commander  were  to  give  orders  for 
a  battle,  all  that  would  follow  would  be  a  muddle,  and  no  battle  would 
be  fought.  There  would  be  no  battle,  because  all  the  officers  in  com¬ 
mand,  not  merely  recognised  the  position  to  be  impossible,  but  were  only 
engaged  now  in  discussing  what  was  to  be  done  after  the  inevitable  aban¬ 
donment  of  that  position.  How  could  officers  lead  their  men  to  a  field 
of  battle  which  they  considered  it  impossible  to  hold?  The  officers  of  lower 
rank,  and  even  the  soldiers  themselves  (they  too  form  their  conclusions), 
recognised  that  the  position  could  not  be  held,  and  so  they  could  not 
advance  into  battle  with  the  conviction  that  they  would  be  defeated. 
That  Bennigsen  urged  the  defence  of  this  position,  and  others  still  dis¬ 
cussed  it,  was  a  fact  that  had  no  significance  in  itself,  but  only  as  a 
pretext  for  dissension  and  intrigue.  Kutuzov  knew  that. 

Bennigsen  was  warmly  manifesting  his  Russian  patriotism  (Kutuzov 
could  not  listen  to  him  without  wincing),  by  insisting  on  the  defence  of 
Moscow.  To  Kutuzov,  his  object  was  as  clear  as  daylight:  in  case  of  the 
defence  being  unsuccessful,  to  throw  the  blame  on  Kutuzov,  who  had 
brought  the  army  as  far  as  the  Sparrow  Hills  without  a  battle;  in  case 
of  its  being  successful,  to  claim  the  credit;  in  case  of  it  not  being  at¬ 
tempted,  to  clear  himself  of  the  crime  of  abandoning  Moscow. 

But  these  questions  of  intrigue  did  not  occupy  the  old  man’s  mind 
now.  One  terrible  question  absorbed  him.  And  to  that  question  he  heard 
no  reply  from  any  one.  The  question  for  him  now  was  this:  ‘Can  it  be 
that  I  have  let  Napoleon  get  to  Moscow,  and  when  did  I  do  it?  When 
did  it  happen?  Was  it  yesterday,  when  I  sent  word  to  Platov  to  retreat, 
or  the  evening  before  when  I  had  a  nap  and  bade  Bennigsen  give  in¬ 
structions?  Or  earlier  still?  .  .  .  When,  when  was  it  this  fearful  thing 
happened?  Moscow  must  be  abandoned.  The  army  must  retire,  and  I 
must  give  the  order  for  it.’ 


WAR  AND  PEACE  781 

To  give  that  terrible  order  seemed  to  him  equivalent  to  resigning  the 
command  of  the  army.  And  apart  from  the  fact  that  he  loved  power, 
and  was  used  to  it  (the  honours  paid  to  Prince  Prozorovsky,  under  whom 
he  had  been  serving  in  Turkey,  galled  him),  he  was  convinced  that  he 
was  destined  to  deliver  Russia,  and  had  only  for  that  cause  been  chosen 
commander-in-chief  contrary  to  the  Tsar’s  wishes  by  the  will  of  the 
people.  He  was  persuaded  that  in  these  difficult  circumstances  he  was 
the  one  man  who  could  maintain  his  position  at  the  head  of  the  army, 
that  he  was  the  only  man  in  the  world  capable  of  meeting  Napoleon  as 
an  antagonist  without  panic.  And  he  was  in  terror  at  the  idea  of  having 
to  resign  the  command.  But  he  must  decide  on  some  step,  he  must  cut 
short  this  chatter  round  him,  which  was  beginning  to  assume  too  free 
a  character. 

He  beckoned  the  senior  generals  to  him. 

‘Ma  tete,  jiit-elle  bonne  on  mauvaise,  n’a  qu’a  s’aider  d’elle-meme,’ 
he  said,  getting  up  from  his  bench,  and  he  rode  off  to  Fili,  where  his 
carriages  were  waiting. 


IV 

In  the  large  best  room  of  the  peasant  Andrey  Savostyanov’s  cottage,  at 
two  o’clock,  a  council  met.  The  men  and  women  and  children  of  the 
peasant’s  big  family  all  crowded  together  in  the  room  on  the  other  side 
of  the  passage.  Only  Andrey’s  little  grandchild,  Malasha,  a  child  of  six, 
whom  his  highness  had  petted,  giving  her  sugar  while  he  drank  his  tea, 
stayed  behind  by  the  big  stove  in  the  best  room.  Malasha  peeped  out 
from  on  the  stove  with  shy  delight  at  the  faces,  the  uniforms,  and  the 
crosses  of  the  generals,  who  kept  coming  into  the  room  one  after  another, 
and  sitting  in  a  row  on  the  broad  benches  in  the  best  corner  under  the 
holy  images.  ‘Grandad’  himself,  as  Malasha  in  her  own  mind  called 
Kutuzov,  was  sitting  apart  from  the  rest  in  the  dark  corner  behind  the 
stove.  He  sat  sunk  all  of  a  heap  in  a  folding  armchair,  and  was  con¬ 
tinually  clearing  his  throat  and  straightening  the  collar  of  his  coat, 
which,  though  it  was  unbuttoned,  still  seemed  to  gall  his  neck.  The 
generals,  as  they  came  in  one  after  another,  walked  up  to  the  com¬ 
mander-in-chief:  he  shook  hands  with  some,  to  others  he  merely  nodded. 

The  adjutant,  Kaisarov,  would  have  drawn  back  a  curtain  from  the 
window  facing  Kutuzov,  but  the  latter  shook  his  hand  angrily  at  him, 
and  Kaisarov  saw  that  his  highness  did  not  care  for  them  to  see  his  face. 

Round  the  peasant’s  deal  table,  on  which  lay  maps,  plans,  pencils,  and 
papers,  there  was  such  a  crowd  that  the  orderlies  brought  in  another 
bench,  and  set  it  near  the  table.  Yermolov,  Kaisarov,  and  Toll  seated 
themselves  on  this  bench.  In  the  foremost  place,  under  the  holy  images, 
sat  Barclay  de  Tolly,  with  his  Order  of  St.  George  on  his  neck,  with  his 
pale,  sickly  face  and  high  forehead  that  met  his  bald  head.  He  had 
been  in  the  throes  of  fever  for  the  last  two  days,  and  was  shivering  and 
shaking  now.  Beside  him  sat  Uvarov,  speaking  to  him  with  rapid  gestiru- 


782  WAR  AND  PEACE 

’it ion  in  the  same  low  voice  in  which  everybody  spoke.  Little  chubby 
Dohturov  was  listening  attentively  with  his  eyebrows  raised  and  his 
hands  clasped  over  his  stomach.  On  the  other  side,  resting  his  broad 
head  on  his  hand,  sat  Count  Osterman-Tolstoy,  with  his  bold  features  : 
and  brilliant  eyes,  apparently  plunged  in  his  own  thoughts.  Raevsky  sat 
twisting  his  black  curls  on  his  temples,  as  he  always  did,  and  looking 
with  impatience  from  Kutuzov  to  the  door.  Konovnitsyn’s  firm,  hand¬ 
some,  good-humoured  face  was  bright  with  a  sly  and  kindly  smile.  He 
caught  Malasha’s  eye,  and  made  signs  to  her  with  his  eyes,  that  set  the 
little  girl  smiling. 

They  were  all  waiting  for  Bennigsen,  who,  on  the  pretext  of  a  fresh 
inspection  of  the  position,  was  engaged  in  finishing  his  luxurious  dinner. 
They  waited  for  him  from  four  to  six  o’clock,  and  all  that  time  did  not 
enter  on  their  deliberations,  but  talked  of  extraneous  matters  in  subdued 
tones. 

Only  when  Bennigsen  had  entered  the  hut,  Kutuzov  moved  out  of  his 
corner  and  came  up  to  the  table,  but  sat  there  so  that  his  face  did  not 
come  within  the  light  of  the  candles  on  it. 

Bennigsen  opened  the  council  by  the  question:  Whether  to  abandon 
the  holy  and  ancient  capital  of  Russia,  or  to  defend  it? 

A  prolonged  silence  followed.  Every  face  was  knitted,  and  in  the  still-  | 
ness  Kutuzov  could  be  heard  angrily  coughing  and  clearing  his  throat. 
All  eyes  were  fixed  on  him.  Malasha  too  gazed  at  ‘Grandad.’ 

She  was  nearest  of  all  to  him,  and  saw  that  his  face  was  working;  he 
seemed  to  be  going  to  cry.  But  that  did  not  last  long. 

‘The  holy  and  ancient  capital  of  Russia!’  he  cried  suddenly,  in  a 
wrathful  voice,  repeating  Bennigsen’s  words,  and  thereby  underlining  the 
false  note  in  them.  ‘Allow  me  to  tell  your  excellency  that  that  question 
has  no  meaning  to  a  Russian.’  (He  lurched  his  unwieldy  figure  forward.) 
‘Such  a  question  cannot  be  put;  there  is  no  sense  in  such  a  question.  The 
question  I  have  asked  these  gentlemen  to  meet  to  discuss  is  the  question 
of  the  war.  The  question  is:  The  safety  of  Russia  lies  in  her  army.  Is  it 
better  to  risk  the  loss  of  the  army  and  of  Moscow  by  giving  battle,  or 
to  abandon  Moscow  without  a  battle?  That  is  the  question  on  which  1 
desire  to  learn  your  opinion.’  He  lurched  back  into  his  low  chair  again. 

A  debate  began.  Bennigsen  did  not  yet  consider  that  the  game  was 
lost.  Overruled  by  the  opinion  of  Barclay  and  others  in  admitting  the 
impossibility  of  maintaining  a  defensive  position  at  Fili,  he  proceeded 
to  prove  his  Russian  patriotism  and  devotion  to  Moscow  by  proposing 
to  move  the  army  during  the  night  from  the  right  to  the  left  flank  of  the 
position,  and  to  aim  a  blow  at  the  French  right  flank  next  day.  Opinions 
were  divided,  and  arguments  were  advanced  for  and  against  this  project. 
Yermolov,  Dohturov,  and  Raevsky  sided  with  Bennigsen.  Led  by  a  feel¬ 
ing  that  a  sacrifice  was  called  for  before  abandoning  the  city,  and  by 
other  personal  considerations,  these  generals  seemed  unable  to  grasp  that 
the  council  then  sitting  could  not  affect  the  inevitable  course  of  events, 
and  that  Moscow  was  already  in  effect  abandoned.  The  other  generals 


WARANDPEACE  7S3 

understood  this,  and  leaving  the  question  of  Moscow  on  one  side,  talked 
of  the  direction  the  army  ought  to  take  in  retreating. 

Malasha,  who  kept  her  eyes  fixed  on  what  was  passing  before  her,  saw 
the  council  in  quite  a  different  light.  It  seemed  to  her  that  the  whole 
point  at  issue  was  a  personal  struggle  between  ‘Grandad’  and  ‘Longcoat,’ 
as  she  called  Bennigsen  to  herself.  She  saw  that  they  were  angry  when 
they  spoke  to  one  another,  and  in  her  heart  she  was  on  ‘Grandad’s’  side. 
In  the  middle  of  the  conversation,  she  caught  the  swift,  subtle  glance  that 
‘Grandad’  gave  Bennigsen,  and  immediately  after,  she  noted  with  glee 
that  ‘Grandad’s’  words  had  put  ‘Longcoat’  down.  Bennigsen  suddenly 
flushed,  and  strode  angrily  across  the  room.  The  words  that  had  thus 
affected  Bennigsen  were  Kutuzov’s  quietly  and  softly  uttered  comment 
on  his  proposal  to  move  the  troops  from  the  right  to  the  left  flank  in  the 
night  in  order  to  attack  the  French  right. 

‘I  cannot  approve  of  the  count’s  plan,  gentlemen,’  said  Kutuzov. 
‘Movements  of  troops  in  close  proximity  to  the  enemy  are  always  risky, 
and  military  history  affords  many  examples  of  disasters  arising  from 
them.  For  instance  .  .  .’  (Kutuzov  seemed  to  ponder,  seeking  an  ex¬ 
ample,  and  then  looking  with  a  frank,  naive  expression  at  Bennigsen) 

.  .  .  ‘well,  the  battle  of  Friedland,  which,  as  I  have  no  doubt  the  count 
remembers,  was  not  .  .  .  completely  successful  owing  to  the  change 
of  the  position  of  the  troops  in  too  close  proximity  to  the  enemy  .  .  .’ 

A  momentary  silence  followed  that  seemed  lengthy  to  all. 

The  debate  was  renewed;  but  pauses  often  interrupted  it,  and  it  was 
felt  that  there  was  nothing  to  talk  about. 

In  one  of  these  pauses  Kutuzov  heaved  a  heavy  sigh,  as  though  pre¬ 
paring  to  speak.  All  looked  round  at  him. 

‘Well,  gentlemen,  I  see  that  it  is  I  who  will  have  to  pay  for  the  broken 
pots,’  he  said.  And  slowly  rising  from  his  seat,  he  walked  up  to  the  table. 
‘Gentlemen,  I  have  heard  your  opinions.  Some  of  you  will  not  agree  with 
me.  But  I’  (he  stopped),  ‘by  the  authority  intrusted  me  by  my  Tsar  and 
my  country,  give  the  order  to  retire.’ 

After  that  the  generals  began  to  disperse  with  the  solemnity  and 
circumspect  taciturnity  with  which  people  separate  after  a  funeral. 
Several  of  the  generals  made  some  communication  to  the  commander-in¬ 
chief  in  a  low  voice,  pitched  in  quite  a  different  scale  from  that  in  which 
they  had  been  talking  at  the  council. 

Malasha,  who  had  long  been  expected  in  the  other  room  to  supper, 
dropped  backwards  down  from  the  stove,  her  bare  toes  clinging  to  the 
projections  of  the  stove,  and  slipping  between  the  generals’  legs,  she 
darted  out  at  the  door. 

After  dismissing  the  generals,  Kutuzov  sat  a  long  while  with  his 
elbows  on  the  table,  pondering  that  terrible  question:  ‘When,  when  had 
it  become  inevitable  that  Moscow  should  be  abandoned?  When  was  the 
thing  done  that  made  it  inevitable,  and  who  is  to  blame  for  it?’ 

‘This  I  did  not  expect!’  he  said  to  the  adjutant,  Schneider,  who  came 


784  WAR  AND  PlACE 

in  to  him  late  at  night;  ‘this  I  did  not  expect!  This  I  never  thought  of!’ 
‘You  must  rest,  your  highness,’  said  Schneider. 

‘Yes;  but  they  shall  eat  horse-flesh  like  the  Turks!’  Kutuzov  cried, 
not  heeding  him,  as  he  brought  his  podgy  fist  down  on  the  table.  ‘They, 
too,  shall  eat  it,  if  only  .  .  .  !  ’ 


V 

Meanwhile,  in  an  event  of  even  greater  importance  than  the  retreat  of 
the  army  without  a  battle,  in  the  abandonment  and  burning  of  Moscow, 
Count  Rastoptchin,  whom  we  conceive  as  taking  the  lead  in  that  event, 
was  acting  in  a  very  different  manner  from  Kutuzov. 

This  event — the  abandonment  and  burning  of  Moscow — was,  after  the 
battle  of  Borodino,  as  inevitable  as  the  retreat  of  the  army  without 
fighting. 

Every  Russian  could  have  foretold  what  happened,  not  as  a  result  of 
any  train  of  intellectual  deductions,  but  from  the  feeling  that  lies  at 
the  bottom  of  our  hearts,  and  lay  at  the  bottom  of  our  fathers’! 

In  every  town  and  village  on  Russian  soil,  from  Smolensk  onwards, 
without  the  assistance  of  Count  Rastoptchin  and  his  placards,  the  same 
thing  took  place  as  happened  in  Moscow.  The  people  awaited  the  com¬ 
ing  of  the  enemy  without  disturbance;  did  not  display  excitement;  tore 
nobody  to  pieces,  but  calmly  awaited'  their  fate,  feeling  in  themselves 
the  power  to  find  what  they  must  do  in  the  moment  of  difficulty. 

And  as  soon  as  the  enemy  came  near,  the  wealthier  elements  of  the 
population  went  away,  leaving  their  property  behind;  the  poorer  re¬ 
mained,  and  burnt  and  destroyed  all  that  was  left. 

The  sense  that  this  would  be  so,  and  always  would  be  so,  lay,  and  lies, 
at  the  bottom  of  every  Russian’s  heart.  And  a  sense  of  this,  and  more, 
a  foreboding  that  Moscow  would  be  taken  by  the  enemy,  lay  in  the 
Russian  society  of  Moscow  in  1812.  Those  who  had  begun  leaving  Mos¬ 
cow  in  July  and  the  beginning  of  August  had  shown  that  they  expected  it. 
Those  who  left  the  city  with  what  they  could  carry  away,  abandoning 
their  houses  and  half  their  property,  did  so  in  consequence  of  that  latent 
patriotism,  which  finds  expression,  not  in  phrases,  not  in  giving  one’s  ■ 
children  to  death  for  the  sake  of  the  fatherland,  and  such  unnatural  ex¬ 
ploits,  but  expresses  itself  imperceptibly  in  the  most  simple,  organic 
way,  and  so  always  produces  the  most  powerful  results. 

‘It’s  a  disgrace  to  fly  from  danger;  only  the  cowards  are  flying  from 
Moscow,’  they  were  told.  Rastoptchin,  in  his  placards,  urged  upon  them 
that  it  was  base  to  leave  Moscow.  They  were  ashamed  at  hearing  them¬ 
selves  called  cowards;  they  were  ashamed  of  going  away;  but  still  they 
went  away,  knowing  that  it  must  be  so.  Why  did  they  go  away?  It  cannot 
be  supposed  that  Rastoptchin  had  scared  them  with  tales  of  the  atrocities 
perpetrated  by  Napoleon  in  the  countries  he  conquered.  The  first  to 
leave  were  the  wealthy,  educated  people,  who  knew  very  well  that  Vienna 


WAR  AND  PEACE  785 

and  Berlin  remained  uninjured,  and  that  the  inhabitants  of  those  cities, 
when  Napoleon  was  in  occupation  of  them,  had  spent  their  time  gaily  with 
the  fascinating  Frenchmen,  of  whom  all  Russians,  and  especially  the 
ladies,  had  at  that  period  been  so  fond. 

They  went  away  because  to  Russians  the  question  whether  they  would 
be  comfortable  or  not  under  the  government  of  the  French  in  Moscow 
could  never  occur.  To  be  under  the  government  of  the  French  was  out 
of  the  question;  it  was  worse  than  anything.  They  were  going  away  even 
before  Borodino,  and  still  more  rapidly  after  Borodino;  regardless  of 
the  calls  to  defend  the  city,  regardless  of  the  proclamations  of  the  gov¬ 
ernor  of  Moscow;  of  his  intention  of  going  with  the  Iversky  Virgin  into 
battle,  and  of  the  air-balloons  which  were  to  demolish  the  French,  and 
all  the  nonsense  with  which  Rastoptchin  filled  his  placards.  They  knew 
that  it  was  for  the  army  to  fight,  and  if  the  army  could  not,  it  would  be 
of  no  use  to  rush  out  with  young  ladies  and  house-serfs  to  fight  Napoleon 
on  the  Three  Hills,  and  so  they  must  make  haste  and  get  away,  sorry  as 
they  were  to  leave  their  possessions  to  destruction.  They  drove  away 
without  a  thought  of  the  vast  consequences  of  this  immense  wealthy  city 
Deing  abandoned  by  its  inhabitants,  and  being  inevitably  thereby  con¬ 
signed  to  the  flames.  To  abstain  from  destroying  and  burning  empty 
houses  would  never  occur  to  the  Russian  peasantry.  They  drove  away, 
each  on  his  own  account,  and  yet  it  was  only  in  consequence  of  their 
action  that  the  grand  event  came  to  pass  that  is  the  highest  glory  of  the 
Russian  people.  The  lady  who  in  June  set  off  with  her  negroes  and  her 
buffoons  from  Moscow  for  her  Saratov  estates,  with  a  vague  feeling  that 
she  was  not  going  to  be  a  servant  of  Bonaparte’s,  and  a  vague  dread  that 
she  might  be  hindered  from  going  by  Rastoptchin’s  orders,  was  simply 
and  genuinely  doing  the  great  deed  that  saved  Russia. 

Count  Rastoptchin  at  one  time  cried  shame  on  those  who  were  going, 
then  removed  all  the  public  offices,  then  served  out  useless  weapons  to 
the  drunken  rabble,  then  brought  out  the  holy  images,  and  prevented 
Father  Augustin  from  removing  the  holy  relics  and  images,  then  got 
hold  of  all  the  private  conveyances  that  were  in  Moscow,  then  in  one 
hundred  and  thirty-six  carts  carried  out  the  air-balloon  made  by  Lep- 
pich,  at  one  time  hinted  that  he  should  set  fire  to  Moscow,  at  one  time 
described  how  he  had  burnt  his  own  house,  and  wrote  a  proclamation 
to  the  French  in  which  he  solemnly  reproached  them  for  destroying  the 
home  of  his  childhood.  He  claimed  the  credit  of  having  set  fire  to  Moscow, 
then  disavowed  it;  he  commanded  the  people  to  capture  all  spies,  and 
bring  them  to  him,  then  blamed  the  people  for  doing  so;  he  sent  all  the 
French  residents  out  of  Moscow,  and  then  let  Madame  Aubert-Chalmey, 
who  formed  the  centre  of  French  society  in  Moscow,  remain.  For  no 
particular  reason  he  ordered  the  respected  old  postmaster,  Klucharov, 
to  be  seized  and  banished.  He  got  the  people  together  on  the  Three  Hills 
to  fight  the  French,  and  then,  to  get  rid  of  them,  handed  a  man  over 
to  them  to  murder,  and  escaped  himself  by  the  back  door.  He  vowed  he 


786  WAR  AND  PEACE 

would  never  survive  the  disaster  of  Moscow,  and  later  on  wrote  French 

verses  in  albums  on  his  share  in  the  affair.1 

This  man  had  no  inkling  of  the  import  of  what  was  happening.  All  he 
wanted  was  to  do  something  himself,  to  astonish  people,  to  perform  some 
heroic  feat  of  patriotism,  and,  like  a  child,  he  frolicked  about  the  grand 
and  inevitable  event  of  the  abandonment  and  burning  of  Moscow,  trying 
with  his  puny  hand  first  to  urge  on,  and  then  to  hold  back,  the  tide  of 
the  vast  popular  current  that  was  bearing  him  along  with  it. 

VI 

Ellen  had  accompanied  the  court  on  its  return  from  Vilna  to  Peters¬ 
burg,  and  there  found  herself  in  a  difficult  position. 

In  Petersburg  Ellen  had  enjoyed  the  special  patronage  of  a  great 
personage,  who  occupied  one  of  the  highest  positions  in  the  government. 
In  Vilna  she  had  formed  a  liaison  with  a  young  foreign  prince. 

When  she  returned  to  Petersburg  the  prince  and  the  great  dignitary 
were  both  in  that  town;  both  claimed  their  rights,  and  Ellen  was  con¬ 
fronted  with  a  problem  that  had  not  previously  arisen  in  her  career— 
the  preservation  of  the  closest  relations  with  both,  without  giving  offence 
to  either. 

What  might  have  seemed  to  any  other  woman  a  difficult  or  impossible 
task  never  cost  a  moment’s  thought  to  Countess  Eezuhov,  who  plainly 
deserved  the  reputation  she  enjoyed  of  being  a  most  intelligent  woman. 
Had  she  attempted  concealment;  had  she  allowed  herself  to  get  out  of 
her  awkward  position  by  subterfuges,  she  would  have  spoilt  her  own 
case  by  acknowledging  herself  the  guilty  party.  But  like  a  truly  great 
man,  who  can  always  do  everything  he  chooses,  Ellen  at  once  assumed 
the  rectitude  of  her  own  position,  of  which  she  was  indeed  genuinely 
convinced,  and  the  guilty  responsibility  of  every  one  else  concerned. 

The  first  time  the  young  foreign  prince  ventured  to  reproach  her,  she 
lifted  her  beautiful  head,  and,  with  a  haughty  tone  towards  him,  said 
firmly: 

‘This  is  the  egoism  and  the  cruelty  of  men.  I  expected  nothing  else. 
Woman  sacrifices  herself  for  you;  she  suffers,  and  this  is  her  reward. 
What  right  have  you,  your  highness,  to  call  me  to  account  for  my  friend¬ 
ships,  my  affections?  He  is  a  man  who  has  been  more  than  a  father  to 
me!  ’ 

The  prince  would  have  said  something.  Ellen  interrupted  him. 

‘Well,  yes,  perhaps  he  has  sentiments  for  me  other  than  those  of  a 
father,  but  that  is  not  a  reason  I  should  shut  my  door  on  him.  I  am  not 

1‘Je  stiis  ne  Tartare 
Je  voulus  etre  Romain 
Les  Franqais  m’appelerent  barbare, 

Les  Russes — George  Dandin.’ 


W  A  R  A  N  D  P  E  A  C  E  787 

a  man  to  be  ungrateful.  Know,  youi  highness,  that  in  all  that  relates  to 
my  private  sentiments  I  will  account  only  to  God  and  to  my  con¬ 
science!’  she  concluded,  laying  her  hand  on  her  beautiful,  heaving 
bosom,  and  looking  up  to  heaven. 

‘But  listen  to  me,  in  God’s  name!’  .  .  . 

‘Marry  me,  and  I  will  be  your  slave!’ 

‘But  it  is  impossible.’ 

‘You  do  not  deign  to  stoop  to  me,  you  .  .  Ellen  burst  into  tears. 

The  prince  attempted  to  console  her.  Ellen,  as  though  utterly  dis¬ 
traught,  declared  through  her  tears  that  there  was  nothing  to  prevent 
her  marrying;  that  there  were  precedents  (they  were  but  few  at  that 
time,  but  Ellen  quoted  the  case  of  Napoleon  and  some  other  persons  of 
exalted  rank) ;  that  she  had  never  been  a  real  wife  to  her  husband;  that 
she  had  been  dragged  an  unwilling  victim  into  the  marriage. 

‘But  the  law,  religion  .  .  .’  murmured  the  prince,  on  the  point  of 
yielding. 

‘Religion,  laws  .  .  .  what  can  they  have  been  invented  for,  if  they 
are  unable  to  manage  that?’  said  Ellen. 

The  prince  was  astonished  that  so  simple  a  reflection  had  never  oc¬ 
curred  to  him,  and  applied  to  the  council  of  the  brotherhood  of  the 
Society  of  Jesus,  with  which  he  was  in  close  relations. 

A  few  days  later,  at  one  of  the  fascinating  fetes  Ellen  used  to  give  at 
her  summer  villa  at  Kamenny  Ostrov,  a  certain  fascinating  M.  Jobert 
was  presented  to  her;  a  man  no  longer  young,  with  snow-white  hair 
and  brilliant  black  eyes,  un  Jcsuite  a  robe  courtc,  who  walked  for  a  long 
while  with  Ellen  among  the  illuminations  in  the  garden  to  the  strains  of 
music,  conversing  with  her  of  the  love  of  God,  of  Christ,  of  the  heart  of 
the  Holy  Mother,  and  of  the  consolations  afforded  in  this  life  and  the 
next  by  the  one  true  Catholic  faith.  Ellen  was  touched,  and  several  times 
tears  stood  both  in  her  eyes  and  in  M.  Jobert’s,  and  their  voices  trembled. 
A  dance,  to  which  her  partner  fetched  Ellen  away,  cut  short  her  con¬ 
versation  with  the  future  ‘director  of  her  conscience,’  but  the  next 
evening  M.  Jobert  came  alone  to  see  Ellen,  and  from  that  day  he  was 
a  frequent  visitor. 

One  day  he  took  the  countess  into  a  Catholic  church,  where  she  fell 
on  her  knees  before  the  altar,  up  to  which  she  was  conducted.  The  fasci¬ 
nating,  middle-aged  Frenchman  laid  his  hands  on  her  head,  and  as  she 
herself  afterwards  described  it,  she  felt  something  like  a  breath  of  fresh 
air,  which  seemed  wafted  into  her  soul.  It  was  explained  to  her  that  this 
was  the  ‘grace  of  God.’ 

Then  an  abbe  a  robe  longue  was  brought  to  her;  he  confessed  her,  and 
absolved  her  from  her  sins.  Next  day  a  box  was  brought  containing  the 
Sacred  Host,  and  left  for  her  to  partake  of  at  her  house.  Several  days 
later  Ellen  learned  to  her  satisfaction  that  she  had  now  been  admitted 
into  the  true  Catholic  Church,  and  that  in  a  few  days  the  Pope  himself 
would  hear  of  her  case,  and  send  her  a  document  of  some  sort. 


/S8  WAR  AND  PEACE 

All  that  was  done  with  her  and  around  her  at  this  period,  the  attention 
paid  her  by  so  many  clever  men,  and  expressed  in  such  agreeable  and 
subtle  forms,  and  her  dovelike  purity  during  her  conversion  (she  wore 
nothing  but  white  dresses  and  white  ribbons  all  the  time)— all  afforded 
her  gratification.  But  this  gratification  never  led  her  for  one  instant  to 
lose  sight  of  her  object.  And,  as  always  happens  in  contests  of  cunning, 
the  stupid  person  gains  more  than  the  cleverer;  Ellen,  fully  grasping 
that  the  motive  of  all  these  words  and  all  this  manoeuvring  was  by  her 
conversion  to  Catholicism  to  get  a  round  sum  from  her  for  the  benefit  of 
the  Jesuit  order  (this  was  hinted  at,  indeed),  held  back  the  money,  while 
insisting  steadily  on  the  various  operations  that  would  set  her  free  from 
her  conjugal  bonds.  To  her  notions,  the  real  object  of  every  religion  was 
to  provide  recognised  forms  of  propriety  for  the  satisfaction  of  human 
desires.  And  with  this  end  in  view,  she  insisted,  in  one  of  her  conversa¬ 
tions  with  her  spiritual  adviser,  on  demanding  an  answer  to  the  question 
how  far  her  marriage  was  binding. 

They  were  sitting  in  the  drawing-room  window.  It  was  dusk.  There  was 
a  scent  of  flowers  from  the  window.  Ellen  wore  a  white  dress,  transparent 
over  the  bosom  and  shoulders.  The  sleek,  well-fed  abbe,  with  his  plump, 
clean-shaven  chin,  his  amiable,  strong  mouth,  and  his  white  hands, 
clasped  mildly  on  his  knees,  was  sitting  close  by  Ellen.  With  a  subtle 
smile  on  his  lips,  and  a  look  of  discreet  admiration  in  his  eyes,  he  gazed 
from  time  to  time  at  her  face,  as  he  expounded  his  views  on  the  subject. 
Ellen,  with  a  restless  smile,  stared  at  his  curly  hair  and  his  smooth- 
shaven,  blackish  cheeks,  and  seemed  every  minute  to  be  expecting  the 
conversation  to  take  a  new  turn.  But  the  abbe,  though  unmistakably 
aware  of  the  beauty  of  his  companion,  was  also  interested  in  his  own 
skilful  handling  of  the  question.  The  spiritual  adviser  adopted  the  fol¬ 
lowing  chain  of  reasoning: — 

‘In  ignorance,’  said  he,  ‘of  the  significance  of  your  promise,  you  took 
a  vow  of  conjugal  fidelity  to  a  man  who,  on  his  side,  was  guilty  of 
sacrilege  in  entering  on  the  sacrament  of  matrimony  with  no  faith  in  its 
religious  significance.  That  marriage  had  not  the  dual  binding  force  it 
should  have  had.  But  in  spite  of  that,  your  vow  was  binding  upon  you. 
You  broke  it.  What  did  you  commit?  Venial  sin  or  mortal  sin?  A  venial 
sin,  because  you  committed  it  with  no  intention  of  acting  wrongly.  If 
now,  with  the  object  of  bearing  children,  you  should  enter  into  a  new 
marriage,  your  sin  might  be  forgiven.  But  the  question  again  falls  into 
two  divisions.  First  .  .  .’ 

‘But,  I  imagine, ’  Ellen,  who  was  getting  bored,  said  suddenly,  with 
her  fascinating  smile,  ‘that  after  being  converted  to  the  true  religion, 
I  cannot  be  bound  by  any  obligations  laid  upon  me  by  a  false  religion.’ 

Her  spiritual  adviser  was  astounded  at  the  simplicity  of  this  solution, 
as  simple  as  the  solution  of  Columbus’s  egg.  He  was  enchanted  at  the 
unexpected  rapidity  of  his  pupil’s  progress,  but  could  not  abandon  the 
edifice  of  subtle  argument  that  had  cost  him  mental  effort. 


WARANDPEACE  789 

‘Let  us  understand  each  other,’  he  said,  with  a  smile;  and  began  to 
find  arguments  to  refute  his  spiritual  daughter’s  contention. 


VII 

Ellen  perceived  that  the  matter  was  very  simple  and  easy  from  the 
ecclesiastical  point  of  view,  but  that  her  spiritual  counsellors  raised  diffi¬ 
culties  simply  because  they  were  apprehensive  of  the  way  in  which  it 
might  be  looked  at  by  the  temporal  authorities. 

And,  consequently,  Ellen  decided  in  her  own  mind  that  the  way  must 
be  paved  for  society  to  look  at  the  matter  in  the  true  light.  She  excited 
the  jealousy  of  the  old  dignitary,  and  said  the  same  thing  to  him  as  she 
had  to  her;  other  suitor — that  is,  gave  him  to  understand  that  the  sole 
means  of  obtaining  exclusive  rights  over  her  was  to  marry  her.  The 
elderly  dignitary  was,  like  the  young  foreign  prince,  for  the  first  moment 
taken  aback  at  this  proposal  of  marriage  from  a  wife  whose  husband  was 
living.  But  Ellen’s  unfaltering  confidence  in  asserting  that  it  was  a 
matter  as  simple  and  natural  as  the  marriage  of  an  unmarried  girl  had 
its  effect  on  him  too.  Had  the  slightest  traces  of  hesitation,  shame,  or 
reserve  been  perceptible  in  Ellen  herself,  her  case  would  have  been  un¬ 
doubtedly  lost.  But  far  from  it;  with  perfect  directness  and  simple- 
hearted  naivete,  she  told  her  intimate  friends  (and  that  term  included 
all  Petersburg),  that  both  the  prince  and  the  dignitary  had  made  her 
proposals  of  marriage,  and  that  she  loved  both,  and  was  afraid  of  griev¬ 
ing  either. 

The  rumour  was  immediately  all  over  Petersburg — not  that  Ellen 
wanted  a  divorce  from  her  husband  (had  such  a  rumour  been  discussed 
very  many  persons  would  have  set  themselves  against  any  such  illegal  pro¬ 
ceeding)— but  that  the  unhappy,  interesting  Ellen  was  in  hesitation 
which  of  her  two  suitors  to  marry.  The  question  was  no  longer  how  far 
any  marriage  was  possible,  but  simply  which  would  be  the  more  suitable 
match  for  her,  and  how  the  court  would  look  at  the  question.  There  were, 
indeed,  certain  strait-laced  people  who  could  not  rise  to  the  high  level  of 
the  subject,  and  saw  in  the  project  a  desecration  of  the  sanctity  of  mar¬ 
riage;  but  such  persons  were  few  in  number,  and  they  held  their  tongues; 
while  the  majority  were  interested  in  the  question  of  Ellen’s  happiness, 
and  which  would  be  the  better  match  for  her.  As  to  whether  it  were  right 
or  wrong  for  a  wife  to  marry  when  her  husband  was  alive,  that  was  not 
discussed,  as  the  question  was  evidently  not  a  subject  of  doubt  for 
persons  ‘wiser  than  you  and  me’  (as  was  said),  and  to  doubt  the  correct¬ 
ness  of  their  decision  would  be  risking  the  betrayal  of  one’s  ignorance 
and  absence  of  savoir  jaire. 

Marya  Dmitryevna  Ahrosimov,  who  had  come  that  summer  to  Peters¬ 
burg  to  see  one  of  her  sons,  was  the  only  person  who  ventured  on  the 
direct  expression  of  a  contrary  opinion.  Meeting  Ellen  at  a  ball,  Mayra 


790  WAR  AND  PEACE 

Dmitryevna  stopped  her  in  the  middle  of  the  room,  and  in  the  midst 
of  a  general  silence  said  to  her,  in  her  harsh  voice: 

‘So  you  are  going  to  pass  on  from  one  husband  to  another,  I  hear! 
You  think,  I  dare  say,  it’s  a  new  fashion  you  are  setting.  But  you  are 
not  the  first,  madam.  That’s  a  very  old  idea.  They  do  the  same  in  all 
the  .  .  .’  And  with  these  words,  Marya  Dmitryevna  tucked  up  her 
broad  sleeves  with  her  usual  menacing  action,  and  looking  severely 
round  her,  walked  across  the  ballroom. 

Though  people  were  afraid  of  Marya  Dmitryevna,  yet  in  Petersburg 
they  looked  on  her  as  a  sort  of  buffoon,  and  therefore  of  all  her  words 
they  noticed  only  the  last  coarse  one,  and  repeated  it  to  one  another  I 
in  whispers,  supposing  that  the  whole  point  of  her  utterance  lay  in  that. 

Prince  Vassily  had  of  late  dropped  into  very  frequently  forgetting  . 
what  he  had  said,  and  repeating  the  same  phrase  a  hundred  times;  and 
every  time  he  happened  to  see  his  daughter  he  used  to  say: 

‘Ellen,  I  have  a  word  to  say  to  you,’  he  would  say,  drawing  her  aside, 
and  pulling  her  arm  downwards.  ‘I  have  got  wind  of  certain  projects 
relative  to  .  .  .  you  know.  Well,  my  dear  child,  you  know  how  my 
father’s  heart  rejoices  to  know  you  are  .  .  .  You  have  suffered  so  much. 
But,  my  dear  child,  consult  only  your  heart.  That’s  all  I  tell  you.’  And 
concealing  an  emotion  identical  on  each  occasion,  he  pressed  his  cheek  to 
his  daughter’s  cheek  and  left  her. 

Bilibin,  who  had  not  lost  his  reputation  as  a  wit,  was  a  disinterested 
friend  of  Ellen’s;  one  of  those  friends  always  to  be  seen  in  the  train 
of  brilliant  women,  men  friends  who  can  never  pass  into  the  rank  of 
lovers.  One  day,  in  a  ‘small  and  intimate  circle,’  Bilibin  gave  his  friend 
Ellen  his  views  on  the  subject. 

‘Econtcz,  Bilibin’  (Ellen  always  called  friends  of  the  category  to  which 
Bilibin  belonged  by  their  surnames) ,  and  she  touched  his  coat-sleeve 
with  her  white,  beringed  fingers.  ‘Tell  me,  as  you  would  a  sister,  what 
ought  I  to  do?  Which  of  the  two?’ 

Bilibin  wrinkled  up  the  skin  over  his  eyebrows,  and  pondered  with  £ 
smile  on  his  lips. 

‘You  do  not  take  me  unawares,  you  know,’  he  said.  ‘As  a  true  friend, 

I  have  thought,  and  thought  again  of  your  affair.  You  see,  if  you  marry 
the  prince’ — (the  younger  suitor)  he  crooked  his  finger — ‘you  lose  for 
ever  the  chance  of  marrying  the  other,  and  then  you  displease  the  court. 
(There  is  a  sort  of  relationship,  you  know.)  But  if  you  marry  the  old 
count,  you  make  the  happiness  of  his  last  days.  And  then  as  widow  of  the 
great  .  .  .  the  prince  will  not  be  making  a  mesalliance  in  marrying  you 
.  .  .’  and  Bilibin  let  the  wrinkles  run  out  of  his  face. 

‘That’s  a  real  friend!’  said  Ellen  beaming,  and  once  more  touching 
Bilibin’s  sleeve.  ‘But  the  fact  is  I  love  them  both,  and  I  don’t  want  to 
make  them  unhappy.  I  would  give  my  life  for  the  happiness  of  both,’ 
she  declared. 

Bilibin  shrugged  his  shoulders  to  denote  that  for  such  a  trouble  even 
he  could  suggest  no  remedy. 


WAR  AND  PEACE  79i 

‘Une  maitresse-jemme!  That  is  what’s  called  putting  the  question 
squarely.  She  would  like  to  be  married  to  all  three  at  once,’  thought 
Bilibin. 

‘But  do  tell  me  what  is  your  husband’s  view  of  the  question?’  he  said, 
the  security  of  his  reputation  saving  him  from  all  fear  of  discrediting 
himself  by  so  naive  a  question.  ‘Does  he  consent?’ 

‘Oh,  he  is  so  fond  of  me!’  said  Ellen,  who,  for  some  unknown  reason, 
fancied  that  Pierre  too  adored  her.  ‘II  jera  tout  pour  uioi.’ 

Bilibin  puckered  up  his  face  Ln  Dreparation  of  the  coming  mot. 

‘Meme  le  divorce?’  he  said. 

Ellen  laughed. 

Among  the  persons  who  ventured  to  question  the  legality  of  the  pro¬ 
posed  marriage  was  Ellen’s  mother,  Princess  Kuragin.  She  had  con¬ 
stantly  suffered  pangs  of  envy  of  her  daughter,  and  now  when  the  ground 
for  such  envy  was  the  one  nearest  to  her  own  heart,  she  could  not  recon- 
:ile  herself  to  the  idea  of  it. 

She  consulted  a  Russian  priest  to  ascertain  how  far  divorce  and  re¬ 
marriage  was  possible  for  a  woman  in  her  husband’s  lifetime.  The  priest 
assured  her  that  this  was  impossible;  and  to  her  delight  referred  her  to 
the  text  in  the  Gospel  in  which  (as  it  seemed  to  the  priest)  re-marriage 
during  the  lifetime  of  the  husband  was  directly  forbidden. 

Armed  with  these  arguments,  which  seemed  to  her  irrefutable,  Princess 
Kuragin  drove  round  to  her  daughter’s  early  one  morning  in  order  to  find 
her  alone. 

Ellen  heard  her  mother’s  protests  to  the  end,  and  smiled  with  bland 
sarcasm. 

‘You  see  it  is  plainly  said:  “He  who  marryeth  her  that  is  di¬ 
vorced  .  .  .”  ’ 

‘O  mamma,  don’t  talk  nonsense.  Amu  don’t  understand.  In  my  position 
I  have  duties  .  .  .’  Ellen  began,  passing  out  of  Russian  into  French,  for 
in  the  former  language  she  always  felt  a  lack  of  clearness  about  her  case. 

‘But,  my  dear  .  .  .’ 

‘O  mamma,  how  is  it  you  don’t  understand  that  the  Holy  Father,  who 
has  the  right  of  granting  dispensations  .  .  .’ 

At  that  moment  the  lady  companion,  who  lived  in  Ellen’s  house,  came 
in  to  announce  that  his  highness  was  in  the  drawing-room,  and  wished  to 
see  her. 

‘No,  tell  him  I  don’t  want  to  see  him,  that  I  am  furious  with  him  for 
not  keeping  his  word.’ 

I  ‘Countess,  there  is  mercy  for  every  sin,’  said  a  young  man  with  fair 
hair  and  a  long  face  and  long  nose. 

The  old  princess  rose  respectfully  and  curtsied  at  his  entrance.  The 
young  man  took  no  notice  of  her.  Princess  Kuragin  nodded  to  her  daugh¬ 
ter,  and  swam  to  the  door. 

‘Yes,  she  is  right,’  thought  the  old  princess,  all  of  whose  convictions  had 
oeen  dissipated  by  the  appearance  of  his  highness  on  the  scene.  ‘She  is 
•ight ;  but  how  was  it  in  our  youth — gone  now  for  ever — we  knew  nothing 


792  WARANDPEACE 

of  this?  And  it  is  so  simple,’  thought  Princess  Kuragin,  as  she  settled 
herself  in  her  carriage. 

At  the  beginning  of  August  Ellen’s  affairs  were  settled,  and  she  wrote 
to  her  husband  (who,  as  she  supposed,  was  deeply  attached  to  her)  a 
letter,  in  which  she  made  known  to  him  her  intention  of  marrying  N.  N. 
She  informed  him  also  of  her  conversion  to  the  one  true  faith,  and  begged 
him  to  go  through  all  the  necessary  formalities  for  obtaining  a  divorce,  of 
which  the  bearer  of  the  letter  would  give  him  further  details.  ‘On  which  I 
pray  God  to  have  you  in  His  holy  and  powerful  keeping.  Your  friend 
Ellen.’ 

This  letter  was  brought  to  Pierre’s  house  at  the  time  when  he  was  on 
the  field  of  Borodino. 

VIII 

At  the  end  of  the  day  of  Borodino,  Pierre  ran  for  a  second  time  from 
Raevsky’s  battery,  and  with  crowds  of  soldiers  crossed  the  ravine  on  the 
way  to  Knyazkovo.  There  he  reached  an  ambulance  tent,  and  seeing 
blood  and  hearing  screams  and  groans,  he  hurried  on,  caught  up  in  a 
mob  of  soldiers. 

The  one  thing  Pierre  desired  now  with  his  whole  soul  was  to  get  away 
from  the  terrible  sensations  in  which  he  had  passed  that  day,  to  get  back 
into  the  ordinary  conditions  of  life,  and  to  go  to  sleep  quietly  indoors  in  his 
own  bed.  He  felt  that  only  in  the  ordinary  conditions  of  life  would  he  be  fit 
to  understand  himself  and  all  he  had  seen  and  felt.  But  the  ordinary 
conditions  of  life  were  nowhere  to  be  found. 

Though  bullets  and  cannon  balls  were  not  whistling  here  on  the  road 
along  which  he  was  going,  still  he  saw  here  on  all  sides  the  same  sights 
as  on  the  field  of  battle.  There  were  everywhere  the  same  suffering,  ex¬ 
hausted,  and  sometimes  strangely  indifferent  faces;  everywhere  the  same 
blood  and  soldiers’  overcoats,  the  same  sound  of  firing  at  a  distance,  yet 
still  rousing  the  same  horror.  There  was  heat  and  dust  besides. 

After  walking  about  three  versts  along  the  Mozhaisk  road,  Pierre  sat 
down  by  the  roadside. 

The  shadows  of  night  were  beginning  to  fall  over  the  earth,  and  the 
roar  of  cannon  died  down.  Pierre  lay  leaning  on  his  elbow,  and  lay  so  a 
long  while,  gazing  at  the  shadows  passing  by  him  in  the  dusk.  He  was  con¬ 
tinually  fancying  that  a  cannon  ball  was  swooping  down  upon  him  with  a 
fearful  whiz.  He  started  and  sat  up.  He  had  no  idea  how  long  he  had  been 
there.  In  the  middle  of  the  night,  three  soldiers,  dragging  branches  after 
them,  settled  themselves  near  him  and  began  making  a  fire. 

Casting  sidelong  glances  at  Pierre,  the  soldiers  lighted  the  fire,  set  a 
pot  on  it,  broke  up  their  biscuits  into  it,  and  put  in  some  lard.  The  pleasant 
odour  of  the  savoury  and  greasy  mess  blended  with  the  smell  of  smoke. 
Pierre  raised  himself  and  sighed.  The  soldiers  (there  were  three  of  them) 


WARANDPEACE  793 

were  eating  and  talking  among  themselves,  without  taking  any  notice 
of  Pierre. 

‘And  what  lot  will  you  be  one  of?’  one  of  the  soldiers  suddenly  asked 
Pierre,  evidently  suggesting  in  this  inquiry  precisely  what  Pierre  was 
thinking  about.  ‘If  you  are  hungry  we’ll  give  you  some,  only  tell  us  whether 
you’re  a  true  man.’ 

‘I?’  .  .  .  said  Pierre,  feeling  the  necessity  of  minimising  his  social 
position  as  far  as  possible,  so  as  to  be  closer  to  the  soldiers  and  more 
within  their  range.  ‘I  am  really  a  militia  officer,  but  my  company’s  no¬ 
where  about;  I  came  to  the  battle  and  lost  sight  of  my  comrades.’ 

‘Well!  Fancy  that!’  said  one  of  the  soldiers. 

Another  soldier  shook  his  head. 

‘Well,  you  can  have  some  of  the  mash,  if  you  like!’  said  the  first,  and 
licking  a  wooden  spoon  he  gave  it  to  Pierre. 

Pierre  squatted  by  the  fire,  and  fell  to  eating  the  mess  in  the  pot,  which 
seemed  to  him  the  most  delicious  dish  he  had  ever  tasted.  While  he  was 
bending  over  the  pot,  helping  himself  to  big  spoonfuls  and  greedily  munch¬ 
ing  one  after  another,  the  soldiers  stared  at  him  in  silence. 

‘Where  do  you  want  to  go?  Tell  us!  ’  the  first  of  them  asked  again. 

‘To  Mozhaisk.’ 

‘You’re  a  gentleman,  then?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘And  what’s  your  name?’ 

‘Pyotr  Kirillovitch.’ 

‘Well,  Pyotr  Kirillovitch,  come  along,  we’ll  take  you  there.’ 

In  the  pitch  dark  the  soldiers  and  Pierre  walked  to  Mozhaisk. 

The  cocks  were  crowing  when  they  reached  Mozhaisk,  and  began  as¬ 
cending  the  steep  hill  into  the  town. 

Pierre  walked  on  with  the  soldiers,  entirely  forgetting  that  his  inn  was 
at  the  bottom  of  the  hill  and  he  had  passed  it.  He  would  not  have  been 
aware  of  this — so  preoccupied  was  he — if  he  had  not  chanced  halfway  up 
the  hill  to  stumble  across  his  groom,  who  had  been  to  look  for  him  in  the 
town,  and  was  on  his  way  back  to  the  inn.  The  groom  recognised  Pierre 
by  his  hat,  which  gleamed  white  in  the  dark. 

‘Your  excellency!’  he  cried,  ‘why,  we  had  quite  given  you  up.  How  is 
it  you  are  on  foot?  And,  mercy  on  us,  where  are  you  going?’ 

‘Oh,  to  be  sure  .  .  .’ said  Pierre. 

The  soldiers  halted. 

‘Well,  found  your  own  folks  then?’  said  one  of  them. 

‘Well,  good-bye  to  you — Pyotr  Kirillovitch,  wasn’t  it?’ 

.  ‘Good-bye,  Pyotr  Kirillovitch!’  said  the  other  voices. 

‘Good-bye,’  said  Pierre,  and  with  the  groom  he  turned  in  the  direction 
of  the  inn. 

‘I  ought  to  give  them  something!  ’  thought  Tierre,  feeling  for  his  pocket. 
‘No,  better  not,’  some  inner  voice  prompted  him. 

There  was  not  a  room  at  the  inn:  all  were  full.  Pierre  went  out  into  the 
yard,  and  muffling  his  head  up,  lay  down  in  his  carriage. 


794 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


IX 

Pierre  had  hardly  put  his  head  on  the  pillow  when  he  felt  that  he  was 
dropping  asleep.  But  all  of  a  sudden  he  heard,  almost  with  the  distinctness 
of  reality,  the  sound  of  the  boom,  boom,  boom  of  the  cannon,  the  groans 
and  shrieks  and  dull  thud  of  the  falling  shell,  smelt  the  blood  and  powder; 
and  the  feeling  of  horror,  of  the  dread  of  death  came  over  him.  He  opened 
his  eyes  in  a  panic,  and  put  his  head  out  from  the  cloak.  All  was  quiet  in 
the  yard.  The  only  sound  came  from  a  servant  of  some  sort  talking  with 
the  porter  at  the  gate,  and  splashing  through  the  mud.  Over  Pierre’s  head, 
under  the  dark,  wooden  eaves,  he  heard  pigeons  fluttering,  startled  by  the 
movement  he  had  made  in  sitting  up.  The  whole  yard  was  pervaded  by 
the  strong  smell  of  a  tavern — full  of  peaceful  suggestion  and  soothing 
relief  to  Pierre — the  smell  of  hay,  of  dung,  and  of  tar.  Between  two  dark 
sheds  he  caught  a  glimpse  of  the  pure,  starlit  sky. 

‘Thank  God,  that  is  all  over!’  thought  Pierre,  covering  his  head  up 
again.  ‘Oh,  how  awful  terror  is,  and  how  shamefully  I  gave  way  to  it!  But 
they  .  .  .  they  were  firm  and  calm  all  the  while  up  to  the  end  .  .  .’  he 
thought.  They,  in  Pierre’s  mind,  meant  the  soldiers,  those  who  had  been 
on  the  battery,  and  those  who  had  given  him  food,  and  those  who  had 
prayed  to  the  holy  picture.  They — those  strange  people,  of  whom  he  had 
known  nothing  hitherto — they  stood  out  clearly  and  sharply  in  his  mind 
apart  from  all  other  people. 

‘To  be  a  soldier,  simply  a  soldier!’  thought  Pierre  as  he  fell  asleep.  ‘To 
enter  with  one’s  whole  nature  into  that  common  life,  to  be  filled  with  what , 
makes  them  what  they  are.  But  how  is  one  to  cast  off  all  that  is  super¬ 
fluous,  devilish  in  one’s  self,  all  the  burden  of  the  outer  man?  At  one  time 
I  might  have  been  the  same.  I  might  have  run  away  from  my  father  as  I 
wanted  to.  After  the  duel  with  Dolohov  too  I  might  have  been  sent  for 
a  soldier.’ 

And  into  Pierre’s  imagination  flashed  a  picture  of  the  dinner  at  the, 
club,  at  which  he  had  challenged  Dolohov,  then  the  image  of  his  bene¬ 
factor  at  Torzhok.  And  there  rose  before  his  mind  a  solemn  meeting  of 
the  lodge.  It  was  taking  place  at  the  English  Club.  And  some  one  he  knew, , 
some  one  near  and  dear  to  him,  was  sitting  at  the  end  of  the  table.  ‘Why, 
it  is  he!  It  is  my  benefactor.  But  surely  he  died?’  thought  Pierre.  ‘Yes,, 
he  did  die,  but  I  didn’t  know  he  was  alive.  And  how  sorry  I  was  when  he 
died,  and  how  glad  I  am  he  is  alive  again!  ’  On  one  side  of  the  table  were1 
sitting  Anatole,  Dolohov,  Nesvitsky,  Denisov,  and  others  like  them  (in, 
Pierre’s  dream  these  people  formed  as  distinct  a  class  apart  as  those  other 
men  whom  he  had  called  them  to  himself),  and  those  people,  Anatole  and 
Dolohov,  were  loudly  shouting  and  singing.  But  through  their  clamouri , 
the  voice  of  his  benefactor  could  be  heard  speaking  all  the  while,  and  the 
sound  of  his  voice  was  as  weighty  and  as  uninterrupted  as  the  din  of  the  j 
battlefield,  but  it  was  pleasant  and  comforting.  Pierre  did  not  understand  , 
what  his  benefactor  was  saying,  but  he  knew  (the  category  of  his  ideas 


WAR  AND  PEACE  795 

too,  was  distinct  in  his  dream)  that  he  was  talking  of  goodness,  of  the 
possibility  of  being  like  them.  And  they  with  their  simple,  good,  plucky 
faces  were  surrounding  his  benefactor  on  all  sides.  But  though  they  were 
kindly,  they  did  not  look  at  Pierre;  they  did  not  know  him.  Pierre  wanted 
to  attract  their  notice,  and  to  speak  to  them.  He  got  up,  but  at  the  same 
instant  became  aware  that  his  legs  were  bare  and  chill. 

Pie  felt  ashamed,  and  put  his  arm  over  his  legs,  from  which  his  cloak 
had  in  fact  slipped  off.  For  an  instant  Pierre  opened  his  eyes  as  he  pulled 
up  the  cloak,  and  saw  the  same  roofs,  and  posts,  and  yard,  but  it  was  now 
full  of  bluish  light,  and  glistening  with  dew  or  frost. 

‘It’s  getting  light,’  thought  Pierre.  ‘But  that’s  not  the  point.  I  want  to 
hear  and  understand  the  benefactor’s  words.’ 

He  muffled  himself  in  the  cloak  again,  but  the  masonic  dinner  and  his 
benefactor  would  not  come  back.  All  that  remained  were  thoughts,  clearly 
expressed  in  words,  ideas;  some  voice  was  speaking,  or  Pierre  was 
flunking. 

When  he  recalled  those  thoughts  later,  although  they  had  been  evoked 
ay  the  impressions  of  that  day,  Pierre  was  convinced  that  they  were 
uttered  by  some  one  outside  himself.  It  seemed  to  him  that  he  had  never 
ueen  capable  of  thinking  those  thoughts  and  expressing  them  in  that 
'orm  in  his  waking  moments. 

‘The  most  difficult  thing  is  the  subjection  of  man’s  will  to  the  law 
af  God,’  said  the  voice.  ‘Simplicity  is  the  submission  to  God;  there  is 
io  escaping  from  Him.  And  they  are  simple.  They  do  not  talk,  but  act. 
\  word  uttered  is  silver,  but  unuttered  is  golden.  No  one  can  be  master 
if  anything  while  he  fears  death.  And  all  things  belong  to  him  who  fears 
t  not.  If  it  were  not  for  suffering,  a  man  would  know  not  his  limits,  would 
mow  not  himself.  The  hardest  thing’  (Pierre  thought  or  heard  in  his 
Iream)  ‘is  to  know  how  to  unite  in  one’s  soul  the  significance  of  the  whole, 
ro  unite  the  whole?’  Pierre  said  to  himself.  ‘No,  not  to  unite.  One  cannot 
mite  one’s  thoughts,  but  to  harness  together  all  those  ideas,  that’s  what’s 
vanted.  Yes,  one  must  harness  together,  harness  together,’  Pierre  re¬ 
lated  to  himself  with  a  thrill  of  ecstasy,  feeling  that  those  words,  and 
inly  those  words,  expressed  what  he  wanted  to  express,  and  solved  the 
vhole  problem  fretting  him. 

‘Yes,  one  must  harness  together ;  it’s  time  to  harness  .  . 

‘We  want  to  harness  the  horses;  it’s  time  to  harness  the  horses,  your 
excellency!  Your  excellency,’  some  voice  was  repeating,  ‘we  want  to 
tarness  the  horses ;  it’s  time  .  .  .’ 

i  It  was  the  groom  waking  Pierre.  The  sun  was  shining  full  in  Pierre’s 
ace.  He  glanced  at  the  dirty  tavern  yard;  at  the  well  in  the  middle  of  it 
oldiers  were  watering  their  thin  horses;  and  waggons  were  moving  out  of 
he  gate. 

He  turned  away  with  repugnance,  and  shutting  his  eyes,  made  haste 
a  huddle  up  again  on  the  seat  of  the  carriage.  ‘No,  I  don’t  want  that;  I 
pn’t  want  to  see  and  understand  that;  I  want  to  understand  what  was 
;?vealed  to  me  in  my  sleep.  Another  second  and  I  should  have  understood 


796  '  WARANDPEACE 

it  all.  But  what  am  I  to  do?  To  harness,  but  how  harness  all  together? 
And  Pierre  felt  with  horror  that  the  whole  meaning  of  what  he  had  seer 
and  thought  in  his  dream  had  slipped  away. 

The  groom,  the  coachman,  and  the  porter  told  Pierre  that  an  office) 
had  come  with  the  news  that  the  French  were  advancing  on  Mozhaisk 
and  our  troops  were  retreating. 

Pierre  got  up,  and  ordering  the  carriage  to  be  got  out  and  to  drive  aftei 
him,  crossed  the  town  on  foot. 

The  troops  were  marching  out,  leaving  tens  of  thousands  of  woundec 
behind.  The  wounded  could  be  seen  at  the  windows  of  the  houses,  anc 
were  crowding  the  yards  and  streets.  Screams,  oaths,  and  blows  coulc 
be  heard  in  the  streets  about  the  carts  which  were  to  carry  away  the 
wounded.  Pierre  put  his  carriage  at  the  service  of  a  wounded  genera 
of  his  acquaintance,  and  drove  with  him  to  Moscow.  On  the  way  h( 
was  told  of  the  death  of  his  brother-in-law,  Anatole,  and  of  the  death  o 
Prince  Andrey. 


X 

On  the  30th  Pierre  returned  to  Moscow.  Almost  at  the  city  gates  he  wa 
met  by  an  adjutant  of  Count  Rastoptchin’s. 

‘Why,  we  have  been  looking  for  you  everywhere,’  said  the  adjutant 
‘The  count  urgently  wants  to  see  you.  He  begs  you  to  come  to  him  a! 
once  on  very  important  business.’  Instead  of  going  home,  Pierre  hailed  ; 
cab-driver  and  drove  to  the  governor’s. 

Count  Rastoptchin  had  only  that  morning  arrived  from  his  summe 
villa  at  Sokolniky.  The  ante-room  and  waiting-room  in  the  count’s  hous 
were  full  of  officials,  who  had  been  summoned  by  him,  or  had  come  to  hir 
for  instructions.  Vassiltchekov  and  Platov  had  already  seen  the  couni 
and  informed  him  that  the  defence  of  Moscow  was  out  of  the  questior 
and  the  city  would  be  surrendered.  Though  the  news  was  being  conceale 
from  the  citizens,  the  heads  of  various  departments  and  officials  of  differ 
ent  kinds  knew  that  Moscow  would  soon  be  in  the  hands  of  the  enem} 
just  as  Count  Rastoptchin  knew  it.  And  all  of  them  to  escape  persorn 
responsibility  had  come  to  the  governor  to  inquire  how  to  act  in  regard  t 
the  offices  in  their  charge. 

At  the  moment  when  Pierre  went  into  the  waiting-room,  a  courie 
from  the  army  was  just  coming  out  from  an  interview  with  the  coun 
The  courier  waved  his  hand  with  a  hopeless  air  at  the  questions  wit 
which  he  was  besieged,  and  walked  across  the  room. 

While  he  waited,  Pierre  watched  with  weary  eyes  the  various  officials- 
young,  old,  military,  and  civilian,  important  and  insignificant — wl 
were  gathered  together  in  the  room.  All  seemed  dissatisfied  and  uneas; 
Pierre  went  up  to  one  group  of  functionaries,  among  whom  he  recognise 
an  acquaintance.  After  greeting  him,  they  went  on  with  their  conversatio 
‘Well,  to  send  out  and  bring  back  again  would  be  no  harm;  but  : 
the  present  position  of  affairs  there’s  no  answering  for  anything.’ 


WAR  AND  PEACE  797 

‘But  look  here,  what  he  writes,’  said  another,  pointing  to  a  printed 
japer  he  held  in  his  hand. 

‘That’s  a  different  matter.  That’s  necessary  for  the  common  people,’ 
;aid  the  first. 

‘What  is  it?’  asked  Pierre. 

‘The  new  proclamation.’ 

Pierre  took  it  and  began  to  read. 

‘His  highness  the  prince  has  passed  Mozhaisk,  so  as  to  unite  with  the 
roops  that  are  going  to  join  him,  and  has  taken  up  a  strong  position, 
vhere  the  enemy  cannot  attack  him  suddenly.  Forty-eight  cannon  with 
hells  have  been  sent  him  from  here,  and  his  highness  declares  that  he 
vill  defend  Moscow  to  the  last  drop  of  blood,  and  is  ready  even  to  fight 
n  the  streets.  Don’t  mind,  brothers,  that  the  courts  of  justice  are  closed; 
re  must  take  our  measures,  and  we’ll  deal  with  miscreants  in  our  own 
ashion.  When  the  time  comes,  I  shall  have  need  of  some  gallant  fellows, 
ioth  of  town  and  country.  I  will  give  the  word  in  a  couple  of  days;  but 
iow  there’s  no  need,  and  I  hold  my  peace.  The  axe  is  useful;  the  pike, 
oo,  is  not  to  be  despised;  but  best  of  all  is  the  three-pronged  fork:  a 
Tenchman  is  no  heavier  than  a  sheaf  of  rye.  To-morrow  after  dinner, 
shall  take  the  Iversky  Holy  Mother  to  St.  Catherine’s  Hospital  to  the 
rounded.  There  we  will  consecrate  the  water;  they  will  soon  be  well 
gain.  I,  too,  am  well  now;  one  of  my  eyes  was  bad,  but  now  I  look  well 
ut  of  both.’ 

‘Why,  I  was  told  by  military  men,’  said  Pierre,  ‘that  there  could  be  no 
ighting  in  the  town  itself,  and  the  position  .  .  .’ 

‘To  be  sure,  that’s  just  what  we  are  saying,’  said  the  first  speaker. 
‘But  what  does  that  mean:  “One  of  my  eyes  was  bad,  but  now  I  look 
ut  of  both”?’  asked  Pierre. 

‘The  count  had  a  sty  in  his  eye,’  said  the  adjutant  smiling;  ‘and  he 
/as  very  much  put  out  when  I  told  him  people  were  coming  to  ask  what 
/as  the  matter.  And  oh,  count,’  he  said  suddenly,  addressing  Pierre  with 
smile,  ‘we  have  been  hearing  that  you  are  in  trouble  with  domestic 
nxieties,  that  the  countess,  your  spouse  .  .  .’ 

‘I  have  heard  nothing  about  it,’  said  Pierre  indifferently.  ‘What  is  it 
ou  have  heard?’ 

‘Oh,  you  know,  stories  are  so  often  made  up.  I  only  repeat  what  I 
ear.’ 

‘What  have  you  heard?’ 

‘Oh,  they  say,’  said  the  adjutant  again  with  the  same  smile,  ‘that  the 
ountess,  your  wife,  is  preparing  to  go  abroad.  It’s  most  likely  nonsense.’ 

‘It  may  be,’  said  Pierre,  looking  absent-mindedly  about  him.  ‘Who  is 
hat?’  he  asked,  indicating  a  tall  old  man  in  a  clean  blue  overcoat,  with  a 
ig,  snow-white  beard  and  eyebrows  and  a  ruddy  face. 

‘That?  Oh,  he’s  a  merchant;  that  is,  he’s  the  restaurant-keeper, 
'ereshtchagin.  You  have  heard  the  story  of  the  proclamation,  I  dare  say?’ 
‘Oh,  so  that’s  Vereshtchagin!  ’  said  Pierre,  scrutinising  the  firm,  calm 


79S  WARANDPEACE 

face  of  the  old  merchant,  and  seeking  in  it  some  token  of  treachery, 

‘That’s  not  the  man  himself.  That’s  the  father  of  the  fellow  who  wrote 
the  proclamation,’  said  the  adjutant.  ‘The  young  man  himself  is  in 
custody,  and  I  fancy  it  will  go  hardly  with  him.’ 

A  little  old  gentleman  with  a  star,  and  a  German  official  with  a  cross 
on  his  neck,  joined  the  group. 

‘It’s  a  complicated  story,  you  see,’  the  adjutant  was  relating.  ‘The 
proclamation  appeared  two  months  ago.  It  was  brought  to  the  count. 
He  ordered  inquiry  to  be  made.  Well,  Gavrilo  Ivanitch  made  investiga-, 
tions;  the  proclamation  had  passed  through  some  sixty-three  hands.  We 
come  to  one  and  ask,  From  whom  did  you  get  it?  From  so  and  so.  And 
the  next  refers  us  on  to  so  and  so;  and  in  that  way  they  traced  it  to 
Vereshtchagin  ...  a  half-educated  merchant’s  son,  one  of  those  pretty 
dears,  you  know,’  said  the  adjutant  smiling.  ‘He  too  was  asked,  From 
whom  did  you  get  it?  And  we  knew  very  well  from  whom  he  had  it  really. 
He  could  have  had  it  from  no  one  but  the  director  of  the  post-office.  But 
it  was  clear  there  was  an  understanding  between  them.  He  says  he  got 
it  from  no  one,  but  had  composed  it  himself.  And  threaten  him  and 
question  him  as  they  would,  he  stuck  to  it,  he  had  written  it  himself. 
So  the  matter  was  reported,  and  the  count  had  him  sent  for.  “From  whom 
did  you  get  the  proclamation?”  “I  wrote  it  myself.”  Well!  you  know  the 
count,’  said  the  adjutant,  with  a  smile  of  pride  and  delight.  ‘He  was 
fearfully  angry;  and  only  fancy  the  insolence,  and  lying,  and  stub¬ 
bornness!’ 

‘Oh !  the  count  wanted  him  to  say  it  was  from  Klutcharyov,  I  under¬ 
stand,’  said  Pierre. 

‘Oh  no,  not  at  all,’  said  the  adjutant  in  dismay.  ‘Klutcharyov  had  sin; 
enough  to  answer  for  without  that,  and  that’s  why  he  was  banished.  Bui 
any  way,  the  count  was  very  indignant.  “How  could  you  write  it?”  sayi 
the  count.  He  took  up  the  Hamburg  Gazette  that  was  on  the  table.  “Hert 
it  is.  You  did  not  compose  it,  but  translated  it,  and  very  badly  too,  be 
cause  you  don’t  even  know  French,  you  fool.”  What  do  you  think?  “No,’ 
says  he,  “I  have  never  read  any  gazettes;  I  made  it  up.”  “But  if  so1 
you’re  a  traitor,  and  I’ll  hand  you  over  for  judgment,  and  you  will  bi , 
hanged.”  “Tell  us  from  whom  you  got  it.”  “I  have  not  seen  any  gazettes 
I  composed  it.”  So  the  matter  rests.  The  count  sent  for  the  father;  hi; 
sticks  to  the  same  story.  And  they  had  him  tried,  and  he  was  sentenced 
I  believe,  to  hard  labour.  Now  the  father  has  come  to  petition  in  hi 
favour.  But  he  is  a  worthless  young  scamp!  You  know  the  style  o 
spoilt  merchant’s  son,  a  regular  dandy  and  lady-killer;  has  attendee 
lectures  of  some  sort,  and  so  fancies  that  he’s  above  everybody.  A  regula  ; 
young  scamp!  His  father  has  an  eating-house  here  on  the  Ivamenn; 
bridge;  and  in  the  shop,  you  know,  there  is  a  great  picture  of  God  th 
Supporter  of  All,  represented  with  a  sceptre  in  one  hand  and  the  empir 
in  the  other;  well,  he  took  that  picture  home  for  a  few  days,  and  wha 
do  you  suppose  he  did!  He  got  hold  of  some  wretched  painter  .  .  .’ 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


799 


XI 

In  the  middle  of  this  new  story  Pierre  was  summoned  to  the  governor. 

He  went  into  Count  Rastoptchin’s  study.  Rastoptchin,  frowning,  passed 
his  hand  across  his  forehead  and  eyes  as  Pierre  entered.  A  short  man  was 
saying  something,  but  as  soon  as  Pierre  walked  in  he  stopped,  and 
went  out. 

‘Ah!  greetings  to  you,  valiant  warrior,’  said  Rastoptchin  as  soon  as  the 
other  man  had  left  the  room.  ‘We  have  been  hearing  about  your  prouesses! 
But  that’s  not  the  point.  Mon  cher,  entre  nous,  are  you  a  mason?’  said 
Count  Rastoptchin  in  a  severe  tone,  that  suggested  that  it  was  a  crime 
to  be  so,  but  that  he  intended  to  pardon  it.  Pierre  did  not  speak.  ‘Mon 
cher,  je  suis  bien  in  for  me;  but  I  know  that  there  are  masons  and  masons, 
and  I  hope  you  don’t  belong  to  those  among  them  who,  by  way  of 
regenerating  the  human  race,  are  trying  to  ruin  Russia.’ 

‘Yes,  I  am  a  mason,’  answered  Pierre. 

‘Well  then,  look  here,  my  dear  boy.  You  are  not  unaware,  I  dare  say, 
of  the  fact  that  Speransky  and  Magnitsky  have  been  sent — to  their  proper 
place — and  the  same  has  been  done  with  Klutcharyov  and  the  others 
who,  under  the  guise  of  building  up  the  temple  of  Solomon,  have  been 
trying  to  destroy  the  temple  of  their  fatherland.  You  may  take  it  for 
granted  there  are  good  reasons  for  it,  and  that  I  could  not  have  banished 
the  director  of  the  post-office  here  if  he  had  not  been  a  dangerous  person 
Now,  it  has  reached  my  ears  that  you  sent  him- your  carriage  to  get  out 
of  the  town,  and  that  you  have  even  taken  charge  of  his  papers.  I  like 
you,  and  wish  you  no  harm,  and  as  you  are  half  my  age,  I  advise  you,  as 
a  father  might,  to  break  off  all  connection  with  people  of  that  sort,  and 
to  get  away  from  here  yourself  as  quickly  as  you  can.’ 

‘But  what  was  Klutcharyov’s  crime?’  asked  Pierre. 

‘That's  my  business;  and  it’s  not  yours  to  question  me,’  cried  Ras¬ 
toptchin. 

‘If  he  is  accused  of  having  circulated  Napoleon’s  proclamation,  the 
charge  has  not  been  proved,’  said  Pierre,  not  looking  at  Rastoptchin. 
‘And  Vereshtchagin  .  .  .’ 

‘Nous  y  voila,’  Rastoptchin  suddenly  broke  in,  scowling  and  shouting 
louder  than  ever.  ‘Vereshtchagin  is  a  traitor  and  a  deceiver,  who  will 
1  receive  the  punishment  he  deserves,’  he  said,  with  the  vindictiveness 
with  which  people  speak  at  the  recollection  of  an  affront.  ‘But  I  did  not 
1  send  for  you  to  criticise  my  actions,  but  in  order  to  give  you  advice  or  a 
command,  if  you  will  have  it  so.  I  beg  you  to  break  off  all  connection 
:  with  Klutcharyov  and  his  set,  and. to  leave  the  town.  And  I'll  knock  the 
nonsense  out  of  them,  wherever  I  may  find  it.’  And,  probably  becoming 
!  conscious  that  he  was  taking  a  heated  tone  with  Bezuhov,  who  wTas  as 
I  yet  guilty  of  no  offence,  he  added,  taking  Pierre’s  hand  cordially:  ‘We 
are  on  the  eve  of  a  public  disaster,  and  I  haven’t  time  to  say  civil  things 


Soo  WARANDPEACE 

to  every  one  who  has  business  with  me.  My  head  is  at  times  in  a  perfect 
whirl.  Well,  what  are  you  going  to  do,  you  personally?’ 

‘Oh,  nothing,’  answered  Pierre,  with  his  eyes  still  dgwncast,  and  no 
change  in  the  expression  of  his  dreamy  face. 

The  count  frowned. 

‘Un  conseil  d’ami,  mon  cher.  Decamp,  and  as  soon  as  may  be,  that’s 
my  advice.  A  bon  entendeur,  saint!  Good-bye,  my  dear  boy.  Oh,  by  the 
way,’  he  called  after  him  at  the  door,  ‘is  it  true  the  countess  has  fallen 
into  the  clutches  of  the  holy  fathers  of  the  Society  of  Jesus?’ 

Pierre  made  no  answer.  He  walked  out  from  Rastoptchin’s  room, 
scowling  and  wrathful  as  he  had  never  been  seen  before. 

By  the  time  he  reached  home  it  was  getting  dark.  Eight  persons  of 
different  kinds  were  waiting  on  him  that  evening.  A  secretary  of  a  com¬ 
mittee,  the  colonel  of  his  battalion  of  militia,  his  steward,  his  bailiff,  and 
other  persons  with  petitions.  All  of  them  had  business  matters  with  Pierre, 
which  he  had  to  settle.  He  had  no  understanding  of  their  questions,  nor 
interest  in  them,  and  answered  .them  with  the  sole  object  of  getting  rid 
of  these  people.  At  last  he  was  left  alone,  and  he  broke  open  and  read 
his  wife’s  letter. 

‘They — the  soldiers  on  the  battery,  Prince  Andrey  killed  .  .  .  the  old 
man.  .  .  .  Simplicity  is  submission  to  God’s  will.  One  has  to  suffer  .  .  . 
the  significance  of  the  whole  .  .  .  one  must  harness  all  together  .  .  .  my 
wife  is  going  to  be  married.  .  .  .  One  must  forget  and  understand  .  .  .’ 
And,  without  undressing,  he  threw  himself  on  his  bed  and  at  once  fell 
asleep. 

When  he  waked  up  next  morning  his  steward  came  in  to  announce 
that  a  police  official  was  below,  sent  expressly  by  Count  Rastoptchin  to 
find  out  whether  Count  Bezuhov  had  gone,  or  was  going  away. 

A  dozen  different  people  were  waiting  in  the  drawing-room  to  see 
Pierre  on  business.  Pierre  dressed  in  haste,  and  instead  of  going  down  to 
see  them,  he  ran  down  the  back  staircase  and  out  by  the  back  entry  to 
the  gates. 

From  that  moment  till  the  occupation  of  Moscow  was  over,  no  one  of 
Bezuhov’s  household  saw  him  again,  nor  could  discover  his  whereabouts, 
in  spite  of  every  effort  to  track  him. 


XII 

The  Rostovs  remained  in  Moscow  till  the  ist  of  September,  the  day 
before  the  enemy  entered  the  city. 

After  Petya  had  joined  Obolensky’s  regiment  of  Cossacks  and  had 
gone  away  to  Byely  Tserkov,  where  the  regiment  was  being  enrolled, 
the  countess  fell  into  a  panic  of  terror.  The  idea  that  both  her  sons  were 
at  the  war,  that  they  had  both  escaped  from  under  her  wing,  that  any 
day  either  of  them — and  possibly  even  both  at  once,  like  the  three  sons 
of  a  lady  of  her  acquaintance — might  be  killed,  seemed  for  the  first  time 


8oi 


WAR  AND  PEACE 
that  summer  to  strike  her  imagination  with  cruel  vividness.  She  tried  to 
get  Nikolay  back,  wanted  to  go  herself  after  Petya,  or  to  obtain  some 
post  for  him  in  Petersburg;  but  all  these  seemed  equally  impossible. 
Petya  could  not'  be  brought  back  except  by  the  return  of  his  regiment, 
or  through  being  transferred  to  another  regiment  on  active  service. 
Nikolay  was  somewhere  at  the  front,  and  nothing  had  been  heard  from 
him  since  the  letter  in  which  he  had  given  a  detailed  account  of  his  meet¬ 
ing  with  Princess  Marya.  The  countess  could  not  sleep  at  nights,  and 
when  she  did  sleep,  she  dreamed  that  her  sons  had  been  killed.  After 
much  talking  the  matter  over,  and  many  consultations  of  friends,  the 
count  at  last  hit  on  a  means  for  soothing  the  countess,  tie  got  Petya 
transferred  from  Obolensky’s  regiment  to  Bezuhov’s,  which  was  in  forma¬ 
tion  near  Moscow.  Though,  even  so,  Petya  remained  in  the  army,  by  this 
exchange  the  countess  had  the  consolation  of  seeing  one  son  at  least 
again  under  her  wing;  and  she  hoped  to  manage  not  to  let  her  Petya 
escape  her  again,  but  to  succeed  in  getting  him  always  appointed  to 
places  where  there  would  be  no  risk  of  his  being  in  battle.  While  Nikolay 
had  been  the  only  one  in  danger,  the  countess  had  fancied  (and  had 
suffered  some  pricks  of  conscience  on  the  subject)  that  she  loved  her 
elder  son  better  than  the  other  children.  But  now  that  her  younger  boy, 
the  scapegrace  Petya,  always  idle  at  his  lessons,  always  in  mischief,  and 
teasing  every  one,  her  little  Petya,  with  his  snub-nose,  his  merry  black 
eyes,  his  fresh  colour,  and  the  soft  down  just  showing  on  his  cheeks,  had 
slipped  away  into  the  company  of  those  big,  dreadful,  cruel  men,  who 
were  fighting  away  somewhere  about  something,  and  finding  a  sort  of 
pleasure  in  it — now  it  seemed  to  the  mother  that  she  loved  him  more, 
far  more,  than  all  the  rest.  The  nearer  the  time  came  for  the  return  of 
her  longed-for  Petya  to  Moscow,  the  greater  was  the  uneasiness  of  the 
countess.  She  positively  thought  she  would  never  live  to  see  such  happi¬ 
ness.  Not  only  Sonya’s  presence,  even  her  favourite  Natasha’s,  even  her 
husband’s  company,  irritated  the  countess.  ‘What  do  I  want  with  them, 
I  want  no  one  but  Petya!’  she  thought.  One  day  towards  the  end  of 
August,  the  Rostovs  received  a  second  letter  from  Nikolay.  He  wrote 
from  the  province  of  Voronezh,  where  he  had  been  sent  to  procure  re¬ 
mounts.  This  letter  did  not  soothe  the  countess.  Knowing  that  one  son 
was  out  of  danger,  she  seemed  to  feel  even  greater  alarm  on  Petya’s 
account. 

Although  by  the  20th  of  August  almost  all  the  Rostovs’  acquaintances 
had  left  Moscow;  although  everybody  was  trying  to  persuade  the  countess 
to  get  away  as  quickly  as  possible,  she  would  not  hear  of  leaving  till  her 
treasure,  her  idolised  Petya,  had  come  back.  On  the  28th  of  August 
Petya  arrived.  The  morbidly  passionate  tenderness  with  which  his  mother 
received  him  was  by  no  means  gratifying  to  the  sixteen-year-old  officer. 
Though  his  mother  concealed  her  intention  of  never  letting  him  escape 
from  under  her  wing  again,  Petya  divined  her  plans,  and  instinctively 
afraid  of  his  mother’s  making  him  too  soft,  of  her  ‘making  a  ninny’  of 
him  (as  he  expressed  it  in  his  own  mind),  he  treated  her  rather  coolly, 


S02 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

avoided  being  with  her,  and  during  his  stay  in  Moscow  devoted  himself 
exclusively  to  Natasha,  for  whom  he  had  always  had  the  warmest 
brotherly  affection,  almost  approaching  adoration. 

The  count,  with  his  characteristic  carelessness,  had  by  the  28th  made 
no  preparations  for  leaving,  and  the  waggons  that  were  to  come  from 
their  Moscow  and  Ryazan  estate  to  remove  all  their  property  out  of  the 
house  only  arrived  on  the  30th. 

From  the  28th  to  the  31st,  Moscow  was  all  bustle  and  movement. 
Every  day  thousands  of  wounded  from  the  field  of  Borodino  were  brought 
in  at  the  Dorogomilov  gate  and  conveyed  across  Moscow,  and  thousands 
of  vehicles,  full  of  residents  and  their  belongings,  were  driving  out  at  the 
gates  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  city.  In  spite  of  Rastoptchin’s  placards — 
either  arising  independently  of  them,  or  perhaps  in  consequence  of  them 
— the  strangest  and  most  contradictory  rumours  were  circulating  about 
the  town.  Some  said  that  every  one  was  forbidden  to  leave  the  city; 
others  asserted  that  all  the  holy  pictures  had  been  taken  from  the  churches, 
and  every  one  was  to  be  driven  out  of  Moscow  by  force.  Some  said  there 
had  been  another  battle  after  Borodino,  in  which  the  French  had  been 
utterly  defeated;  others  declared  that  the  whole  Russian  army  had  been 
annihilated.  Some  talked  of  the  Moscow  militia,  which  was  to  advance, 
preceded  by  priests,  to  Three  Hills;  others  whispered  that  Father 
Augustin  had  been  forbidden  to  leave,  that  traitors  had  been  caught,  that 
the  peasants  were  in  revolt,  and  were  plundering  those  who  left  the  town, 
and  so  on.  But  all  this  was  only  talk:  in  reality  even  though  the  council 
at  Fili,  at  which  it  was  decided  to  abandon  Moscow,  had  not  yet  taken  1 
place,  all — those  who  were  leaving  and  those  who  were  staying — felt  that 
Moscow  would  be  surrendered,  though  they  did  not  say  so  freely,  and  felt 
that  they  must  make  all  haste  to  escape,  and  to  save  their  property. 
There  was  a  feeling  that  there  must  come  a  general  crash  and  change, 
yet  till  the  1st  of  September  everything  went  on  unchanged.  Like  a  crimi¬ 
nal  being  led  to  the  gallows,  who  knows  in  a  minute  he  must  die,  and  yet 
stares  about,  and  puts  straight  the  cap  awry  on  his  head,  Moscow  in¬ 
stinctively  went  on  with  the  daily  routine  of  life,  though  aware  that  the 
hour  of  ruin  was  approaching,  when  all  the  customary  conditions  of  life 
would  be  at  an  end. 

During,  the  three  days  preceding  the  occupation  of  Moscow,  the  whole 
Rostov  family  was  busily  engaged  in  various  practical  ways.  The  head 
of  the  family,  Count  Ilya  Andreitch,  was  continually  driving  about  the 
town,  picking  up  all  the  rumours  that  were  in  circulation,  and  while  at 
home,  'gave  superficial  and  hasty  directions  for  the  preparations  for 
departure. 

The  countess  superintended  the  sorting  out  of  things  to  be  packed; 
she  was  out  of  humour  with  every  one,  and  was  in  continual  pursuit  of 
Petya,  who  was  as  continually  escaping  from  her,  and  exciting  her  jealousy 
by  spending  all  his  time  with  Natasha.  Sonya  was  the  only  person  who 
really  undertook  the  practical  business  of  getting  things  packed.  But 
Sonva  had  been  particularly  silent  and  melancholy  of  late.  She  had  been 


WAR  AND  PEACE  803 

present  when  Nikolay’s  letter  mentioning  Princess  Marya  had  elicited 
the  most  delighted  deductions  from  the  countess,  who  saw  in  Nikolay’s 
meeting  with  Princess  Marya  the  direct  intervention  of  Providence. 

‘I  was  never  really  happy/  said  the  countess,  ‘when  Bolkonsky  was 
engaged  to  Natasha,  but  I  had  always  longed  for  Nikolay  to  marry  the 
princess,  and  I  have  always  had  a  presentiment  about  it.  And  what  a 
good  thing  it  would  be!  ’ 

Sonya  felt  that  this  was  true;  that  the  only  possibility  of  retrieving 
the  Rostovs’  position  was  by  Nikolay’s  marriage  to  an  heiress,  and  that 
the  princess  would  be  an  excellent  match  for  him.  But  this  reflection  was 
very  bitter  for  her.  In  spite,  or  perhaps  in  consequence,  of  her  sadness, 
she  undertook  the  difficult  task  of  seeing  after  the  sorting  and  packing 
of  the  household  goods,  and  for  whole  days  together  she  was  busily 
employed.  The  count  and  countess  referred  to  her  when  they  had  any 
orders  to  give.  Petya  and  Natasha,  on  the  contrary,  did  nothing  to  help 
their  parents,  but  were  generally  in  every  one’s  way,  and  were  only  a 
hindrance.  And  all  day  long  the  house  resounded  with  their  flying  foot¬ 
steps  and  shouts  and  shrieks  of  causeless  mirth.  They  laughed  and  were 
gay,  not  in  the  least  because  there  was  reason  for  laughter.  But  they  were 
gay  and  glad  at  heart,  and  so  everything  that  happened  was  reason 
enough  for  gaiety  and  laughter  in  them.  Petya  was  in  high  spirits  be¬ 
cause  he  had  left  home  a  boy,  and  come  back  (so  every  one  told  him)  a 
fine  young  man,  because  he  was  at  home,  because  he  had  left  Byely 
Tserkov,  where  there  seemed  no  hope  of  being  soon  on  active  service, 
and  come  to  Moscow  where  there  would  be  fighting  in  a  few  days,  and 
above  all,  because  Natasha,  whose  lead  he  always  followed,  was  in  high 
spirits.  Natasha  was  gay,  because  she  had  too  long  been  sad,  and  now 
nothing  reminded  her  of  the  cause  of  her  sadness,  and  she  was  quite 
strong  again.  She  was  gay  too,  because  she  needed  some  one  to  adore 
her  (the  adoration  of  others  was  like  the  grease  on  the  wheels,  without 
which  her  mechanism  never  worked  quite  smoothly),  and  Petya  did  adore 
her.  And  above  all,  they  were  both  gay,  because  there  was  war  at  the 
very  gates  of  Moscow,  because  there  would  be  fighting  at  the  barriers, 
because  arms  were  being  given  out,  and  everybody  was  rushing  about, 
and  altogether  something  extraordinary  was  happening,  which  is  always 
inspiriting,  especially  for  the  young. 


XIII 

On  Saturday,  the  31st  of  August,  the  whole  household  of  the  Rostovs 
seemed  turned  upside  down.  All  the  doors  stood  wide  open,  all  the  furni¬ 
ture  had  been  moved  about  or  carried  out,  looking-glasses  and  pictures 
had  been  taken  down.  The  rooms  were  littered  up  with  boxes,  with  hay 
and  packing  paper  and  cord.  Peasants  and  house-serfs  were  tramping 
about  the  parquet  floors  carrying  out  the  baggage.  The  courtyard  was 


S04  WAR  AND  PEACE 

crowded  with  peasants’  carts,  some  piled  high  with  goods  and  corded  up. 
others  still  standing  empty. 

The  voices  and  steps  of  the  immense  multitude  of  servants  and  of 
peasants,  who  had  come  with  the  carts,  resounded  through  the  courtyard 
and  the  house.  The  count  had  been  out  since  early  morning.  The  countess 
had  a  headache  from  the  noise  and  bustle,  and  was  lying  down  in  the  new 
divan-room  with  compresses  steeped  in  vinegar  on  her  head.  Petya  was  not 
at  home ;  he  had  gone  off  to  see  a  comrade,  with  whom  he  was  planning 
to  get  transferred  from  the  militia  to  a  regiment  at  the  front.  Sonya  was 
in  the  great  hall,  superintending  the  packing  of  the  china  and  glass. 
Natasha  was  sitting  on  the  floor  in  her  dismantled  room  among  heaps  of 
dresses,  ribbons,  and  scarfs.  She  sat  gazing  immovably  at  the  floor,  hold¬ 
ing  in  her  hands  an  old  ball-dress,  tire  very  dress,  now  out  of  fashion,  in 
which  she  had  been  to  her  first  Petersburg  ball. 

Natasha  was  ashamed  of  doing  nothing  when  every  one  in  the  house 
was  so  busy,  and  several  times  that  morning  she  had  tried  to  set  to  work ; 
but  her  soul  was  not  in  it;  and  she  was  utterly  unable  to  do  anything 
unless  all  her  heart  and  soul  were  in  it.  She  stood  over  Sonya  while  she 
packed  the  china,  and  tried  to  help;  but  soon  threw  it  up,  and  went  to  her 
room  to  pack  her  own  things.  At  first  she  had  found  it  amusing  to  give 
away  her  di esses  and  ribbons  to  the  maids,  but  afterwards  when  it  came 
to  packing  what  was  left,  it  seemed  a  wearisome  task. 

‘Dunyasha,  you’ll  pack  it  all,  dear?  Yes?  yes?’ 

And  when  Dunyasha  readily  undertook  to  do  it  all  for  her,  Natasha 
sat  down  on  the  floor  with  the  old  ball-dress  in  her  hands,  and  fell  to 
dreaming  on  subjects  far  removed  from  what  should  have  been  occupying 
her  mind  then.  From  the  reverie  she  had  fallen  into,  Natasha  was  aroused 
by  the  talk  of  the  maids  in  the  next  room  and  their  hurried  footsteps 
from  their  room  to  the  backstairs.  Natasha  got  up  and  looked  out  of  the 
window.  A  huge  train  of  carts  full  of  wounded  men  had  stopped  in  the 
street. 

The  maids,  the  footmen,  the  housekeeper,  the  old  nurse,  the  cooks, 
the  coachmen,  the  grooms,  and  the  scullion-boys  were  all  at  the  gates, 
staring  at  the  wounded  men. 

Natasha  flung  a  white  pocket-handkerchief  over  her  hair,  and  holding 
the  corners  in  both  hands,  went  out  into  the  street. 

The  old  housekeeper,  Mavra  Kuzminishna,  had  left  the  crowd  standing 
at  the  gate,  and  gone  up  to  a  cart  with  a  tilt  of  bast-mats  thrown  over 
it.  She  was  talking  to  a  pale  young  officer  who  was  lying  in  this  cart. 
Natasha  took  a  few  steps  forward  and  stood  still  timidly,  holding  her 
kerchief  on  and  listening  to  what  the  housekeeper  was  saying. 

‘So  you  have  no  one  then  in  Moscow?’  Mavra  Kuzminishna  was  saying. 
‘You’d  be  more  comfortable  in  some  apartment.  ...  In  our  house  even. 
The  masters  are  all  leaving.’ 

‘I  don’t  know  if  it  would  be  allowed,’  said  the  officer  in  a  feeble  voice. 
‘There’s  our  chief  officer  .  .  .  ask  him,’  and  he  pointed  to  a  stout  major 


WARANDPEACE  805 

who  had  turned  back  and  was  walking  along  the  row  of  carts  down  the 
street. 

Natasha  glanced  with  frightened  eyes  into  the  face  of  the  wounded 
officer,  and  at  once  went  to  meet  the  major. 

‘May  the  wounded  men  stay  in  our  house?’  she  asked. 

The  major  with  a  smile  put  his  hand  to  his  cap. 

‘What  is  your  pleasure,  ma’mselle?’  he  said,  screwing  up  his  eyes  and 
smiling. 

Natasha  quietly  repeated  her  question,  and  her  face  and  her  whole 
manner,  though  she  still  kept  hold  of  the  corners  of  the  pocket-handker¬ 
chief,  was  so  serious,  that  the  major  left  off  smiling,  and  after  a  moment’s 
pondering — as  though  asking  himself  how  far  it  were  possible — he  gave 
her  an  affirmative  answer. 

‘Oh  yes,  why  not,  they  may,’  he  said. 

Natasha  gave  a  slight  nod,  and  went  back  with  rapid  steps  to  Mavra 
Kuzminishna,  who  was  still  talking  with  commiserating  sympathy  to  the 
young  officer. 

‘They  may;  he  said  they  might!’  whispered  Natasha. 

The  officer  in  the  covered  cart  turned  into  the  Rostovs’  courtyard,  and 
dozens  of  carts  of  wounded  men  began  at  the  invitation  of  the  inhabitants 
to  drive  up  to  the  entries  of  the  houses  in  Povarsky  Street.  Natasha  was 
evidently  delighted  at  having  to  do  with  new  people  in  conditions  quite 
outside  the  ordinary  routine  of  life.  She  joined  Mavra  Kuzminishna  in 
trying  to  get  as  many  as  possible  driven  into  their  yard. 

‘We  must  ask  your  papa  though,’  said  Mavra  Kuzminishna. 

‘Nonsense,  nonsense.  What  does  it  matter?  For  one  day,  we’ll  move 
into  the  drawing-room.  We  can  give  them  all  our  half  of  the  house.’ 

‘What  an  idea!  what  next?  The  lodge,  may  be*  the  men’s  room,  and 
old  nurse’s  room;  and  you  must  ask  leave  for  that.’ 

‘Well,  I  will  ask.’ 

Natasha  ran  indoors,  and  went  on  tiptoe  to  the  half-open  door  of  the 
divan-room,  where  there  was  a  strong  smell  of  vinegar  and  Hoffmann’s 
drops. 

‘Are  you  asleep,  mamma?’ 

‘Oh,  what  chance  is  there  of  sleep!’  said  the  countess,  who  had  just 
dropped  into  a  doze. 

‘Mamma,  darling!  ’  said  Natasha,  kneeling  before  her  mother  and  lean¬ 
ing  her  face  against  her  mother’s.  ‘I  am  sorry,  forgive  me,  I’ll  never  do 
it  again,  I  waked  you.  Mavra  Kuzminishna  sent  me;  they  have  brought 
some  wounded  men  in,  officers,  will  you  allow  it?  They  have  nowhere  to 
go;  I  know  you  will  allow  it,  .  .  .’  she  said  rapidly,  not  taking  breath. 

‘Officers?  Who  have  been  brought  in?  I  don’t  understand,’  said  the 
countess. 

Natasha  laughed,  the  countess  too  smiled  faintly. 

‘I  knew  you  would  let  me  ...  so  I  will  tell  them  so.’  And  Natasha, 
kissing  her  mother,  got  up  and  went  to  the  door. 

In  the  hall  she  met  her  father,  who  had  come  home  with  bad  news. 


So  '3 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘We  have  lingered  on  too  long!  ’  said  the  count,  with  unconscious  anger 
in  his  voice;  ‘the  club’s  shut  up  and  the  police  are  leaving.’ 

‘Papa,  you  don’t  mind  my  having  invited  some  of  the  wounded  into 
the  house?’  said  Natasha. 

‘Of  course  not,’  said  the  count  absently.  ‘But  that’s  not  to  the  point. 
I  beg  you  now  not  to  let  yourself  be  taken  up  with  any  nonsense,  but  to 
help  to  pack  and  get  off — to  get  off  to-morrow  .  .  .’ 

And  the  count  gave  his  butler  and  servants  the  same  orders.  Petya 
came  back  at  dinner-time,  and  he  too  had  news  to  tell  them. 

He  said  that  the  mob  was  taking  up  arms  to-day  in  the  Kremlin;  that 
though  Rastoptchin’s  placard  said  he  would  give  the  word  two  days  later, 
it  had  really  been  arranged  that  all  the  people  should  go  next  day  in 
arms  to  the  Three  Hills,  and  there  a  great  battle  was  to  be  fought. 

The  countess  looked  in  timid  horror  at  her  son’s  eager,  excited  face, 
as  he  told  them  this.  She  knew  that  if  she  said  a  word  to  try  and  dissuade 
Petya  from  going  to  this  battle  (she  knew  how  he  was  enjoying  the 
prospect  of  it),  he  would  say  something  about  the  duty  of  a  man,  about 
honour,  and  the  fatherland — something  irrational,  masculine,  and 
perverse — which  it  would  be  useless  to  oppose,  and  all  hope  of  preventing 
him  would  be  gone.  And,  therefore,  hoping  to  succeed  in  setting  off  before 
this  battle,  and  in  taking  Petya  with  her,  to  guard  and  protect  them  on 
the  road,  she  said  nothing  to  her  son,  but  after  dinner  called  her  husband 
aside,  and  with  tears  besought  him  to  take  her  away  as  soon  as  could  be, 
that  night  if  possible.  With  the  instinctive,  feminine  duplicity  of  love, 
though  she  had  till  then  shown  not  the  slightest  sign  of  alarm,  she  de¬ 
clared  she  should  die  of  terror  if  they  did  not  get  away  that  very  night. 
She  was  indeed  without  feigning  afraid  now  of  everything. 

XIV 

Madame  Schoss,  who  had  gone  out  to  visit  her  daughter,  increased  the 
countess’s  terrors  by  describing  the  scenes  she  had  witnessed  at  a  spirit 
dealer’s  in  Myasnitsky  Street.  She  entered  that  street  on  her  way  home, 
but  could  not  pass  through  it  owing  to  the  drunken  mob  raging  round  the 
spirit  dealer’s.  She  had  taken  a  cab  and  driven  home  by  a  circuitous  route, 
and  the  driver  had  told  her  that  the  mob  had  broken  open  the  casks  of 
spirit,  that  orders  had  been  given  to  that  effect. 

After  dinner  all  the  Rostov  household  set  to  work  packing  and  pre¬ 
paring  for  their  departure  with  eager  haste.  The  old  count,  suddenly 
rousing  himself  to  the  task,  spent  the  rest  of  the  day  continually  trotting 
from  the  courtyard  into  the  house  and  back  again,  shouting  confused 
instructions  to  the  hurrying  servants,  and  trying  to  spur  them  on  to 
even  greater  haste.  Petya  looked  after  things  in  the  yard.  Sonya  was  quite 
bewildered  by  the  count’s  contradictory  orders,  and  did  not  know  what  to 
do.  The  servants  raced  about  the  rooms,  shouting,  quarrelling,  and  mak¬ 
ing  a  noise.  Natasha,  too.  suddenly  set  to  work  with  the  ardour  that  was 


WARANDPEACE  807 

characteristic  of  her  in  all  she  did.  At  first  her  intervention  was  sceptically 
received.  No  one  expected  anything  serious  from  her  or  would  obey  fief 
instructions.  But  with  heat  and  perseverance,  she  insisted  on  being  obeyed, 
got  angry  and  almost  shed  tears  that  they  did  not  heed  her,  and  did  at 
last  succeed  in  impressing  them.  Her  first  achievement,  which  cost  her 
immense  effort,  and  established  her  authority,  was  the  packing  of  the 
rugs.  There  were  a  number  of  costly  Gobelin  tapestries  and  Persian  rugs 
in  the  house.  When  Natasha  set  to  work,  she  found  two  boxes  standing 
open  in  the  hail:  one  packed  almost  full  of  china,  the  other  full  of  rugs. 
There  was  a  great  deal  more  china  left  standing  on  the  tables  and  there 
was  more  still  to  come  from  the  storeroom.  Another  third  box  was  needed, 
and  the  men  had  gone  to  get  one. 

‘Sonya,  wait  a  little,  and  we’ll  pack  it  all  without  that,’  said  Natasha. 

‘You  cannot,  miss;  we  have  tried  already,’  said  the  footman. 

‘No,  wait  a  minute,  please.’  And  Natasha  began  taking  out  the  plates 
and  dishes,  packed  up  in  paper. 

‘The  dishes  would  go  better  in  here  with  the  rugs,’  she  said. 

‘Why,  there  are  rugs  enough  left  that  we  shall  hardly  get  into  three 
boxes,’  said  the  footman. 

‘But  do  wait  a  little,  please.’  And  Natasha  began  rapidly  and  deftly 
sorting  out  the  things.  ‘These  we  don't  want,’  she  said  of  the  plates  of 
Kiev  ware;  ‘this  and  this  we  can  pack  in  the  rugs,’  she  decided,  fishing 
out  the  Saxony  dishes. 

‘Come,  let  it  alone,  Natasha;  come,  that's  enough,  we’ll  pack  them,’ 
said  Sonya  reproachfully. 

‘What  a  young  lady!’  protested  the  footman. 

But  Natasha  would  not  give  in.  She  pulled  everything  out,  and  began 
rapidly  packing  them  again,  deciding  that  the  commoner  rugs  and 
crockery  shpuld  not  be  taken  at  all.  When  she  had  taken  everything  out, 
she  began  repacking  what  was  to  go;  and  by  sorting  out  almost  all  the 
cheaper  goods  which  were  not  worth  taking,  all  that  was  of  value  was  got 
into  two  boxes.  Only  the  lid  of  the  box  full  of  rugs  would  not  shut.  A  few 
things  might  have  been  taken  out,  but  Natasha  wanted  to  manage  it  in 
her  own  way.  She  unpacked,  repacked,  squeezed  the  things  in,  made  the 
footman  and  Petya,  whom  she  had  drawn  into  assisting  in  the  work,  press 
on  the  lid,  and  herself  tried  desperately  to  do  the  same. 

‘That  will  do,  Natasha,’  Sonya  said  to  her.  ‘I  see  you  are  quite  right, 
but  take  out  just  the  top  one.’ 

‘I  won’t,’  cried  Natasha,  with  one  hand  holding  her  disordered  hair 
off  her  perspiring  face,  while  with  the  other  she  squeezed  down  the  rugs. 
‘Press  it,  Petya,  press  it!  Vassilitch,  press  hard!’  she  cried.  The  rugs 
yielded,  and  the  lid  closed.  Natasha,  clapping  her  hands,  shrieked  with 
delight,  and  tears  started  into  her  eyes.  But  that  lasted  only  a  second. 
She  set  to  work  at  once  on  a  fresh  job;  and  now  the  servants  put  com¬ 
plete  faith  in  her,  and  the  count  did  not  take  it  amiss  when  they  told 
him  that  Natalya  Ilyinitshna  had  given  some  direction  superseding  his 
orders;  and  the  servants  came  to  Natasha  to  ask  whether  a  cart  was 


SoS 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

packed  full  enough  and  whether  the  loads  were  to  be  tied  on.  The  packing 
went  on  fast  now,  thanks  to  Natasha’s  supervision;  everything  useless 
was  left  behind,  and  the  most  valuable  goods  were  packed  as  compactly 
as  possible. 

But  with  all  their  exertions,  even  late  at  night  everything  was  not 
ready.  The  countess  had  fallen  asleep,  and  the  count  put  off  their  de- 
parture  till  morning  and  went  to  bed. 

Sonya  and  Natasha  slept  in  the  divan-room,  without  undressing. 

That  night  another  wounded  officer  was  driven  along  Povarsky  Street, 
and  Mavra  Kuzminishna,  who  was  standing  at  the  gate,  had  him  brought 
into  the  Rostovs’  yard.  The  wounded  officer  must,  Mavra  Kuzminishna 
thought,  be  a  man  of  very  great  consequence.  He  was  in  a  coach  with 
the  hood  let  down  and  a  carriage  apron  completely  covering  it.  An  old 
man,  a  most  respectable-looking  valet,  was  sitting  on  the  box  with  the 
driver.  A  doctor  and  two  soldiers  followed  the  carriage  in  another  con¬ 
veyance. 

‘Come  into  our  house,  come  in.  The  masters  are  going  away,  the  whole 
house  is  empty,’  said  the  old  woman,  addressing  the  old  servant. 

‘Well,’  answered  the  valet,  sighing,  ‘and  indeed  we  have  no  hope  of 
getting  him  home  alive!  We  have  a  house  of  our  own  in  Moscow,  but  it 
is  a  long  way  further,  and  there’s  no  one  living  in  it  either.’ 

‘Pray  come  in,  our  masters  have  plenty  of  everything,  and  you  are 
welcome,’  said  Mavra  Kuzminishna.  ‘Is  the  gentleman  very  bad,  then?’ 
she  asked. 

“There’s  no  hope!  I  must  ask  the  doctor.’  And  the  valet  got  down 
and  went  to  the  vehicle  behind. 

‘Very  good,’  said  the  doctor. 

The  valet  went  up  to  the  coach  again,  peeped  into  it,  shook  his  head, 
told  the  coachman  to  turn  into  the  yard,  and  stood  still  beside  Mavra 
Kuzminishna. 

‘Lord  Jesus  Christ,  have  mercy!’  she  murmured. 

Mavra  Kuzminishna  suggested  the  wounded  man  being  carried  into 
the  house. 

‘The  masters  won’t  say  anything  .  .  .’  said  she. 

But  they  had  to  avoid  lifting  him  up  the  steps,  and  so  they  carried 
the  wounded  man  to  the  lodge,  and  put  him  in  the  room  that  had  been  < 
Madame  Schoss’s.  This  wounded  officer  was  Prince  Andrey  Bolkonsky. 


XV 

The  last  day  of  Moscow  had  come.  It  was  a  bright,  clear  autumn  day. 
It  was  Sunday.  The  bells  were  ringing  for  service  in  all  the  churches,  just 
as  on  all  other  Sundays.  No  one  seemed  yet  able  to  grasp  what  was  await¬ 
ing  Moscow. 

There  were  only  two  indications  in  the  condition  of  society  that  be¬ 
trayed  the  position  of  Moscow;  those  were  the  rabble,  that  is,  the  poorer 


WARANDPEACE  809 

class,  and  the  prices  of  different  objects.  Factory  hands,  house-serfs,  and 
peasants  came  out  early  that  morning  on  to  Three  Hills  in  immense 
crowds,  which  were  swelled  by  clerks,  divinity  students,  and  gentlemen. 
After  staying  there  a  while  waiting  for  Rastoptchin,  who  did  not  come, 
and  gaining  the  conviction  that  Moscow  would  be  surrendered,  this  mob 
dispersed  about  the  taverns  and  drinkshops  of  Moscow.  Prices,  too,  on 
that  day  indicated  the  position  of  affairs.  The  prices  of  weapons,  of  carts 
and  horses,  and  the  value  of  gold  rose  higher  and  higher,  while  the  value 
of  paper-money  and  the  prices  of  things  useful  in  town  were  continually 
falling,  so  that  by  the  middle  of  the  day  there  were  instances  of  cab- 
drivers  carrying  off  at  half-price  expensive  goods,  like  cloth;  and  while 
five  hundred  roubles  was  paid  for  a  peasant’s  horse,  furniture,  mirrors, 
and  bronzes  were  given  away  for  nothing. 

In  the  old-fashioned  and  decorous  house  of  the  Rostovs  the  collapse 
of  all  the  usual  conditions  of  life  was  very  slightly  perceptible.  In  the 
night  three  out  of  the  immense  retinue  of  servants,  did  indeed  disappear; 
but  nothing  was  stolen,  and  the  Rostovs  were  only  aware  of  the  change  in 
the  relative  value  of  things  from  finding  that  the  thirty  carts  from  the 
country  were  of  enormous  value,  for  which  they  were  envied  by  many, 
and  offered  enormous  sums.  Besides  these  would-be  purchasers,  all  the 
previous  evening  and  early  in  the  morning  of  the  1st  of  September  order¬ 
lies  and  servants  were  being  continually  sent  into  the  Rostovs’  courtyard 
from  wounded  officers,  and  wounded  men  were  constantly  dragging  them¬ 
selves  there  from  the  Rostovs’  and  neighbouring  houses,  to  beseech  the 
servants  to  try  and  get  them  a  lift  out  of  Moscow.  The  butler,  to  whom 
these  requests  were  referred,  resolutely  refused,  though  he  felt  for  the 
wounded  men,  and  declared  that  he  would  never  even  dare  to  hint  at  such 
a  thing  to  the  count.  Pitiable  as  the  position  of  these  wounded  men  was, 
it  was  obvious  that  if  one  gave  up  one  cart  to  them,  one  might  as  well 
give  all — and  would  even  have  to  put  the  carriages  too  at  their  service. 
Thirty  waggons  could  not  save  all  the  wounded,  and  in  the  general  catas¬ 
trophe  one  must  think  of  oneself  and  one’s  family  first.  So  the  butler 
reasoned  on  his  master’s  behalf. 

On  waking  up  that  morning  Count  Ilya  Andreitch  slipped  quietly  out 
of  his  bedroom,  so  as  not  to  ’.vake  his  wife,  who  had  been  awake  till  morn¬ 
ing,  and  in  his  lilac  silk  dressing-gown  he  came  out  on  to  the  steps.  The 
loaded  waggons  were  standing  in  the  courtyard.  The  carriages  were  drawn 
up  at  the  steps.  The  butler  was  standing  in  the  entrance  talking  with 
an  old  orderly  and  a  pale  young  officer  with  his  arm  in  a  sling.  The 
butler,  seeing  his  master,  made  a  significant  and  peremptory  sign  to  them 
both  to  retire. 

‘Well,  is  everything  ready,  Vassilitch?’  said  the  count,  rubbing  his  bald 
head;  and  looking  benignly  at  the  officer  and  the  orderly,  he  nodded  to 
them.  (The  count  was  always  attracted  by  new  faces.) 

‘Ready  to  put  the  horses  in  immediately,  your  excellency.’ 

‘Well,  that’s  capital;  the  countess  will  soon  be  awake,  and,  please  God, 


8io 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

we  set  off!  What  can  I  do  for  your,  sir?’  he  said,  addressing  the  officer. 
‘You  are  staying  in  my  house?’ 

The  officer  came  closer.  His  pale  face  suddenly  flushed  crimson. 

‘Count,  do  me  a  great  favour,  allow  me  .  .  .  for  God’s  sake  ...  to 
get  into  one  of  your  waggons.  I  have  nothing  here  with  me  ...  I  can  go 
quite  well  with  the  luggage  .  .  .’- 

Before  the  officer  finished  speaking,  the  orderly  came  up  to  make  the 
same  request  for  his  piaster. 

‘Oh!  yes,  yes,  yes,’  said  the  count  hurriedly.  ‘I  shall  be  very  glad  in¬ 
deed.  Vassilitch,  you  see  to  it ;  you  have  a  waggon  or  two  cleared,  well  .  .  . 
well  .  .  .  what’s  needed  .  .  .  ?’  The  count  murmured  some  vague  ■ 
orders.  But  the  glowing  look  of  gratitude  on  the  officer’s  face  instantly 
put  the  seal  on  the  order.  The  count  looked  about  him;  everywhere — in 
the  yard,  at  the  gates,  at  the  windows  of  the  lodge — he  saw  wounded  men 
and  orderlies.  They  were  all  gazing  at  him  and  moving  up  towards  the 
steps. 

‘Will  you  please  walk  into  the  gallery,  your  excellency;  what  are  your 
orders  about  the  pictures  there?’  said  the  butler.  And  the  count  went  into 
the  house  with  him,  repeating  his  instructions  that  they  were  not  to 
refuse  the  wounded  men  who  begged  to  go  with  them. 

‘You  can  take  something  out  of  the  loads,  you  know,’  he  added,  in  a 
subdued  and  mysterious  voice,  as  though  he  were  afraid  of  being  over¬ 
heard. 

At  nine  o’clock  the  countess  woke  up,  and  Matrona  Timofyevna,  who 
had  been  her  maid  before  her  marriage,  and  now  performed  the  duties  of 
a  sort  of  chef  de  gendarmes  for  the  countess,  came  in  to  report  to  her 
that  Madame  Schoss  was  very  much  aggrieved,  and  that  the  young  ladies’ 
summer  dresses  could  not  possibly  be  left  behind.  On  the  countess  inquir¬ 
ing  the  cause  of  Madame  Schoss’s  resentment,  it  appeared  that  that  lady’s 
trunk  had  been  taken  out  of  the  waggon,  and  that  all  the  waggons  were 
being  unloaded,  and  that  the  luggage  was  being  taken  out,  as  the  waggons 
were  to  be  given  up  to  the  wounded  men,  whom  the  count,  with  his  usual 
readiness  to  be  imposed  upon,  had  consented  to  take  away  with  them. 
The  countess  sent  for  her  husband  to  come  to  her. 

‘What’s  this,  my  dear?  I  hear  the  luggage  is  being  unloaded.’ 

‘Do  you  know,  ma  chere,  I  wanted  to  speak  to  you  about  it  .  .  .  dear 
little  countess  ...  an  officer  came  up  to  me- — they  are  imploring  us  to 
let  them  have  a  few  wagons  for  the  wounded.  It’s  all  a  question  of  money 
loss  to  us,  of  course,  but  to  be  left  behind  .  .  .  think  what  it  means  to 
them!  .  .  .  Here  they  are  in  our  very  yard;  we  asked  them  in  ourselves; 
here  are  officers.  .  .  .  You  know,  I  really  think,  ma  chere  .  .  .  well,  let 
them  take  them.  We  are  in  no  hurry.’ 

The  count  spoke  timidly,  as  he  always  did  when  the  subject  was  in 
any  way  connected  with  money.  The  countess  was  used  to  that  tone, 
which  always  ushered  in  some  matter  prejudicial  to  her  children’s  inter¬ 
ests,  such  as  the  building  of  a  new  gallery,  or  conservatory,  or  a  new 
theatre  in  the  house,  or  the  training  of  an  orchestra;  and  she  made  it  a 


WAR  AND  PEACE  811 

habit,  and  regarded  it  as  a  duty,  to  oppose  everything  that  was  communi¬ 
cated  in  that  tone. 

She  assumed  her  air  of  tearful  resignation,  and  said  to  her  husband: 

‘Listen,  count,  you  have  mismanaged  things  so,  that  we  are  getting 
nothing  for  the  house,  and  now  you  want  to  throw  away  all  our — all  the 
children’s — property.  Why,  you  told  me  yourself  that  we  have  a  hundred 
thousand  roubles’  worth  of  valuables  in  the  house.  I  protest,  and  protest, 
my  love.  What  would  you  have!  It’s  for  the  Government  to  look  after 
the  wounded.  They  know  that.  Only  think,  the  Lopuhins  opposite  cleared 
everything  to  the  last  stick  out  of  their  house  the  day  before  yesterday. 
That’s  how  other  people  manage.  It’s  only  we  who  are  such  fools.  If 
you  have  no  consideration  for  me,  do  at  least  think  of  your  children.’ 

The  count  waved  his  hands  in  despair,  and  went  out  of  the  room  with¬ 
out  a  word. 

‘Papa!  why  do  you  do  that?’  said  Natasha,  who  had  followed  him  into 
her  mother’s  room. 

‘Nothing!  It’s  no  business  of  yours!’  the  count  said  angrily. 

‘But  I  heard,’  said  Natasha.  ‘Why  won’t  mamma  have  it? 

‘It’s  no  business  of  yours!  ’  cried  the  count. 

Natasha  walked  away  to  the  window  and  pondered. 

‘Papa,  here’s  Berg  coming  to  see  us,’  she  said,  looking  out  of  the  window. 


XVI 

The  Rostovs’  son-in-law,  Berg,  was  by  now  a  colonel,  with  the  orders  of 
Vladimir  and  Anne  on  his  neck,  and  was  still  filling  the  same  comfortable 
and  agreeable  post  of  assistant  to  the  head  of  the  staff  of  the  assistant 
of  the  chief  officer  of  the  staff  of  the  commander  of  the  left  flank  of  the 
infantry  of  the  first  army. 

On  the  ist  of  September  he  had  come  into  Moscow  from  the  army. 

He  had  absolutely  nothing  to  do  in  Moscow;  but  he  noticed  that  every 
one  in  the  army  was  asking  leave  to  go  into  Moscow,  and  was  busy 
doing  something  there.  He,  too,  thought  fit  to  ask  leave  of  absence  on 
account  of  urgent  domestic  and  family  affairs. 

Berg  drove  up  to  his  father-in-law’s  house  in  his  spruce  chaise,  with 
his  pair  of  sleek  roans,  precisely  similar  to  those  of  a  certain  prince. 
He  looked  carefully  at  the  luggage  in  the  yard,  and  as  he  ran  up  the  steps, 
he  took  out  a  clean  pocket-handkerchief,  and  tied  a  knot  in  it. 

Berg  ran  with  a  swimming,  impatient  step  from  the  entry  into  the 
drawing-room,  embraced  the  count,  kissed  Natasha’s  hand  and  Sonya’s, 
and  then  hastened  to  inquire  after  mamma’s  health. 

‘Health,  at  a  time  like  this!  Come,  tell  us  what  news  of  the  army!’ 
said  the  count.  ‘Are  they  retreating,  or  will  there  be  a  battle?’ 

‘Only  Almighty  God  can  tell  what  will  be  the  fate  of  our  Fatherland, 
oapa,’  said  Berg.  ‘The  army  is  animated  by  the  most  ardent  spirit  of 
proism,  and  now  its  chiefs,  so  to  speak,  are  sitting  in  council.  No  one 


Sl2 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

knows  what  is  coming.  But  I  can  tell  you,  papa,  that  our  heroic  spirit,  the 
truly  antique  valour  of  the  Russian  army,  which  they — it,  I  mean,’  he 
corrected  himself — ‘showed  in  the  fight  of  the  26th  .  .  .  well,  there  are 
no  words  that  can  do  justice  to  it.’  (He  smote  himself  on  the  chest,  just 
as  he  had  seen  a  general  do,  who  had  used  much  the  same  phrases  before 
him — but  he  was  a  little  too  late,  for  the  blow  on  the  chest  should  properly 
have  been  at  the  words,  ‘the  Russian  army.’)  ‘I  can  assure  you,  papa,  that 
we  officers,  so  far  from  having  to  urge  the  soldiers  on,  or  anything  of 
the  sort,  had  much  ado  to  keep  in  check  this  .  .  .  yes,  these  exploits 
recalling  the  valour  of  antiquity,’  he  rattled  off.  ‘General  Barclay  de  Tolly 
risked  his  life  everywhere  in  front  of  his  troops,  I  can  assure  you.  Our 
corps  was  posted  on  the  slope  of  a  hill.  Only  fancy!  ’  And  Berg  proceeded 
to  recount  all  the  stories  he  had  heard  repeated  about  the  battle.  Natasha 
stared  at  Berg,  as  though  seeking  the  solution  of  some  problem  in  his 
face,  and  her  eyes  disconcerted  him. 

‘Altogether,  the  heroism  shown  by  the  Russian  soldiers  is  beyond  praise, 
and  beyond  description!’  said  Berg,  looking  at  Natasha;  and  as  though 
wishing  to  soften  her,  he  smiled  in  response  to  her  persistent  stare  .  .  . 
‘  “Russia  is  not  in  Moscow,  she  lives  in  the  hearts  of  her  sons!  ”  Eh,  papa?’ 
said  Berg. 

At  that  moment  the  countess  came  in  from  the  divan-room  with  a  look 
of  weariness  and  annoyance  on  her  face.  Berg  skipped  up,  kissed  the 
countess’s  hand,  asked  after  her  health,  and  stood  beside  her,  with  a 
sympathetic  shake  of  his  head. 

‘Yes,  mamma,  to  tell  the  truth,  these  are  hard  and  sorrowful  times 
for  every  Russian.  But  why  should  you  be  so  anxious?  You  have  still 
time  to  get  away  .  . 

‘I  can’t  make  out  what  the  servants  are  about,’  said  the  countess,  ad¬ 
dressing  her  husband.  ‘They  told  me  just  now  nothing  was  ready.  Some 
one  really  must  go  and  look  after  them.  It’s  at  such  times  one  misses 
Mitenka.  There  will  be  no  end  to  it.’ 

The  count  was  about  to  make  some  reply;  but  with  a  visible  effort  to 
restrain  himself,  got  up  and  went  to  the  door  without  a  word. 

Berg,  meanwhile,  had  taken  out  his  handkerchief  as  though  about  to 
blow  his  nose,  and,  seeing  the  knot  in  it,  he  pondered  a  moment,  shaking 
his  head  with  mournful  significance. 

‘And,  do  you  know,  papa,  I  have  a  great  favour  to  ask  .  .  .’  he  began. 

‘H’m?’  said  the  count,  pausing. 

‘I  was  passing  by  Yusupov’s  house  just  now,’  said  Berg,  laughing. 
‘The  steward,  a  man  I  know,  ran  out  and  asked  me  whether  I  wouldn’t 
care  to  buy  any  of  their  things.  I  went  in,  you  know,  out  of  curiosity, 
and  there  is  a  little  chiffonier  and  dressing-table.  You  know,  just  like 
what  Verushka  wanted,  and  we  quarrelled  about.’  (Berg  unconsciously 
passed  into  a  tone  expressive  of  his  pleasure  in  his  own  excellent  domes¬ 
tic  arrangements.)  ‘And  such  a  charming  thing! — it  moves  forward,  you 
know,  with  a  secret  English  lock.  And  it’s  just  what  Verushka  wanted. 
So  I  want  to  make  it  a  surprise  for  her.  I  see  what  a  number  of  peasants 


WARANDPEACE  813 

you  have  in  the  yard.  Please,  spare  me  one  of  them.  I’ll  pay  him  well, 
and  .  .  .’ 

The  count  frowned  and  sniffed. 

‘Ask  the  countess;  I  don’t  give  the  orders.’ 

‘If  it’s  troublesome,  pray  don’t,’  said  Berg.  ‘Only  I  should  have  liked 
it  on  Vera’s  account.’ 

‘Ah,  go  to  damnation  all  of  you,  damnation!  damnation!  damnation!’ 
cried  the  old  count.  ‘My  head’s  going  round.’  And  he  went  out  of  the  room. 

The  countess  began  to  cry. 

‘Yes,  indeed,  these  are  terrible  times,  mamma!’  said  Berg. 

Natasha  went  out  with  her  father,  and  as  though  unable  to  make  up 
her  mind  on  some  difficult  question,  she  followed  him  at  first,  then  turned 
and  ran  downstairs. 

Petya  was  standing  at  the  entrance,  engaged  in  giving  out  weapons 
to  the  servants,  who  were  leaving  Moscow.  The  loaded  waggons  were 
still  standing  in  the  yards.  Two  of  them  had  been  uncorded,  and  on  to 
one  of  these  the  wounded  officer  was  clambering  with  the  assistance  of 
his  orderly. 

‘Do  you  know  what  it  was  about?’  Petya  asked  Natasha.  (Natasha 
knew  that  he  meant,  what  their  father  and  mother  had  been  quarrelling 
anout.)  She  did  not  answer. 

‘It  was  because  papa  wanted  to  give  up  all  the  waggons  to  the  wounded,’ 
said  Petya.  ‘Vassilitch  told  me.  And  what  I  think  .  .  .’ 

‘What  I  think,’  Natasha  suddenly  almost  screamed,  turning  a  furious 
face  on  Petya,  ‘what  I  think  is,  that  it’s  so  vile,  so  loathsome  ...  I 
don’t  know.  Are  we  a  lot  of  low  Germans?  .  .  Her  throat  was  quiver¬ 
ing  with  sobs,  but  afraid  of  being  weak,  or  wasting  the  force  of  her  anger, 
she  turned  and  flew  headlong  up  the  stairs. 

Berg  was  sitting  beside  the  countess,  trying  with  filial  respectfulness 
to  reassure  her.  The  count  was  walking  about  the  room  with  a  pipe  in  his 
hand,  when,  with  a  face  distorted  by  passion,  Natasha  burst  like  a  tempest 
into  the  room,  and  ran  with  rapid  steps  up  to  her  mother. 

‘It’s  vile!  It’s  loathsome!  ’  she  screamed.  ‘It  can’t  be  true  that  it’s  your 
order.’ 

Berg  and  the  countess  gazed  at  her  in  alarm  and  bewilderment.  The 
count  stood  still  in  the  window  listening. 

‘Mamma,  it’s  impossible;  look  what’s  being  done  in  the  yard!’  she 
cried;  ‘they  are  being  left  .  .  .’ 

‘What’s  the  matter?  Who  are  they?  What  do  you  want?’ 

‘The  wounded!  It’s  impossible,  mamma,  it’s  outrageous.  .  .  .  No, 

!  mamma,  darling,  it’s  all  wrong;  forgive  me,  please,  darling  .  .  .  Mamma, 
what  is  it  to  us  what  we  take  away;  you  only  look  out  into  the  yard. 
.  .  .  Mamma!  ...  It  can’t  be  done.  .  .  .’ 

The  count  stood  in  the  window,  and  listened  to  Natasha  without  turn¬ 
ing  him  head.  All  at  once  he  gave  a  sort  of  gulp,  and  put  his  face  closer 
to  the  window. 

The  countess  glanced  at  her  daughter,  saw  her  face  full  of  shame  for 


Si4  WAR  AND  PEACE 

her  mother,  saw  her  emotion,  felt  why  her  husband  would  not  look  at 
her  now,  and  looked  about  her  with  a  distracted  air. 

‘Oh,  do  as  you  please.  Am  1  doing  anything  to  hinder  any  one?’  she 
said,  not  giving  way  all  at  once. 

‘Mamma,  darling,  forgive  me.’ 

But  the  countess  pushed  away  her  daughter,  and  went  up  to  the  count. 

‘My  dear,  you  order  what  is  right.  ...  I  don’t  understand  about  it, 
you  know,’  she  said,  dropping  her  eyes  with  a  guilty  air. 

‘The  eggs,  ...  the  eggs  teaching  the  hen,  .  .  .’  the  count  murmured 
through  tears  of  gladness,  and  he  embraced  his  wife,  who  was  glad  to  hide 
her  ashamed  face  on  his  breast. 

‘Papa,  mamma!  may  I  give  the  order?  May  I?  .  .  .’  asked  Natasha. 
‘We’ll  take  all  that’s  quite  necessary  all  the  same,’  she  added. 

The  count  nodded;  and  Natasha,  with  the  same  swiftness  with  which 
she  used  to  run  at  ‘catch-catch,’  flew  across  the  hall  into  the  vestibule, 
and  down  the  steps  into  the  yard. 

The  servants  gathered  round  Natasha,  and  could  hardly  believe  the 
strange  order  she  gave  them,  till  the  count  himself  in  his  wife’s  name 
confirmed  the  order  that  all  the  waggons  were  to  be  placed  at  the  disposal 
of  the  wounded,  and  the  boxes  were  to  be  taken  down  to  the  storerooms. 
When  they  understood,  the  servants  gleefully  and  busily  set  to  this  new 
task.  It  no  longer  seemed  strange  to  the  servants,  it  seemed  to  them, 
indeed,  that  no  other  course  was  possible;  just  as  a  quarter  of  an  hour 
before  they  had  not  thought  it  strange  to  leave  the  wounded  behind  and 
take  the  furniture;  had  accepted  that  too,  in  fact,  as  the  only  course 
possible.  ' 

All  the  household  set  to  work  getting  the  wounded  men  into  the  waggons 
with  the  greatest  zeal,  as  though  to  make  up  for  not  having  espoused 
their  cause  earlier.  The  wounded  soldiers  came  creeping  out  of  their 
rooms,  and  crowded  round  the  wagons,  with  pale,  delighted  faces.  The 
news  spread  to  the  neighbouring  houses,  and  wounded  men  began  to  come 
into  the  yard  from  other  houses  too.  Many  of  the  wounded  soldiers 
begged  them  not  take  out  the  boxes,  but  only  to  let  them  sit  on  the  top  of 
them.  But  when  once  the  work  of  unloading  had  begun  there  was  no 
stopping  it;  it  seemed  of  little  consequence  whether  all  were  left  or  half. 
The  cases  of  china,  of  bronzes,  of  pictures  and  looking-glasses,  which 
had  been  so  carefully  packed  during  the  previous  night  lay  in  the  yard, 
and  still  they  sought  and  found  possibilities  of  taking  out  more  and  more, ! 
and  leaving  more  and  more,  for  the  wounded. 

‘We  can  take  four  more,’  said  the  steward.  ‘I’ll  leave  my  luggage,  or 
else  what  is  to  become  of  them?’ 

‘Oh,  let  them  have  our  wardrobe  cart,’  said  the  countess;  ‘Dunyasha 
will  go  with  me  in  the  carriage.’ 

The  waggon  packed  with  the  ladies’  wardrobe  was  unloaded,  and  sent 
to  fetch  wounded  men  from  two  doors  off.  All  the  family  and  the  servants 
too  were  eager  and  merry.  Natasha  was  in  a  state  of  ecstatic  happiness, 
such  as  she  had  not  known  for  a  very  long  while. 


WARANDPEACE  815 

‘Where  are  we  to  fasten  this  on?-’  said  the  servant,  trying  to  lay  a 
runk  on  the  narrow  footboard  behind  in  the  carriage.  ‘We  must  keep 
ust  one  cart  for  it.’ 

‘What  is  it?’  asked  Natasha. 

‘The  count’s  books.’ 

‘Leave  it.  Vassilitch  will  put  it  away.  That’s  not  necessary.’ 

The  covered  gig  was  full , of  people;  they  were  only  in  doubt  where 
'yotr  Ilyitch  was  to  sit. 

‘He’ll  go  on  the  box.  You’ll  go  on  the  box,  won’t  you,  Petya?’  cried 
Jatasha. 

Sonya,  too,  worked  with  unflagging  zeal;  but  the  aim  of  her  exertions 
ras  the  opposite  of  Natasha’s.  She  saw  to  the  storing  away  of  all  that  was 
■ft  behind,  made  a  list  of  them  at  the  countess’s  desire,  and  tried  to 
et  as  much  as  possible  taken  with  them. 


XVII 

y  two  o’clock  the  Rostovs’  four  carriages,  packed  and  ready  to  start, 
,ood  in  the  approach.  The  waggon-loads  of  wounded  were  filing  one  after 
nother  out  of  the  yard. 

The  coach  in  which  Prince  Andrey  was  being  taken  drove  by  the  front 
oor,  and  attracted  the  attention  of  Sonya,  who  was  helping  a  maid  to 
rrange  the  countess’s  seat  comfortably  in  her  huge,  high  carriage. 

‘Whose  carriage  is  that?’  asked  Sonya,  popping  her  head  out  of  the 
irriage  window. 

‘Why,  haven’t  you  heard,  miss?’  answered  the  maid.  ‘The  wounded 
rince;  he  stayed  the  night  in  the  house,  and  is  going  on  with  us.’ 

‘Oh,  who  is  he?  what’s  his  name?’ 

‘Our  betrothed  that  was  .  .  .  Prince  Bolkonsky  himself!’  answered 
le  maid,  sighing.  ‘They  say  he  is  dying.’ 

Sonya  jumped  out  of  the  carriage  and  ran  in  to  the  countess.  The  count- 
;s,  dressed  for  the  journey,  in  her  hat  and  shawl,  was  walking  wearily 
bout  the  drawing-room,  waiting  for  the  rest  of  the  household  to  come 
1  and  sit  down  with  closed  doors,  for  the  usual  silent  prayer  before 
itting  out.  Natasha  was  not  in  the  room. 

‘Mamma,’  said  Sonya.  ‘Prince  Andrey  is  here,  wounded  and  dying, 
le  is  going  with  us.’ 

The  countess  opened  her  eyes  in  dismay,  and  clutching  Sonya’s  arm, 
toked  about  her. 

‘Natasha,’  she  said. 

Both  to  Sonya  and  the  countess  this  news  had  for  the  first  moment 
lit  one  significance.  They  knew  their  Natasha,  and  alarm  at  the  thought 
f  the  effect  the  news  might  have  on  her  outweighed  all  sympathy  for 
le  man,  though  they  both  liked  him. 

‘Natasha  does  not  know  yet,  but  he  is  going  with  us,’  said  Sonya. 
‘You  say  he  is  dying?’ 


Si6 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


Sonya  nodded. 

The  countess  embraced  Sonya  and  burst  into  tears.  ‘The  ways  of  th 
Lord  are  past  our  finding  out!’  she  thought,  feeling  that  in  all  that  wa 
passing  now  the  Hand  of  the  Almighty,  hitherto  unseen,  was  beginnin 
to  be  manifest. 

‘Well,  mamma,  it’s  all  ready.  What  is  it?  .  .  .’  asked  Natasha,  runnin 
with  her  eager  face  into  the  room. 

‘Nothing,’  said  the  countess.  ‘If  we’re  ready,  then  do  let  us  start.’  Am 
the  countess  bent  over  her  reticule  to  hide  her  agitated  face.  Sonya  em 
braced  Natasha  and  kissed  her. 

Natasha  looked  inquisitively  at  her. 

‘What  is  it?  What  has  happened?’ 

‘Nothing,  ...  oh,  no,  .  .  .’ 

‘Something  very  bad,  concerning  me?  .  .  .  What  is  it?’  asked  th 
keen-witted  Natasha. 

Sonya  sighed,  and  made  no  reply.  The  count,  Petya,  Madame  Schos; 
Mavra  Kuzminishna,  and  Vassilitch  came  into  the  drawing-room;  am 
closing  the  doors,  they  all  sat  down,  and  sat  so  in  silence,  without  lookin 
at  each  other  for  several  seconds. 

The  count  was  the  first  to  get  up.  With  a  loud  sigh  he  crossed  himsel 
before  the  holy  picture.  All  the  others  did  the  same.  Then  the  count  prc 
ceeded  to  embrace  Mavra  Kuzminishna  and  Vassilitch,  who  were  t 
remain  in  Moscow;  and  while  they  caught  at  his  hand  and  kissed  hi 
shoulder,  he  patted  them  on  the  back  with  vaguely  affectionate  and  re 
assuring  phrases.  The  countess  went  off  to  the  little  chapel,  and  Sony 
found  her  there  on  her  knees  before  the  holy  pictures,  that  were  still  lei 
here  and  there  on  the  walls.  All  the  holy  pictures  most  precious  throug 
association  with  the  traditions  of  the  family  were  being  taken  with  then 

In  the  porch  and  in  the  yard  the  servants  who  were  going — all  of  whor 
had  been  armed  with  swords  and  daggers  by  Petya — with  their  trousei 
tucked  in  their  boots,  and  their  sashes  or  leather  belts  tightly  bracec 
took  leave  of  those  who  were  left  behind. 

As  is  invariably  the  case  at  starting  on  a  journey,  a  great  many  thins 
were  found  to  have  been  forgotten,  or  packed  in  the  wrong  place;  an 
two  grooms  were  kept  a  long  while  standing,  one  each  side  of  the  ope 
carriage  door,  ready  to  help  the  countess  up  the  carriage  steps,  whil  ' 
maids  were  flying  with  pillows  and  bags  from  the  house  to  the  carriage  ; 
the  coach,  and  the  covered  gig,  and  back  again. 

‘They  will  always  forget  everything  as  long  as  they  live!’  said  til 
countess.  ‘You  know  that  I  can’t  sit  like  that.’  And  Dunyasha,  wit 
clenched  teeth  and  an  aggrieved  look  on  her  face,  rushed  to  the  carriaf 
to  arrange  the  cushions  again  without  a  word. 

‘Ah,  those  servants,’  said  the  count,  shaking  his  head. 

The  old  coachman  Efim,  the  only  one  whom  the  countess  could  tru: 
to  drive  her,  sat  perched  up  on  the  box,  and  did  not  even  look  round  ; 
what  was  passing  behind  him.  His  thirty  years’  experience  had  taugl  | 


WAR  AND  PEACE  817 

im  that  it  would  be  some  time  yet  before  they  would  say,  ‘Now,  in 
lod’s  name,  start!  ’  and  that  when  they  had  said  it,  they  would  stop  him 
t  least  twice  again  to  send  back  for  things  that  had  been  forgotten; 
nd  after  that  he  would  have  to  pull  up  once  more  for  the  countess  herself 
3  put  her  head  out  of  window  and  beg  him,  for  Christ’s  sake,  to  drive 
arefully  downhill.  He  knew  this,  and  therefore  awaited  what  was  to 
pme  with  more  patience  than  his  horses,  especially  the  left  one,  the 
hestnut  Falcon,  who  was  continually  pawing  the  ground  and  champing 
he  bit.  At  last  all  were  seated;  the  carriage  steps  were  pulled  up,  and 
ae  door  slammed,  and  the  forgotten  travelling-case  had  been  sent  for, 
nd  the  countess  had  popped  her  head  out  and  given  the  usual  injunc- 
ons.  Then  Efim  deliberately  took  his  hat  off  and  began  crossing  himself, 
'he  postillion  and  all  the  servants  did  the  same. 

‘With  God’s  blessing!’  said  Efim,  putting  his  hat  on.  ‘Off!’  The  postil- 
on  started  his  horse.  The  right-shaft  horse  began  to  pull,  the  high 
brings  creaked,  and  the  carriage  swayed.  The  footman  jumped  up  on 
lie  box  while  it  was  moving.  The  carriage  jolted  as  it  drove  out  of  the 
ard  on  to  the  uneven  pavement;  the  other  vehicles  jolted  in  the  same 
'ay  as  they  followed  in  a  procession  up  the  street.  All  the  occupants  of 
le  carriages,  the  coach  and  the  covered  gig,  crossed  themselves  on  seeing 
ae  church  opposite.  The  servants,  who  were  staying  in  Moscow,  walked 
long  on  both  sides  of  the  carriages  to  see  them  off. 

Natasha  had  rarely  felt  such  a  joyful  sensation  as  she  experienced  at 
lat  moment  sitting  in  the  carriage  by  the  countess  and  watching,  as 
ley  slowly  moved  by  her,  the  walls  of  forsaken,  agitated  Moscow.  Now 
nd  then  she  put  her  head  out  of  the  carriage  window  and  looked  back, 
nd  then  in  front  of  the  long  train  of  waggons  full  of  wounded  soldiers 
receding  them.  Foremost  of  them  all  she  could  see  Prince  Andrey’s  closed 
arriage.  She  did  not  know  who  was  in  it,  and  every  time  she  took  stock 
f  the  procession  of  waggons  she  looked  out  for  that  coach.  She  knew  it 
'ould  be  the  foremost.  In  Kudrino,  and  from  Nikitsky  Street,  from 
’ryesny,  and  from  Podnovinsky  several  trains  of  vehicles,  similar  to  the 
lostovs’,  came  driving  out,  and  by  the  time  they  reached  Sadovoy  Street 
he  carriages  and  carts  were  two  deep  all  along  the  road. 

As  they  turned  round  Suharev  Tower,  Natasha,  who  was  quickly  and 
rquisitively  scrutinising  the  crowd  driving  and  walking  by,  uttered  a 
ry  of  delight  and  surprise: 

‘Good  Heavens!  Mamma,  Sonya,  look;  it’s  he!’ 

.  ‘Who  ?  who  ?  ’ 

s  ‘Look,  do  look!  Bezuhov,’  said  Natasha,  putting  her  head  out  of  the 
arriage  window  and  staring  at  a  tall,  stout  man  in  a  coachman’s  long 
oat,  obviously  a  gentleman  disguised,  from  his  carriage  and  gait.  He 
,'as  passing  under  the  arch  of  the  Suharev  Tower  beside  a  yellow-looking, 
eardless,  little  old  man  in  a  frieze  cloak. 

,  ‘Only  fancy!  Bezuhov  in  a  coachman’s  coat,  with  a  queer  sort  of  old- 
coking  boy,’  said  Natasha.  ‘Do  look;  do  look!’ 


SiS 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


‘No,  it’s  not  he.  How  can  you  be  so  absurd!’ 

‘Mamma,’  cried  Natasha.  ‘On  my  word  of  honour,  I  assure  you,  it  i 
he.  Stop,  stop,’  she  shouted  to  the  coachman;  but  the  coachman  cou! 
not  stop,  because  more  carts  and  carriages  were  coming  out  of  Myesht 
chansky  Street,  and  people  were  shouting  at  the  Rostovs  to  move  or 
and  not  to  keep  the  rest  of  the  traffic  waiting. 

All  the  Rostovs  did,  however,  though  now  at  a  much  greater  distance 
see  Pierre,  or  a  man  extraordinarily  like  him,  wearing  a  coachman’s  coal 
and  walking  along  the  street  with  bent  head  and  a  serious  face  beside  .  I 
little,  beardless  old  man,  who  looked  like  a  footman.  This  old  man  notice' 
a  face  poked  out  of  the  carriage  window  staring  at  them,  and  respectful!  ’ 
touching  Pierre’s  elbow,  he  said  something  to  him,  pointing  towards  th 
carriage.  It  was  some  time  before  Pierre  understood  what  he  was  saying 
he  was  evidently  deeply  absorbed  in  his  own  thoughts.  At  last  he  looke 
in  the  direction  indicated,  and  recognising  Natasha,  he  moved  instant! 
towards  the  carriage,  as  though  yielding  to  the  first  impulse.  But  afte 
taking  a  dozen  steps  towards  it,  he  stopped  short,  apparently  recollectin 
something.  Natasha’s  head  beamed  out  of  the  carriage  window  wit! 
friendly  mockery. 

‘Pyotr  Kirillitch,  come  here!  We  recognized  you,  you  see!  It’s  : 
wonder!  ’  she  cried,  stretching  out  a  hand  to  him.  ‘How  is  it?  Why  are  yoi 
like  this?’ 

Pierre  took  her  outstretched  hand,  and  awkwardly  kissed  it  as  he  ra| 
beside  the  still  moving  carriage. 

‘What  has  happened,  count?’  the  countess  asked  him,  in  a  surprised  am 
commiserating  tone. 

‘Eh?  Why?  Don’t  ask  me,’  said  Pierre,  and  he  looked  up  at  Natasha  ' 
the  charm  of  whose  radiant,  joyous  eyes  he  felt  upon  him  without  lookin 
at  her. 

‘What  are  you  doing,  or  are  you  staying. in  Moscow?’ 

Pierre  was  silent. 

‘In  Moscow?’  he  queried.  ‘Yes,  in  Moscow.  Good-bye.’ 

‘Oh,  how  I  wish  I  were  a  man,  I  would  stay  with  you.  Ah,  how  splendii 
that  is!  ’  said  Natasha.  ‘Mamma,  do  let  me  stay.’ 

Pierre  looked  absently  at  Natasha,  and  was  about  to  say  something 
but  the  countess  interrupted  him. 

‘You  were  at  the  battle,  we  have  been  told.’ 

‘Yes,  I  was  there,’  answered  Pierre.  ‘To-morrow  there  will  be  a  battl 
again  .  .  .’  he  was  beginning,  but  Natasha  interposed: 

‘But  what  is  the  matter,  count?  You  are  not  like  yourself  .  .  .’ 

‘Oh,  don’t  ask  me,  don’t  ask  me,  I  don’t  know  myself.  To-morrow  .  . 
No!  Good-bye;  good-bye,’  he  said;  ‘it’s  an  awful  time!’  And  he  left  th 
carriage  and  walked  away  to  the  pavement. 

For  a  long  while  Natasha’s  head  was  still  thrust  out  of  the  carriag 
window,  and  she  beamed  at  him  with  a  kindly  and  rather  mocking,  joyou 
smile. 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


819 


XVIII 

’rom  the  time  of  his  disappearance,  two  days  before,  Pierre  had  been 
ving  in  the  empty  abode  of  his  dead  benefactor,  Osip  Bazdyev.  This 
'as  how  it  had  come  to  pass. 

On  waking  up  the  morning  after  his  return  to  Moscow  and  his  interview 
Hth  Count  Rastoptchin,  Pierre  could  not  for  some  time  make  out  where 
e  was  and  what  was  expected  of  him.  When  the  names  of  the  persons 
waiting  to  see  him  were  announced  to  him — among  them  a  Frenchman, 
'ho  had  brought  a  letter  from  his  wife,  the  Countess  Elena  Vassilyevna 
he  felt  suddenly  overcome  by  that  sense  of  the  hopelessness  and  in- 
ricacy  of  his  position  to  which  he  was  particularly  liable.  He  suddenly 
£lt  that  everything  was  now  at  an  end,  everything  was  in  a  muddle, 
yerything  was  breaking  down,  that  no  one  was  right  nor  wrong,  that 
fiere  was  no  future  before  him,  and  that  there  was  no  possible  escape 
-om  the  position.  Smiling  unnaturally  and  muttering  to  himself,  he  sat 
n  the  sofa  in  a  pose  expressive  of  utter  hopelessness,  or  got  up,  ap- 
roached  the  door,  and  peeped  through  the  crack  into  the  reception- 
90m,  where  his  visitors  were  awaiting  him,  then  turned  back  with  a 
esture  of  despair  and  took  up  a  book.  The  butler  came  in  for  the  second 
me  with  a  message  that  the  Frenchman  who  had  brought  the  letter 
rom  the  countess  was  very  desirous  of  seeing  him  if  only  for  a  minute, 
nd  that  they  had  sent  from  the  widow  of  Osip  Alexyevitch  Bazdyev  to 
sk  him  to  take  charge  of  some  books,  as  Madame  Bazdyev  was  going 
way  into  the  country. 

‘Oh,  yes,  in  a  minute;  wait  .  .  .  No,  no;  go  and  say,  I  am  coming 
nmediately,’  said  Pierre. 

As  soon  as  the  butler  had  left  the  room,  Pierre  had  taken  up  his  hat, 
hich  was  lying  on  the  table,  and  gone  out  by  the  other  door.  He  found 
0  one  in  the  corridor.  Pierre  walked  the  whole  length  of  the  corridor 
)  the  staircase,  and  frowning  and  rubbing  his  forehead  with  both  hands, 
je  went  down  as  far  as  the  first  story  landing.  The  porter  was  standing  at 
le  front  door.  A  second  staircase  led  from  the  landing  to  the  back 
ntrance.  Pierre  went  down  the  back  stairs  and  out  into  the  yard.  No 
ne  had  seen  him.  But  as  soon  as  he  turned  out  at  the  gates  into  the  street, 
le  coachman,  standing  by  the  carriages,  and  the  gate-porter  saw  him 
nd  took  off  their  caps  to  him.  Aware  of  their  eyes  fixed  on  him,  Pierre 
id,  as  the  ostrich  does,  hiding  its  head  in  a  bush  to  escape  being  seen: 
licking  his  head  and  quickening  his  pace  he  hurried  along  the  street. 

Of  all  the  business  awaiting  Pierre  that  morning,  the  task  of  sorting 
,ie  books  and  papers  of  Osip  Alexyevitch  seemed  to  him  the  most  urgent. 
He  hailed  the  first  cab-driver  he  came  across,  and  told  him  to  drive  to 
atriarch’s  Ponds,  where  was  the  house  of  the  widow  of  Bazdyev. 

I  Continually  watching  the  loaded  vehicles  moving  out  of  Moscow 
‘om  all  directions,  and  balancing  his  bulky  person  carefully  not  to  slip 


S20 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

out  of  the  rickety  old  chaise,  Pierre  had  the  happy  sensation  of  a  runaway 
schoolboy,  as  he  chatted  with  his  driver. 

The  latter  told  him  that  to-day  arms  were  being  given  out  in  the  Krem 
lin,  and  that  next  day  every  one  would  be  driven  out  beyond  the  Threi 
Hills  Gate,  and  there  there  was  to  be  a  great  battle. 

On  reaching  the  Patriarch’s  Ponds,  Pierre  looked  for  Bazdyev’s  house 
where  he  had  not  been  for  a  long  while  past.  He  went  up  to  a  little  gardei 
gate.  Gerasim,  the  yellow,  beardless  old  man  Pierre  had  seen  five  year 
before  at  Torzhok  with  Osip  Alexyevitch,  came  out  on  hearing  him  knock 

‘At  home?’  asked  Pierre. 

‘Owing  to  present  circumstances,  Sofya  Danilovna  and  her  childrei 
have  gone  away  into  the  country,  your  excellency.’ 

‘I’ll  come  in,  all  the  same;  I  want  to  look  through  the  books,’  sail 
Pierre. 

‘Pray  do,  you  are  very  welcome;  the  brother  of  my  late  master — thij 
heavenly  kingdom  be  his! — Makar  Alexyevitch  has  remained,  but  you 
honour  is  aware  he  is  in  feeble  health,’  said  the  old  servant. 

Makar  Alexyevitch  was,  as  Pierre  knew,  a  brother  of  Osip  Alexyevitch 
'  a  half-mad  creature,  besotted  by  drink. 

‘Yes,  yes,  I  know.  Let  us  go  in,’  said  Pierre,  and  he  went  into  the  house 
A  tall,  bald  old  man  in  a  dressing-gown,  with  a  red  nose  and  goloshe: 
on  his  bare  feet,  was  standing  in  the  vestibule;  seeing  Pierre,  he  mutterei 
something  angrily,  and  walked  away  into  the  corridor. 

‘He  was  a  great  intellect,  but  now,  as  your  honour  can  see,  he  has  growi 
feeble,’  said  Gerasim.  ‘Will  you  like  to  go  into  the  study?’  Pierre  nodded 
‘As  it  was  sealed  up,  so  it  has  remained.  Sofya  Danilovna  gave  order: 
that  if  you  sent  for  the  books  they  were  to  be  handed  over.’ 

Pierre  went  into  the  gloomy  study,  which  he  had  entered  with  suck 
trepidation  in  the  lifetime  of  his  benefactor.  Now  covered  with  dust,  ani 
untouched  since  the  death  of  Osip  Alexyevitch,  the  room  was  gloomie 
than  ever. 

Gerasim  opened  one  blind,  and  went  out  of  the  room  on  tiptoe.  Pierr 
walked  round  the  study,  went  up  to  the  bookcase,  where  the  manuscript 
were  kept,  and  took  one  of  the  most  important,  at  one  time  a  sacred  rell 
of  the  order.  This  consisted  of  the  long  Scottish  acts  of  the  order,  witl 
Bazdyev’s  notes  and  commentaries.  Pie  sat  down  to  the  dusty  writing 
table  and  laid  the  manuscripts  down  before  him,  opened  and  closed  them 
and  at  last,  pushing  them  away,  sank  into  thought,  with  his  elbow  01 
the  table  and  his  head  in  his  hand. 

Several  times  Gerasim  peeped  cautiously  into  the  study  and  saw  tha 
Pierre  was  sitting  in  the  same  attitude. 

More  than  two  hours  passed  by.  Gerasim  ventured  to  make  a  sligh 
noise  at  the  door  to  attract  Pierre’s  attention.  Pierre  did  not  hear  him. 

‘Is  the  driver  to  be  dismissed,  your  honour?’ 

‘Oh  yes,’  said  Pierre,  waking  up  from  his  reverie,  and  hurriedly  gettin: 
up.  ‘Listen,’  he  said,  taking  Gerasim  by  the  button  of  his  coat  and  lookin; 


821 


WAR  AND  PEACE 
own  at  the  old  man  with  moist,  shining,  eager  eyes.  ‘Listen!  You  know 
lat  to-morrow  there  is  to  be  a  battle  .  .  .’ 

‘They  have  been  saying  so  .  .  answered  Gerasim. 

‘I  beg  you  not  to  tell  any  one  who  I  am.  And  do  what  I  tell  you  .  .  .’ 

‘Certainly,  sir,’  said  Gerasim.  ‘Would  your  honour  like  something  to 
it?’ 

‘No,  but  I  want  something  else.  I  want  a  peasant  dress  and  a  pistol,’ 
lid  Pierre,  suddenly  flushing  red. 

‘Certainly,  sir,’  said  Gerasim,  after  a  moment’s  thought. 

All  the  rest  of  that  day  Pierre  spent  alone  in  his  benefactor’s  study, 
acing  restlessly  from  one  corner  to  the  other,  as  Gerasim  could  hear, 
nd  talking  to  himself;  and  he  spent  the  night  on  a  bed  made  up  for 
im  there. 

Gerasim  accepted  Pierre’s  taking  up  his  abode  there  with  the  imper- 
irbability  of  a  servant,  who  had  seen  many  queer  things  in  his  time, 
nd  he  seemed,  indeed,  pleased  at  having  some  one  to  wait  upon.  Without 
ven  permitting  himself  to  wonder  with  what  object  it  was  wanted,  he 
btained  for  Pierre  that  evening  a  coachman’s  coat  and  cap,  and  promised 
ext  day  to  procure  the  pistol  he  required.  Makar  Alexyevitch  twice 
nat  evening  approached  the  door,  shuffling  in  his  goloshes,  and  stood 
here,  gazing  with  an  ingratiating  air  at  Pierre.  But  as  soon  as  Pierre 
jrned  to  him,  he  wrapped  his  dressing-gowm  round  him  with  a  shame- 
iced  and  wrathful  look,  and  hastily  retreated.  Pierre  put  on  the  coach- 
lan’s  coat,  procured  and  carefully  fumigated  for  him  by  Gerasim,  and 
Vent  out  with  the  latter  to  buy  a  pistol  at  the  Suharev  Tower.  It  was  there 
e  had  met  the  Rostovs. 

XIX 

j| 

)n  the  night  of  the  ist  of  September  Kutuzov  gave  the  Russian  troops  the 
ommand  to  fall  back  across  Moscow  to  the  Ryazan  road. 

The  first  troops  moved  that  night,  marching  deliberately  and  in  steady 
rder.  But  at  dawn  the  retreating  troops  on  reaching  the  Dorogomilov 
•ridge  saw  before  them,  crowding  on  the  other  side,  and  hurrying  over 
he  bridge,  and  blocking  the  streets  and  alleys  on  the  same  side,  and 
rearing  down  upon  them  from  behind,  immense  masses  of  soldiers.  And 
he  troops  were  overtaken  by  causeless  panic  and  haste.  There  was  a 
;eneral  rush  forward  towards  the  bridge,  on  to  the  bridge,  to  the  fords 
nd  to  the  boats.  Kutuzov  had  himself  driven  by  back  streets  to  the 
ither  side  of  Moscow. 

At  ten  o’clock  in  the  morning  of  the  2nd  of  September  the  only  troops 
eft  in  the  Dorogomilov  suburbs  were  the  regiments  of  the  rearguard,  and 
he  crush  was  over.  The  army  was  already  on  the  further  side  of  Moscow, 
nd  out  of  the  town  altogether. 

At  the  same  time,  at  ten  o’clock  in  the  morning  of  the  2nd  of  September, 
Napoleon  was  standing  in  the  midst  of  his  troops  on  Poklonny  Hill, 
;azing  at  the  spectacle  that  lay  before  him.  From  the  26th  of  August  to 


822 


WAR  AND  PEACE 
the  2nd  of  September,  from  the  day  of  Borodino  to  the  entrance  inti 
Moscow,  all  that  agitating,  that  memorable  week,  there  had  been  tha 
extraordinarily  beautiful  autumn  weather,  which  always  comes  as  a  sur 
prise,  when  though  the  sun  is  low  in  the  sky  it  shines  more  warmly  thai ; 
in  spring,  when  everything  is  glistening  in  the  pure,  limpid  air,  so  tha; 
the  eyes  are  dazzled,  while  the  chest  is  braced  and  refreshed  inhaling  tb 
fragrant  autumn  air;  when  the  nights  even  are  warm,  and  when  in  thes 
dark,  warm  nights  golden  stars  are  continually  falling  from  the  sky,  to  tb 
delight  or  terror  of  all  who  watch  them.  ’ 

At  ten  o’clock  on  the  2nd  of  September  the  morning  light  was  .f,ul 
of  the  beauty  of  fairyland.  From  Poklonny  Hill  Moscow  lay  stretchinj 
wide  below  with  her  river,  her  gardens,  and  her  churches,  and  seemei 
to  be  living  a  life  of  her  own,  her  cupolas  twinkling  like  stars  in  the  sun 
light. 

At  the  sight  of  the  strange  town,  with  its  new  forms  of  unfamiliar  archi 
tecture,  Napoleon  felt  something  of  that  envious  and  uneasy  curiosity 
that  men  feel  at  the  sight  of  the  aspects  of  a  strange  life,  knowing  nothin; 
of  them.  It  was  clear  that  that  town  was  teeming  with  vigorous  life.  B} 
those  indefinable  tokens  by  which  one  can  infallibly  tell  from  a  distano 
a  live  body  from  a  dead  one,  Napoleon  could  detect  from  Poklonny  Hi} 
the  throb  of  life  in  the  town,  and  could  feel,  as  it  were,  the  breathing  0 
that  beautiful,  great  being.  Every  Russian  gazing  at  Moscow  feels  sh< 
is  the  mother;  every  foreigner  gazing  at  her,  and  ignorant  of  her  signifi 
cance  as  the  mother  city,  must  be  aware  of  the  feminine  character  of  thi 
town,  and  Napoleon  felt  it. 

‘This  Asiatic  city  with  the  innumerable  churches,  Moscow  the  holy 
Here  it  is  at  last,  the  famous  city!  It  was  high  time,’  said  Napoleon 
and  dismounting  from  his  horse  he  bade  them  open  the  plan  of  Moscow 
before  him,  and  sent  for  his  interpreter,  Lelorme  d’ldeville. 

‘A  city  occupied  by  the  enemy  is  like  a  girl  who  has  lost  her  honour, 
he  thought  (it  was  the  phrase  he  had  uttered  to  Tutchkov  at  Smolensk) 
And  from  that  point  of  view  he  gazed  at  the  Oriental  beauty  who  la> 
for  the  first  time  before  his  eyes.  He  felt  it  strange  himself  that  the  desire 
so  long  cherished,  and  thought  so  impossible,  had  at  last  come  to  pass 
In  the  clear  morning  light  he  gazed  at  the  town,  and  then  at  the  plan 
looking  up  its  details,  and  the  certainty  of  possessing  it  agitated  anc 
awed  him. 

‘But  how  could  it  be  otherwise?’  he  thought.  ‘Here  is  this  capital,  she 
lies  at  my  feet  awaiting  her  fate.  Where  is  Alexander  now,  and  what  is 
he  thinking?  A  strange,  beautiful,  and  grand  city!  And  a  strange  and 
grand  moment  is  this!  In  what  light  must  I  appear  to  them?’  he  mused 
thinking  of  his  soldiers.  ‘Here  is  the  city— the  reward  for  all  those  of  little 
faith,’  he  thought,  looking  round  at  his  suite  and  the  approaching  troops, 
forming  into  ranks. 

‘One  word  of  mine,  one  wave  of  my  arm,  and  the  ancient  capital  of  the 
Tsar  is  no  more.  But  my  clemency  is  ever  prompt  to  stoop  to  the  van¬ 
quished.  I  must  be  magnanimous  and  truly  great.  But  no,  it  is  not  true  that 


WAR  AND  PEACE  823 

I  am  in  Moscow/  the  idea  suddenly  struck  him.  ‘She  lies  at  my  feet, 
though,  her  golden  domes  and  crosses  flashing  and  twinkling  in  the  sun. 
But  I  will  spare  her.  On  the  ancient  monuments  of  barbarism  and  des¬ 
potism  I  will  inscribe  the  great  words  of  justice  and  mercy  .  .  .  Alexander 
will  feel  that  more  bitterly  than  anything;  I  know  him.’  (It  seemed  to  Na¬ 
poleon  that  the  chief  import  of  what  had  happened  lay  in  his  personal 
contest  with  Alexander.)  ‘From  the  heights  of  the  Kremlin — yes,  that’s 
the  Kremlin,  yes — I  will  dictate  to  them  the  laws  of  justice,  I  will  teach 
them  the  meaning  of  true  civilisation,  I  will  make  the  generations  of  bo- 
'yards  to  enshrine  their  conqueror’s  name  in  love.  I  will  tell  the  deputation 
that  I  have  not  sought,  and  do  not  seek,  war;  but  I  have  been  waging  war 
only  with  the  deceitful  policy  of  their  court ;  that  I  love  and  respect  Alex¬ 
ander,  and  that  in  Moscow  I  will  accept  terms  of  peace  worthy  of  myself 
and  my  peoples.  I  have  no  wish  to  take  advantage  of  the  fortune  of  war  to 
humiliate  their  honoured  Emperor.  “Boyards,”  I  will  say  to  them,  “I  do 
not  seek  war;  I  seek  the  peace  and  welfare  of  all  my  subjects.”  But  I 
know  their  presence  will  inspire  me,  and  I  shall  speak  to  them  as  I  always 
do,  clearly,  impressively,  and  greatly.  But  can  it  be  true  that  I  am  in 
Moscow!  Yes,  there  she  is!’ 

;  ‘Let  the  boyards  be  brought  to  me/  he  said,  addressing  his  suite.  A 
general,  with  a  brilliant  suite  of  adjutants,  galloped  off  at  once  to  fetch 
the  boyards. 

TwoJtour&qoassed.  Napoleon  had  lunched,  and  was  again  standing  on 
the  same  spot  on  the  Poklonny  Hill,  waiting  for  the  deputation.  His 
speech  to  the  boyards  had  by  now  taken  definite  shape  in  his  mind.  The 
■  speech  was  full  of  dignity  and  of  greatness,  as  Napoleon  understood  it. 
Napoleon  was  himself  carried  away  by  the  magnanimity  with  which  he 
intended  to  act  in  Moscow.  In  imagination  he  had  already  fixed  the  days 
for  a  ‘reunion  dans  le  palais  des  Czars’  at  which  the  great  Russian  nobles 
were  to  mingle  with  the  courtiers  of  the  French  Emperor.  In  thought  he 
had  appointed  a  governor  capable  of  winning  the  hearts  of  the  people. 
Having  heard  that  Moscow  was  full  of  religious  institutions,  he  had  men¬ 
tally  decided  that  his  bounty  was  to  be  showered  on  these  institutions. 
He  imagined  that  as  in  Africa  he  had  had  to  sit  in  a  mosque  wearing  a 
burnous,  in  Moscow  he  must  be  gracious  and  bountiful  as  the  Tsars. 
And  being,  like  every  Frenchman,  unable  to  imagine  anything  moving 
without  a  reference  to  sa  chere,  sa  tendre,  sa  pauvre  mere,  he  decided 
finally  to  touch  the  Russian  heart,  that  he  would  have  inscribed  on  all 
these  charitable  foundations  in  large  letters,  ‘Dedicated  to  my  beloved 
mother/  or  simply,  ‘Maison  de  ma  mere,’  he  decided.  ‘But  am  I  really  in 
‘Moscow?  Yes,  there  she  lies  before  me;  but  why  is  the  deputation  from 
the  city  so  long  in  coming?’  he  wondered. 

Meanwhile  a  whispered  and  agitated  consultation  was  being  held 
among  his  generals  and  marshals  in  the  rear  of  the  suite.  The  adjutants 
j  sent  to  bring  the  deputation  had  come  back  with  the  news  that  Moscow 
\  was  empty,  that  every  one  had  left  or  was  leaving  the  city.  The  faces  of 
all  the  suite  were  pale  and  perturbed.  It  was  not  that  Moscow  had  been 


824  WARANDPEACE 

abandoned  by  its  inhabitants  (grave  as  that  fact  appeared)  that  alarmed 
them.  They  were  in  alarm  at  the  idea  of  making  the  fact  known  to  the 
Emperor;  they  could  not  see  how,  without  putting  his  majesty  into  the 
terrible  position,  called  by  the  French  ridicule,  to  inform  him  that  he  had 
been  waiting  so  long  for  the  boyards  in  vain,  that  there  was  a  drunken 
mob,  but  no  one  else  in  Moscow.  Some  of  the  suite  maintained  that  come 
what  may,  they  must  anyway  scrape  up  a  deputation  of  some  sort;  others 
opposed  this  view,  and  asserted  that  the  Emperor  must  be  carefully  and 
skilfully  prepared,  and  then  told  the  truth. 

‘We  shall  have  to  tell  him  all  the  same,’  said  some  gentleman  of  the 
suite.  .  .  .  ‘But,  gentlemen  .  . 

The  position  was  the  more  difficult  as  the  Emperor,  pondering  on  his 
magnanimous  plans,  was  walking  patiently  up  and  down  before  the  map 
of  the  city,  shading  his  eyes  to  look  from  time  to  time  along  the  road  to 
Moscow,  with  a  proud  and  happy  smile. 

‘But  it’s  awkward  .  .  .’  the  gentlemen-in-waiting  kept  repeating, 
shrugging  their  shoulders  and  unable  to  bring  themselves  to  settle  the 
terrible  word  in  their  minds:  ‘le  ridicule.  .  .  .’ 

Meanwhile  the  Emperor,  weary  of  waiting  in  vain,  and  with  his  actor’s 
instinct  feeling  that  the  great  moment,  being  too  long  deferred,  was  be¬ 
ginning  to  lose  its  grandeur,  made  a  sign  with  his  hand.  A  solitary  cannon 
shot  gave  the  signal,  and  the  invading  army  marched  into  Moscow — at 
the  Tver,  the  Kaluga,  and  the  Dorogomilov  gates.  More  and  more  rapidly, 
vying  with  one  another,  at  a  quick  run  and  a  trot,  the  troops  marched 
in,  concealed  in  the  clouds  of  dust  they  raised,  and  making  the  air  ring 
with  their  deafening  shouts. 

Tempted  on  by  the  advance  of  the  army,  Napoleon  too  rode  as  far  as 
the  Dorogomilov  gate,  but  there  he  halted  again,  and  dismounting  walked 
about  the  Kamerkolezhsky  wall  for  a  long  time,  waiting  for  the  depu¬ 
tation. 


XX 

Moscow  meanwhile  was  empty.  There  were  still  people  in  the  city;  a 
fiftieth  part  of  all  the  former  inhabitants  still  remained  in  it,  but  it  was 
empty. 

It  was  deserted  as  a  dying,  queenless  hive  is  deserted. 

In  a  queenless  hive  there  is  no  life  left.  Yet  at  a  superficial  glance  it 
seems  as  much  alive  as  other  hives. 

In  the  hot  rays  of  the  midday  sun  the  bees  soar  as  gaily  around  the 
queenless  hive  as  around  other  living  hives;  from  a  distance  it  smells 
of  honey  like  the  rest,  and  bees  fly  into  and  out  of  it  just  the  same.  Yet 
one  has  but  to  watch  it  a  little  to  see  that  there  is  no  life  in  the  hive. 
The  flight  of  the  bees  is  not  as  in  living  hives,  the  smell  and  the  sound 
that  meet  the  beekeeper  are  changed.  When  the  beekeeper  strikes  the 
wall  of  the  sick  hive,  instead  of  the  instant,  unanimous  response,  the 
buzzing  of  tens  of  thousands  of  bees  menacingly  arching  their  backs,  and 


WAR  AND  PEACE  825 

by  the  rapid  stroke  of  their  wings  making  that  whirring,  living  sound, 
he  is  greeted  by  a  disconnected,  droning  hum  from  different  parts  of 
the  deserted  hive.  From  the  alighting  board  comes  not  as  of  old  the  spiritu¬ 
ous,  fragrant  smell  of  honey  and  bitterness,  and  the  whiff  of  heat  from 
the  multitudes  within.  A  smell  of  chill  emptiness  and  decay  mingles  with 
the  scent  of  honey.  Around  the  entrance  there  is  now  no  throng  of  guards, 
arching  their  backs  and  trumpeting  the  menace,  ready  to  die  in  its  defence. 
There  is  heard  no  more  the  low,  even  hum,  the  buzz  of  toil,  like  the 
singing  of  boiling  water,  but  the  broken,  discordant  uproar  of  disorder 
comes  forth.  The  black,  long-shaped,  honey-smeared  workers  fly  timidly 
and  furtively  in  and  out  of  the  hive:  they  do  not  sting,  but  crawl  away 
at  the  sight  of  danger.  Of  old  they  flew  in  only  with  their  bags  of  honey, 
and  flew  out  empty:  now  they  fly  out  with  their  burdens.  The  beekeeper 
opens  the  lower  partition  and  peeps  into  the  lower  half  of  the  hive.  Instead 
of  the  clusters  of  black,  sleek  bees,  clinging  on  each  other’s  legs,  hanging  to 
the  lower  side  of  the  partition,  and  with  an  unbroken  hum  of  toil  building 
at  the  wax,  drowsy,  withered  bees  wander  listlessly  about  over  the  roof 
and  walls  of  the  hive.  Instead  of  the  cleanly  glued-up  floor,  swept  by  the 
bees’  wings,  there  are  now  bits  of  wax,  excrement,  dying  bees  feebly  kick¬ 
ing,  and  dead  bees  lying  not  cleared  away  on  the  floor. 

The  beekeeper  opens  the  upper  door  and  examines  the  super  of  the  hive. 
In  place  of  close  rows  of  bees,  sealing  up  every  gap  left  in  the  combs  and 
fostering  the  brood,  he  sees  only  the  skilful,  complex  edifice  of  combs, 
and  even  in  this  the  virginal  purity  of  old  days  is  gone.  All  is  forsaken; 
and  soiled,  black,  stranger  bees  scurry  swiftly  and  stealthily  about  the 
combs  in  search  of  plunder;  while  the  dried-up,  shrunken,  listless,  old- 
looking  bees  of  the  hive  wander  slowly  about,  doing  nothing  to  hinder 
them,  having  lost  every  desire  and  sense  of  life.  Drones,  gadflies,  wasps 
and  butterflies  flutter  about  aimlessly,  brushing  their  wings  against  the 
walls  of  the  hive.  Here  and  there,  between  the  cells  full  of  dead  brood 
and  honey,  is  heard  an  angry  buzz;  here  and  there  a  couple  of  bees  from 
old  habit  and  custom,  though  they  know  not  why  they  do  it,  are  cleaning 
the  hive,  painfully  dragging  away  a  dead  bee  or  a  wasp,  a  task  beyond 
their  strength.  In  another  corner  two  other  old  bees  are  languidly  fighting 
or  cleaning  themselves  or  feeding  one  another,  themselves  unaware 
whether  with  friendly  or  hostile  intent.  Elsewhere  a  crowd  of  bees, 
squeezing  one  another,  is  falling  upon  some  victim,  beating  and  crushing 
it;  and  the  killed  or  enfeebled  bee  drops  slowly,  light  as  a  feather,  on  to 
the  heap  of  corpses.  The  beekeeper  parts  the  two  centre  partitions  to  look 
at  the  nursery.  Instead  of  the  dense,  black  rings  of  thousands  of  bees, 
sitting  back  to  back,  watching  the  high  mysteries  of  the  work  of  genera¬ 
tion,  he  sees  hundreds  of  dejected,  lifeless,  and  slumbering  wrecks  of  bees. 
Almost  all  have  died,  unconscious  of  their  coming  end,  sitting  in  the 
holy  place,  which  they  had  watched — now  no  more.  They  reek  of  death 
and  corruption.  But  a  few  of  them  still  stir,  rise  up,  fly  languidly  and 
settle  on  the  hand  of  the  foe,  without  the  spirit  to  die  stinging  him;  the 
rest  are  dead  and  as  easily  brushed  aside  as  fishes’  scales.  The  beekeeper 


S26 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

closes  the  partition,  chalks  a  mark  on  the  hive,  and  choosing  his  own  time, 
breaks  it  up  and  burns  it. 

So  was  Moscow  deserted,  as  Napoleon,  weary,  uneasy  and  frowning, 
paced  up  and  down  at  the  Kamerkolezhsky  wall  awaiting  that  merely 
external,  but  still  to  his  mind  essential  observance  of  the  proprieties — a 
deputation. 

Some  few  men  were  still  astir  in  odd  corners  of  Moscow,  aimlessly 
following  their  old  habits,  with  no  understanding  of  what  they  were 
doing. 

When,  with  due  circumspectness,  Napoleon  was  informed  that  Moscow 
was  deserted,  he  looked  wrathfully  at  his  informant,  and  turning  his  back 
on  him,  went  on  pacing  up  and  down  in  silence. 

‘My  carriage,’  he  said.  He  sat  down  in  his  carriage  beside  the  adjutant 
on  duty,  and  drove  into  the  suburbs. 

‘Moscow  deserted!  What  an  incredible  event!’  he  said  to  himself. 

He  did  not  drive  right  into  the  town,  but  put  up  for  the  night  at  an  inn 
in  the  Dorogomilov  suburb.  The  dramatic  scene  had  not  come  off. 


XXI 

The  Russian  troops  were  crossing  Moscow  from  two  o’clock  at  night  to 
two  o’clock  in  the  day,  and  took  with  them  the  last  departing  inhabitants 
and  wounded  soldiers. 

The  greatest  crush  took  place  on  the  -Kamenny  bridge,  the  Moskvor- 
yetsky  bridge,  and  Yauzsky  bridge.  While  the  troops,  parting  into  two 
about  the  Kremlin,  were  crowding  on  to  the  Moskvoryetsky  and  Ka¬ 
menny  bridges,  an  immense  number  of  soldiers  availed  themselves  of  the 
stoppage  and  the  block  to  turn  back,  and  slipping  stealthily  and  quietly 
by  Vassily  the  Blessed,  and  unaer  the  Borovitsky  ga^es,  they  made  their 
way  uphill  to  the  Red  Square,  where  some  instinct  told  them  they  could 
easily  carry  off  other  people’s  property.  Every  passage  and  alley  of  the 
Gostinny  bazaar  was  filled  with  a  crowd,  such  as  throngs  there  at  sales. 
But  there  were  no  ingratiating,  alluring  voices  of  shopmen,  no  hawkers, 
no  motley,  female  mob  of  purchasers — everywhere  were  the  uniforms 
and  overcoats  of  soldiers  without  guns,  going  out  in  silence  with  loads 
of  booty,  and  coming  in  empty-handed.  The  shopkeepers  and  shopmen 
(they  were  few)  were  walking  about  among  the  soldiers,  like  men  dis¬ 
traught,  opening  and  shutting  their  shops,  and  helping  their  assistants 
to  carry  away  their  wares.  There  were  drummers  in  the  square  before 
the  bazaar  beating  the  muster-call.  But  the  roll  of  the  drum  made  the 
pillaging  soldiers  not  run  up  at  the  call  as  of  old,  but,  on  the  contrary, 
run  away  from  the  drum.  Among  the  soldiers  in  the  shops  and  passages 
could  be  seen  men  in  the  grey  coats,  and  with  the  shaven  heads  of  con¬ 
victs.  Two  officers,  one  with  a  scarf  over  his  uniform,  on  a  thin,  dark 
grey  horse,  the  other  on  foot,  wearing  a  military  overcoat,  stood  at  the 
corner  of  Ilyinka,  talking.  A  third  officer  galloped  up  to  them. 


WARANDPEACE  827 

‘The  general  has  sent  orders  that  they  positively  must  all  be  driven 
ut.  Why,  this  is  outrageous!  Half  the  men  have  run  off.’ 

‘Why,  are  you  off  too?  .  .  .  Where  are  you  fellows  off  to?’  ...  he 
touted  to  three  infantry  soldiers,  who  ran  by  him  into  the  bazaar  with- 
ut  guns,  holding  up  the  skirts  of  their  overcoats.  ‘Stop,  rascals!’ 

‘Yes,  you  see,  how  are  you  going  to  get  hold  of  them?’  answered  another 
fficer.  ‘There’s  no  getting  them  together;  we  must  push  on  so  that  the 
list  may  not  be  gone,  that’s  the  only  thing  to  do!’ 

‘How’s  one  to  push  on?  There  they  have  been  standing,  with  a  block 
n  the  bridge,  and  they  are  not  moving.  Shouldn’t  a  guard  be  set  to  pre- 
ent  the  rest  running  off.’ 

‘Why,  come  along!  Drive  them  out,’  shouted  the  senior  officer. 

The  officer  in  the  scarf  dismounted,  called  up  a  drummer,  and  went 
ith  him  into  the  arcade.  Several  soldiers  in  a  group  together  made  a 
jsh  away.  A  shopkeeper,  with  red  bruises  on  his  cheeks  about  his  nose, 
ith  an  expression  on  his  sleek  face  of  quiet  persistence  in  the  pursuit 
f  gain,  came  hurriedly  and  briskly  up  to  the  officer  gesticulating. 

‘Your  honour,’  said  he,  ‘graciously  protect  us.  We  are  not  close-fisted 
-any  trifle  now  ...  we  shall  be  delighted!  Pray,  your  honour,  walk 
1,  I’ll  bring  out  cloth  in  a  moment — a  couple  of  pieces  even  for  a  gentle- 
lan — we  shall  be  delighted!  For  we  feel  how  it  is,  but  this  is  simple 
ibbery!  Pray,  your  honour!  a  guard  or  something  should  be  set,  to  let 
fe  at  least  shut  up  .  .  .’ 

Several  shopkeepers  crowded  round  the  officer. 

‘Eh!  it’s  no  use  clacking,’  said  one  of  them,  a  thin  man,  with  a  stern 
ice;  ‘when  one’s  head’s  off,  one  doesn’t  weep  over  one’s  hair.  Let  all 
ike  what  they  please!  ’  And  with  a  vigorous  sweep  of  his  arm  he  turned 
way  from  the  officer. 

‘It’s  all  very  well  for  you  to  talk,  Ivan  Sidpritch,’  the  first  shopkeeper 
egan  angrily.  ‘If  yon  please,  your  honour.’ 

‘What’s  the  use  of  talking!’  shouted  the  thin  man;  ‘in  my  three  shops 
ere  I  have  one  hundred  thousand  worth  of  goods.  How’s  one  to  guard 
lem  when  the  army  is  gone?  Ah,  fellows,  God’s  will  is  not  in  men’s 
ands! ’ 

‘If  you  please,  your  honour,’  said  the  first  shopkeeper,  bowing. 

The  officer  stood  in  uncertainty,  and  his  face  betrayed  indecision.  ‘Why, 
hat  business  is  it  of  mine!’  he  cried  suddenly,  and  he  strode  on  rapidly 
ong  the  arcade.  In  one  open  shop  he  heard  blows  and  high  words, 
id  just  as  the  officer  was  going  into  it,  a  man  in  a  grey  coat,  with  a  shaven 
ead,  was  thrust  violently  out  of  the  door. 

This  man  doubled  himself  up  and  bounded  past  the  shopkeepers  and 
le  officer.  The  officer  pounced  on  the  soldiers  who  wrere  in  the  shop, 
ut  meanwhile  fearful  screams,  coming  from  an  immense  crowd,  were 
iard  near  the  Moskvoryetsky  bridge,  and  the  officer  ran  out  into  the 
'  juare. 

‘What  is  it?  What  is  it?’  he  asked,  but  his  comrade  had  already  gal- 
ped  off  in  the  direction  of  the  screams.  The  officer  mounted  his  horse 


828 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

and  followed  him.  As  he  drew  near  the  bridge,  he  saw  two  cannons  tha 
had  been  taken  off  their  carriages,  the  infantry  marching  over  the  bridge 
a  few  broken-down  carts,  and  some  soldiers  with  frightened,  and  somi 
with  laughing,  faces.  Near  the  cannons  stood  a  waggon  with  a  pair  o: 
horses  harnessed  to  it.  Behind  the  wheels  huddled  four  greyhounds  in  col 
lars.  A  mountain  of  goods  was  piled  up  in  the  waggon,  and  on  the  very  top 
beside  a  child's  chair  turned  legs  uppermost,  sat  a  woman,  who  wa: 
uttering  shrill  and  despairing  shrieks.  The  officer  was  told  by  his  comrade; 
that  the  screams  of  the  crowd  and  the  woman’s  shrieks  were  due  to  the 
fact  that  General  Yermolov  had  come  riding  down  on  the  crowd,  anc 
learning  that  the  soldiers  were  straying  away  in  the  shops,  and  crowd; 
of  the  townspeople  were  blocking  the  bridge,  had  commanded  them  tc 
take  the  cannons  out  of  their  carriages,  and  to  make  as  though  they  woulc 
fire  them  at  the  bridge.  The  crowd  had  made  a  rush;  upsetting  waggons 
trampling  one  another,  and  screaming  desperately,  the  bridge  had  beer 
cleared,  and  the  troops  had  moved  on. 


XXII 

The  town  itself  meanwhile  was  deserted.  There  was  scarcely  a  creature 
in  the  streets.  The  gates  and  the  shops  were  all  closed;  here  and  there 
near  pot-houses  could  be  heard  solitary  shouts  or  drunken  singing.  Nc 
one  was  driving  in  the  streets,  and  footsteps  were  rarely  heard.  Povarskj 
Street  was  perfectly  still  and  deserted.  In  the  immense  courtyard  of  the 
Rostovs’  house  a  few  wisps  of  straw  were  lying  about,  litter  out  of  the 
waggons  that  had  gone  away,  and  not  a  man  was  to  be  seen.  In  the 
Rostovs’1  house — abandoned  with  all  its  wealth — there  were  two  person; 
in  the  great  drawing-room.  These  were  the  porter,  Ignat,  and  the  little 
page,  Mishka,  the  grandson  of  Vassilitch,  who  had  remained  in  Moscovt 
with  his  grandfather.  Mishka  had  opened  the  clavichord,  and  was  strum¬ 
ming  with  one  finger.  The  porter,  with  his  arms  akimbo  and  a  gleefu 
smile  on  his  face,  was  standing  before  the  great  looking-glass. 

‘That’s  fine,  eh,  Uncle  Ignat?’  said  the  boy,  beginning  to  bang  witl 
both  hands  at  once  on  the  keys. 

‘Ay,  ay!’  answered  Ignat,  admiring  the  broadening  grin  on  his  visagi 
in  the  glass. 

‘Shameless  fellows!  Shameless,  upon  my  word!’  they  heard  behinc 
them  the  voice  of  Mavra  Kuzminishna,  who  had  softly  entered.  ‘Th< 
fat-faced  fellow  grinning  at  himself!  So  this  is  what  you  are  at!  It’s  no 
all  cleared  away  down  there,  and  Vassilitch  fairly  knocked  up.  You  wai 
a  bit!  ’ 

Ignat,  setting  his  belt  straight,  left  off  smiling,  and  with  eyes  submis 
sively  downcast,  walked  out  of  the  room. 

‘Auntie,  I  was  only  just  touching  .  .  .’  said  the  boy. 

‘I’ll  teach  you  only  just  to  touch.  Little  rascal!’  cried  Mavra  Kuzmin 
ishna,  waving  her  hand  at  him.  ‘Go  and  set  the  samovar  for  your  granddad.’ 


WARANDPEACE  829 

Brushing  the  dust  off,  she  closed  the  clavichord,  and  sighing  heavily 
/ent  out  of  the  drawing-room  and  closed  the  door.  Going  out  into  the 
ard  Mavra  Kuzminishna  mused  where  she  would  go  next:  whether  to 
[rink  tea  in  the  lodge  with  Vassilitch,  or  to  the  storeroom  to  put  away 
/hat  still  remained  to  be  stored  away. 

There  was  a  sound  of  rapid  footsteps  in  the  still  street.  The  steps  paused 
t  the  gate,  the  latch  rattled  as  some  hand  tried  to  open  it. 

Mavra  Kuzminishna  went  up  to  the  little  gate. 

‘Whom  do  you  want?’ 

‘The  count,  Count  Ilya  Andreitch  Rostov.’ 

‘But  who  are  you?’ 

‘I  am  an  officer.  I  want  to  see  him,’  said  a  genial  voice,  the  voice  of  a 
tussian  gentleman. 

Mavra  Kuzminishna  opened  the  gate.  And  there  walked  into  the  court- 
ard  a  round-faced  officer,  a  lad  of  eighteen,  whose  type  of  face  strikingly 
ssembled  the  Rostovs’. 

‘They  have  gone  away,  sir.  Yesterday,  in  the  evening,  their  honours 
2t  off,’  said  Mavra  Kuzminishna  cordially.  The  young  officer  standing 
1  the  gateway,  as  though  hesitating  whether  to  go  in  or  not,  gave  a  click 
'ith  his  tongue  expressive  of  disappointment. 

‘Ah,  how  annoying!’  he  said.  ‘Yesterday  I  ought  to  .  .  .  Ah,  what  a 
ity  .  .  .’ 

Meanwhile  Mavra  Kuzminishna  was  intently  and  sympathetically 
zrutinising  the  familiar  features  of  the  Rostov  family  in  the  young  man’s 
jce,  and  the  tattered  cloak  and  trodden-down  boots  he  was  wearing. 
Yhat  was  it  you  wanted  to  see  the  count  for?’  she  asked. 

‘Well  .  .  .  what  am  I  to  do  now!’  the  officer  cried,  with  vexation  in 
is  voice,  and  he  took  hold  of  the  gate  as  though  intending  to  go  away, 
le  stopped  short  again  in  uncertainty. 

‘You  see,’  he  said  all  at  once,  ‘I  am  a  kinsman  of  the  count’s,  and  he 
as  always  been  very  kind  to  me.  So  do  you  see’  (he  looked  with  a  merry 
nd  good-humoured  smile  at  his  cloak  and  boots)  ‘I  am  in  rags,  and 
aven’t  a  farthing;  so  I  had  meant  to  ask  the  count  .  .  .’ 

Marva  Kuzminishna  did  not  let  him  finish. 

‘Would  you  wait  just  a  minute,  sir?  Only  one  minute,’  she  said.  And 
js  soon  as  the  officer  let  go  of  the  gate,  Mavra  Kuzminishna  turned,  and 
'ith  her  rapid,  elderly  step  hurried  into  the  back  court  to  her  lodge. 

While  she  was  running  to  her  room,  the  officer,  with  downcast  head 
nd  a  faint  smile,  was  pacing  up  and  down  the  yard,  gazing  at  his 
ittered  boots. 

‘  ‘What  a  pity  I  have  missed  uncle!  What  a  nice  old  body!  Where  has 
he  run  off  to?  And  how  am  I  to  find  out  the  nearest  way  for  me  to  over- 
ike  the  regiment,  which  must  be  at  Rogozhsky  by  now?’  the  young 
fficer  was  musing  meanwhile.  Mavra  Kuzminishna  came  round  the  corner 
rith  a  frightened  and,  at  the  same  time,  resolute  face,  carrying  in  her 
ands  a  knotted  check  handkerchief.  A  few  steps  from  him,  she  untied 


830  W  A  R  A  N  D  P  E  A  C  E 

the  handkerchief,  took  out  of  it  a  white  twenty-five  rouble  note,  and  gav< 
it  hurriedly  to  the  officer. 

‘Had  his  excellency  been  at  horqe,  to  be  sure,  he  would  have  done  f 
kinsman’s  part,  but  as  it  is  .  .  .  see,  may  be  .  .  Mavra  Kuzminishne 
was  overcome  with  shyness  and  confusion.  But  the  officer,  with  no  hash 
nor  reluctance,  took  the  note,  and  thanked  Mavra  Kuzminishna.  ‘If  only 
the  count  had  been  at  home,’  murmured  Mavra  Kuzminishna,  as  it  were! 
apologetically.  ‘Christ  be  with  you,  sir.  God  keep  you  safe,’  she  said 
bowing  and  showing  him  out.  The  officer,  smiling  and  shaking  his  head 
as  though  laughing  at  himself,  ran  almost  at  a  trot  along  the  empty  streets 
to  overtake  his  regiment  at  Yauzsky  bridge. 

But  for  some  time  Mavra  Kuzminishna  remained  standing  with  wel 
eyes  before  the  closed  gate,  pensively  shaking  her  head,  and  feeling  a 
sudden  rush  of  motherly  tenderness  and  pity  for  the  unknown  boy- 
officer. 


XXIII 

In  an  unfinished  house  in  Varvarka,  the  lower  part  of  which  was  a  pot¬ 
house,  there  were  sounds  of  drunken  brawling  and  singing.  Some  ter 
factory  hands  were  sitting  on  benches  at  tables  in  a  little,  dirty  room, 
Tipsy,  sweating,  blear-eyed,  with  wide-gaping  mouths,  bloated  with 
drink,  they  were  singing  some  sort  of  a  song.  They  were  singing  discord¬ 
antly,  with  toil,  with  labour,  not  because  they  wanted  to  sing,  but  simply 
to  betoken  that  they  were  drunk,  and  were  enjoying  themselves.  One 
of  them,  a  tall,  flaxen-headed  fellow,  in  a  clean,  blue  long  coat  was  stand¬ 
ing  over  the  rest.  His  face,  with  its  straight,  fine  nose,  would  have  been 
handsome,  but  for  the  thick,  compressed,  continually  twitching  lips  and 
the  lustreless,  staring,  and  frowning  eyes.  He  was  standing  over  the 
singers,  and,  obviously  with  some  no*:on  in  his  head,  was  making  solemn 
and  angular  passes  over  their  heads  with  his  bare,  white  arm,  while  he 
tried  to  spread  his  dirty  fingers  out  unnaturally  wide  apart.  The  sleeve 
of  his  coat  was  incessantly  slipping  down,  and  the  young  fellow  kept 
carefully  tucking  it  up  again  with  his  left  hand,  as  though  there  was 
something  of  special  significance  requiring  that  white,  sinewy,  waving 
arm  to  be  bare.  In  the  middle  of  the  song,  shouts  and  blows  were  heard 
in  the  passage  and  the  porch.  The  tall  fellow  waved  his  arms. 

‘Shut  up!’  he  shouted  peremptorily.  ‘A  fight,  lads!’  and  still  tucking 
up  his  sleeves,  he  went  out  to  the  porch. 

The  factory  hands  followed  him.  They  had  brought  the  tavern-keeper 
some  skins  that  morning  from  the  factory,  had  had  drink  given  them 
for  this  service,  and  had  been  drinking  under  the  leadership  of  the  tall 
young  man.  The  blacksmiths  working  in  a  smithy  hard  by  heard  the 
sounds  of  revelry  in  the  pothouse,  and  supposing  the  house  had  been 
forcibly  broken  into,  wanted  to  break  in  too.  A  conflict  was  going  on 
in  the  porch. 

The  tavern-keeper  was  fighting  with  a  blacksmith  in  the  doorway,  and 


WAR  AND  PEACE  831 

at  the  moment  when  the  factory  hands  emerged,  the  smith  had  reeled 
away  from  the  tavern-keeper,  and  fallen  on  his  face  on  the  pavement. 

Another  smith  dashed  in  at  the  door,  staggering  with  his  chest  against 
the  tavern-keeper. 

The  young  man  with  the  sleeve  tucked  up,  as  he  went,  dealt  a  blow 
in  the  face  of  the  smith  who  had  dashed  in  at  the  door,  and  shouted 
wildly: 

‘Lads!  they  are  beating  our  mates!  ’ 

Meanwhile,  the  smith  got  up  from  the  ground,  and  with  blood  spurting 
from  his  bruised  face,  cried  in  a  wailing  voice: 

‘Help!  They  have  killed  me  ...  !  They  have  killed  a  man!  Mates!  .  . 

‘Oy,  mercy  on  us,  killed  entirely,  a  man  killed!’  squealed  a  woman, 
coming  out  of  the  gates  next  door.  A  crowd  of  people  gathered  round 
the  blood-stained  smith. 

‘Haven’t  you  ruined  folks  enough,  stripping  the  shirts  off  their  backs?’ 
said  a  voice,  addressing  the  tavern-keeper;  ‘and  so  now  you  have  mur¬ 
dered  a  man!  Blackguard!’ 

!  The  tall  young  man  standing  on  the  steps  turned  his  bleared  eyes  from 
the  tavern-keeper  to  the  smiths,  as  though  considering  with  which  to 
fight. 

‘Cut-throat !  ’  he  cried  suddenly  at  the  tavern-keeper.  ‘Lads,  bind  him !  ’ 

‘Indeed,  and  you  try  and  bind  a  man  like  me!’  bawled  the  tavern- 
keeper,  tearing  himself  away  from  the  men  who  threw  themselves  on  him, 
and  taking  off  his  cap.  he  flung  it  on  the  ground.  As  though  this  act  had 
some  mysterious  and  menacing  significance,  the  factory  hands,  who  had 
surrounded  the  tavern-keeper,  stood  still  in  uncertainty. 

‘I  know  the  law,  mate,  very  well,  I  do.  I’ll  go  to  the  police.  Are  you 
thinking  I  won’t  find  them?  Robbery’s  not  the  order  of  the  day  for  any 
one!’  bawled  the  tavern-keeper,  picking  up  his  cap. 

‘And  go  we  will,  so  there!’  .  ‘And  go  we  will  ...  so  there!’  the 
tavern-keeper  and  the  tall  fellow  repeated  after  one  another,  and  both 
together  moved  forward  along  the  street.  The  blood-bespattered  smith 
walked  on  a  level  with  them.  The  factory-hands  and  a  mob  of  outsiders 
followed  them  with  talk  and  shouting. 

At  the  corner  of  Maroseyka,  opposite  a  great  house  with  closed  shutters, 
and  the  signboard  of  a  bootmaker,  stood  a  group  of  some  twenty  boot¬ 
makers,  thin,  exhausted-looking  men,  with  dejected  faces,  in  loose  smocks, 
.and  torn  coats. 

‘He  ought  to  pay  folks  properly!  ’  a  thin  boot  hand,  with  a  scant  beard 
and  scowling  brows,  was  saying.  ‘He’s  sucked  the  life-blood  out  of  us, 
and  then  he’s  quit  of  us.  He’s  been  promising  and  promising  us  all  the 
week.  And  now  he’s  driven  us  to  the  last  point,  and  he’s  made  off.’ 

|  Seeing  the  mob  and  the  blood-bespattered  smith,  the  man  paused,  and 
the  bootmakers  with  inquisitive  eagerness  joined  the  moving  crowd. 

1  ‘Where  are  the  folks  going?’ 

‘Going  to  the  police,  to  be  sure.’ 

1  ‘Is  it  true  we  are  beaten?’ 


832  WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Why,  what  did  you  think?  Look  what  folks  are  saying!’ 

Questions  and  answers  were  audible.  The  tavern-keeper,  taking  ad¬ 
vantage  of  the  increased  numbers  of  the  rabble,  dropped  behind  the 
mob,  and  went  back  to  his  tavern. 

The  tall  young  fellow,  not  remarking  the  disappearance  of  his  foe,  the 
tavern-keeper,  still  moved  his  bare  arm  and  talked  incessantly,  attracting 
the  attention  of  all.  The  mob  pressed  about  his  figure  principally,  expect¬ 
ing  to  get  from  him  some  solution  of  the  questions  that  were  absorbing 
all  of  them. 

‘Let  them  show  the  order,  let  him  show  the  law,  that’s  what  the  govern-  i 
ment’s  for!  Isn’t  it  the  truth  I  am  saying,  good  Christian  folk?’  said  the 
tall  young  man,  faintly  smiling. 

‘Does  he  suppose  there's  no  government?  Could  we  do  without  govern¬ 
ment?  Wouldn’t  there  be  plenty  to  rob  us,  eh?’ 

‘Why  talk  nonsense!’  was  murmured  in  the  crowd.  ‘Why,  will  they 
leave  Moscow  like  this!  They  told  you  a  lot  of  stuff  in  joke,  and  you 
believed  them.  Haven’t  we  troops  enough?  No  fear,  they  won’t  let  him 
enter!  That’s  what  the  government’s  for.  Ay,  listen  what  folks  are  prating 
of!’  they  said,  pointing  to  the  tall  fellow. 

By  the  wall  of  the  Kitay-Gorod  there  was  another  small  group  of 
people  gathered  about  a  man  in  a  frieze  coat,  who  held  a  paper  in  his 
hand. 

‘A  decree,  a  decree  being  read!  A  decree  is  being  read,’  was  heard  in 
the  crowd,  and  the  mob  surged  round  the  reader. 

The  man  in  the  frieze  coat  was  reading  the  placard  of  the  31st  of 
August.  When  the  mob  crowded  round,  he  seemed  disconcerted,  but  at 
the  demand  of  the  tall  fellow  who  pressed  close  up  to  him,  he  began  with 
a  faint  quiver  in  his  voice  reading  the  notice  again  from  the  beginning. 

‘Early  to-morrow  I  am  going  to  his  highness  the  prince,’  he  read  (‘his 
highness!’  the  tall  young  man  repeated,  with  a  triumphant  smile  and 
knitted  brows),  ‘to  consult  with  him,  to  act  and  to  aid  the  troops  to 
exterminate  the  wretches;  we,  too,  will  destroy  them  root  and  branch  .  . .’ 
the  reader  went  on  and  paused  (‘D’ye  see?’  bawled  the  tall  fellow  with  an 
air  of  victory.  ‘He’ll  unravel  the  whole  evil  for  you  .  .  .’)  ‘and  send 
our  visitors  packing  to  the  devil;  I  shall  come  back  to  dinner,  and  we 
will  set  to  work,  we  will  be  doing  till  we  have  done,  and  done  away 
with  the  villains.’ 

These  last  words  were  uttered  by  the  reader  in  the  midst  of  the  com¬ 
plete  silence.  The  tall  fellow’s  head  sank  dejectedly.  It  was  obvious  that 
nobody  had  understood  these  last  words.  The  words  ‘I  shall  come  back 
to  dinner’  in  especial  seemed  to  offend  both  reader  and  audience.  The 
faculties  of  the  crowd  were  strained  to  the  highest  pitch,  and  this  was 
too  easy  and  unnecessarily  simple ;  it  was  just  what  any  one  of  them  might 
have  said,  and  what  for  that  reason  could  not  be  said  in  a  decree  coming 
from  a  higher  authority. 

All  stood  in  depressed  silence.  The  tall  fellow’s  lips  moved,  and  he 
staggered. 


WAR  AND  PEACE  833 

‘Ask  him!  .  .  .  Isn’t  that  himself?  .  .  .  How’d  it  be  to  ask  him!  Or 
else  .  .  .  He’ll  explain  .  .  was  suddenly  heard  in  the  back  rows  of 
the  crowd,  and  the  general  attention  turned  to  the  chaise  of  the  head 
of  the  police,  which  drove  into  the  square,  escorted  by  two  mounted 
dragoons. 

The  head  of  the  police,  who  had  driven  out  that  morning  by  Count 
Rastoptchin’s  command  to  set  fire  to  the  barques  in  the  river,  and  had 
received  for  that  commission  a  large  sum  of  money,  at  that  moment 
in  his  pocket,  ordered  his  coachman  to  stop  on  seeing  a  crowd  bearing 
down  upon  him. 

i  ‘What  are  those  people?’  he  shouted  to  the  people,  who  timidly  ap¬ 
proached  the  chaise  in  detached  groups.  ‘What  is  this  crowd,  I  ask  you?’ 
repeated  the  head  of  police,  receiving  no  reply. 

‘Your  honour,’  said  the  man  in  the  frieze  coat,  ‘it  was  their  wish,  your 
honour,  not  sparing  their  substance,  in  accord  with  his  excellency  the 
count’s  proclamation,  to  serve,  and  not  to  make  a  riot  at  all,  as  his 
excellency  said  .  .  .’ 

‘The  count  has  not  gone,  he  is  here,  and  will  give  orders  about  you,’ 
said  the  head  of  police.  ‘Go  on!  ’  he  said  to  his  coachman.  The  crowd  stood 
still,  pressing  round  those  who  had  heard  what  was  said  by  the  official, 
and  looking  at  the  departing  chaise. 

The  head  of  the  police  meantime  looked  about  him  in  alarm,  and  said 
something  to  his  coachman;  the  horses  trotted  faster. 

‘Cheated,  mates!  Lead  us  to  himself!’  bawled  the  voice  of  the  tall 
fellow.  ‘Don’t  let  him  go,  lads!  Let  him  answer  for  it!  Keep  him!  ’  roared 
voices,  and  the  crowd  dashed  full  speed  after  the  chaise. 

The  mob  in  noisy  talk  pursued  the  head  of  the  police  to  Lubyanka. 

'‘Why,  the  gentry  and  the  tradespeople  are  all  gone,  and  we  are  left 
to  perish.  Are  we  dogs,  pray?’  was  heard  more  frequently  in  the  crowd. 


XXIV 

On  the  evening  of  the  1st  of  September,  Count  Rastoptchin  had  come 
away  from  his  interview  with  Kutuzov  mortified  and  offended  at  not 
having  been  invited  to  the  council  of  war,  and  at  Kutuzov’s  having  taken 
no  notice  of  his  offer  to  take  part  in  the  defence  of  the  city,  and  astonished 
at  the  new  view  of  things  revealed  to  him  in  the  camp,  in  which  the 
tranquillity  of  the  city  and  its  patriotic  fervour  were  treated  as  matters 
of  quite  secondary  importance,  if  not  altogether  irrelevant  and  trivial. 
Mortified,  offended,  and  astonished  at  all  this,  Count  Rastoptchin  had 
returned  to  Moscow.  After  supper,  he  lay  down  on  a  sofa  without  un¬ 
dressing,  and  at  one  o’clock  was  waked  by  a  courier  bringing  him  a 
letter  from  Kutuzov.  The  letter  asked  the  count,  since  the  troops  were 
retreating  to  the  Ryazan  road  behind  Moscow,  to  send  police  officials 
to  escort  troops  through  the  town.  The  letter  told  Rastoptchin  nothing 
new.  He  had  known  that  Moscow  would  be  abandoned  not  merely  since 


834  WAR  AND  PEACE 

his  interview  the  previous  day  with  Kutuzov  on  the  Poklonny  Hill,  but 
ever  since  the  battle  of  Borodino;  since  when  all  the  generals  who  hac 
come  to  Moscow  had  with  one  voice  declared  that  another  battle  was 
impossible,  and  with  Rastoptchin’s  sanction  government  property  had 
been  removed  every  night,  and  half  the  inhabitants  had  left.  But  never¬ 
theless  the  fact,  communicated  in  the  form  of  a  simple  note,  with  a  com¬ 
mand  from  Kutuzov,  and  received  at  night,  breaking  in  on  his  first  sleep 
surprised  and  irritated  the  governor. 

In  later  days,  Count  Rastoptchin,  by  wajr  of  explaining  his  action 
during  this  time,  wrote  several  times  in  his  notes  that  his  two  great  aims 
at  that  time  were  to  maintain  tranquillity  in  Moscow,  and  to  make  the 
inhabitants  go  out  of  it.  If  this  twofold  aim  is  admitted,  every  act  of 
Rastoptchin’s  appears  irreproachable.  Why  were  not  the  holy  relics,  the 
arms,  the  ammunition,  the  powder,  the  stores  of  bread  taken  away?  Why 
were  thousands  of  the  inhabitants  deceived  into  a  belief  that  Moscow 
would  not  be  abandoned  and  so  ruined?  ‘To  preserve  the  tranquillity  of 
the  city,’  replies  Count  Rastoptchin’s  explanation.  Why  were  heaps  of 
useless  papers  out  of  the  government  offices  and  Leppich’s  balloon  and 
other  objects  carried  away?  ‘To  leave  the  town  empty,’  replies  Count 
Rastoptchin’s  explanation.  One  has  but  to  admit  some  menace  to  public 
tranquillity  and  every  sort  of  action  is  justified. 

All  the  horrors  of  terrorism  were  based  only  on  anxiety  for  public 
tranquillity. 

What  foundation  was  there  for  Count  Rastoptchin’s  dread  of  popular 
disturbance  in  Moscow  in  1812?  What  reason  was  there  for  assuming  a1 
disposition  to  revolution  in  the  city?  The  inhabitants  were  leaving  it; 
the  retreating  troops  were  filling  Moscow.  Why  were  the  mob  likely  to 
riot  in  consequence? 

Not  in  Moscow  only,  but  everywhere  else  in  Russia  nothing  like  riots 
took  place  at  the  approach  of  the  enemy.  On  the  1st  and  2nd  of  September 
more  than  ten  thousand  people  were  left  in  Moscow,  and  except  for  the 
mob  that  gathered  in  the  commander-in-chief’s  courtyard,  attracted  there 
by  himself,  nothing  happened.  It  is  obvious  that  there  would  have  been 
even  less  ground  for  anticipating  disturbances  among  the  populace  if, 
after  the  battle  of  Borodino,  when  the  surrender  of  Moscow  became  a 
certainty,  or  at  least  a  probability,  Rastoptchin  had  taken  steps  for  the 
removal  of  all  the  holy  relics,  of  the  powder,  ammunition,  and  treasury, 
and  had  told  the  people  straight  out  that  the  town  would  be  abandoned, 
instead  of  exciting  the  populace  by  posting  up  placards  and  distributing: 
arms. 

Rastoptchin,  an  impulsive,  sanguine  man,  who  had  always  moved 
in  the  highest  spheres  of  the  administration,  was  a  patriot  in  feeling,  but 
had  not  the  faintest  notion  of  the  character  of  the  people  he  supposed 
himself  to  be  governing.  From  the  time  when  the  enemy  first  entered 
Smolensk,  Rastoptchin  had  in  his  own  imagination  been  playing  the  part 
of  leader  of  popular  feeling — of  the  heart  of  Russia.  He  did  not  merely 
fancy — as  every  governing  official  always  does  fancy — that  he  was  con- 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


835 

trolling  the  external  acts  of  the  inhabitants  of  Moscow,  but  fancied  that 
he  was  shaping  their  mental  attitude  by  means  of  his  appeals  and  placards, 
written  in  that  vulgar,  slangy  jargon  which  the  people  despise  in  their 
own  class,  and  simply  fail  to  understand  when  they  hear  it  from  persons 
of  higher  station.  The  picturesque  figure  of  leader  of  the  popular  feeling 
was  so  much  to  Rastoptchin’s  taste,  and  he  so  lived  in  it,  that  the  neces¬ 
sity  of  abandoning  it,  the  necessity  of  surrendering  Moscow  with  no 
heroic  effect  of  any  kind,  took  him  quite  unawares;  the  very  ground  he 
;was  standing  on  seemed  slipping  from  under  his  feet,  and  he  was  utterly 
at  a  loss  what  to  do.  Though  he  knew  it  was  coming,  he  could  not  till  the 
last  minute  fully  believe  in  the  abandonment  of  Moscow,  and  did  nothing 
towards  it.  The  inhabitants  left  the  city  against  his  wishes.  If  the  courts 
were  removed,  it  was  only  due  to  the  insistence  of  the  officials,  to  which 
Rastoptchin  reluctantly  gave  way.  He  was  himself  entirely  absorbed  by 
the  role  he  had  assumed.  As  is  often  the  case  with  persons  of  heated 
imagination,  he  had  known  for  a  long  while  that  Moscow  would  be  aban¬ 
doned;  but  he  had  known  it  only  with  his  intellect,  and  refused  with  his 
whole  soul  to  believe  in  it,  and  could  not  mentally  adapt  himself  to  the 
new  position  of  affairs. 

The  whole  course  of  his  painstaking  and  vigorous  activity — how  far  it 
was  beneficial  or  had  influence  on  the  people  is  another  question — aimed 
simply  at  awakening  in  the  people  the  feeling  he  was  himself  possessed 
by — hatred  of  the  French  and  confidence  in  himself. 

But  when  the  catastrophe  had  begun  to  take  its  true  historic  propor¬ 
tions;  when  to  express  hatred  of  the  French  in  words  was  plainly  in¬ 
sufficient  ;  when  it  was  impossible  to  express  that  hatred  even  by  a  battle; 
when  self-confidence  was  of  no  avail  in  regard  to  the  one  question  before 
Moscow;  when  the  whole  population,  as  one  man,  abandoning  their 
property,  streamed  out  of  Moscow,  in  this  negative  fashion  giving  proof 
of  the  strength  of  their  patriotism; — then  the  part  Rastoptchin  had 
been  playing  suddenly  became  meaningless.  He  felt  suddenly  deserted, 
weak,  and  absurd,  with  no  ground  to  stand  on. 

On  being  waked  out  of  his  sleep  to  read  Kutuzov’s  cold  and  peremptory 
note,  Rastoptchin  felt  the  more  irritated  the  more  he  felt  himself  to 
blame.  There  was  still  left  in  Moscow  all  that  was  under  his  charge,  all 
the  government  property  which  it  was  his  duty  to  have  removed  to  safety. 
There  was  no  possibility  of  getting  it  all  away.  ‘Who  is  responsible  for 
it?  who  has  let  it  come  to  such  a  pass?’  he  wondered.  ‘Of  course,  it’s  not 
my  doing.  I  had  everything  in  readiness;  I  held  Moscow  in  my  hand — 
like  this!  And  see  what  they  have  brought  things  to!  Scoundrels,  traitors!  ’ 
he  thought,  not  exactly  defining  who  were  these  scoundrels  and  traitors, 
but  feeling  a  necessity  to  hate  these  vaguely  imagined  traitors,  who 
were  to  blame  for  the  false  and  ludicrous  position  in  which  he  found 
himself. 

All  that  night  Rastoptchin  was  giving  instructions,  for  which  people 
were  continually  coming  to  him  from  every  part  of  Moscow.  His  sub¬ 
ordinates  had  never  seen  the  count  so  gloomy  and  irascible. 


836  WARANDPEACE 

‘Your  excellency,  they  have  come  from  the  Estates  Department,  from 
the  director  for  instructions.  .  .  .  From  the  Consistory,  from  the  Senate, 
from  the  university,  from  the  Foundling  Hospital,  the  vicar  has  sent  .  .  . 
he  is  inquiring  .  .  .  what  orders  are  to  be  given  about  the  fire  brigade? 
The  overseer  of  the  prison  .  .  .  the  superintendent  of  the  madhouse  .  . 
all  night  long,  without  pause,  messages  were  being  brought  to  the  count. 

To  all  these  inquiries  he  gave  brief  and  wrathful  replies,  the  drift  of 
which  was  that  his  instructions  were  now  not  needed,  that  all  his  careful 
preparations  had  now  been  ruined  by  somebody,  and  that  that  somebody 
would  have  to  take  all  responsibility  for  anything  that  might  happen  now. 

‘Oh,  tell  that  blockhead,’  he  replied  to  the  inquiry  from  the  Estates 
Department,  ‘to  stay  and  keep  guard  over  his  deeds.  Well,  what  nonsense 
are  you  asking  about  the  fire  brigade?  There  are  horses,  let  them  go  off  to 
Vladimir.  Don’t  leave  them  for  the  French.’ 

‘Your  excellency,  the  superintendent  of  the  madhouse  has  come;  what 
are  your  commands?’ 

‘My  commands?  Let  them  all  go,  that’s  all.  .  .  .  And  let  the  madmen 
out  into  the  town.  When  we  have  madmen  in  command  of  our  armies,  it 
seems  it’s  God’s  will  they  should  be  free.’ 

To  the  inquiry  about  the  convicts  in  the  prison,  the  count  shouted 
angrily  to  the  overseer: 

‘What,  do  you  want  me  to  give  you  two  battalions  for  a  convoy  for 
them,  when  we  haven’t  any  battalions  at  all?  Let  them  all  go,  and  that 
settles  it! ’ 

‘Your  excellency,  there  are  political  prisoners — Myeshkov,  Veresht- 
chagin  .  .  .’ 

‘Vereshtchagin!  He  is  not  yet  hanged?’  cried  Rastoptchin.  ‘Send  him 
to  me.’ 

XXV 

By  nine  o’clock  in  the  morning,  when  the  troops  were  moving  across 
Moscow,  people  had  ceased  coming  to  Rastoptchin  for  instructions.  All 
who  could  get  away  were  going  without  asking  leave;  those  who  stayed 
decided  for  themselves  what  they  had  better  do. 

Count  Rastoptchin  ordered  his  horses  in  order  to  drive  to  Sokolniky, 
and  with  a  yellow  and  frowning  face,  sat  in  silence  with  folded  arms  in 
his  study. 

Every  governing  official  in  quiet,  untroubled  times  feels  that  the  whole 
population  under  his  charge  is  only  kept  going  by  his  efforts;  and  it  is 
this  sense  of  being  indispensably  necessary  in  which  every  governing 
official  finds  the  chief  reward  for  his  toils  and  cares.  It  is  easy  to  under¬ 
stand  that  while  the  ocean  of  history  is  calm,  the  governing  official  hold¬ 
ing  on  from  his  crazy  little  skiff  by  a  pole  to  the  ship  of  the  people,  and 
moving  with  it,  must  fancy  that  it  is  his  efforts  that  move  the  ship  on  to 
which  he  is  clinging.  But  a  storm  has  but  to  arise  to  set  the  sea  heaving  and 
the  ship  tossing  upon  it,  and  such  error  becomes  at  once  impossible.  The 


WAR  AND  PEACE  837 

ship  goes  on  its  vast  course  unchecked,  the  pole  fails  to  reach  the  moving 
vessel,  and  the  pilot,  from  being  the  master,  the  source  of  power,  finds 
himself  a  helpless,  weak,  and  useless  person. 

Rastoptchin  felt  this,  and  it  drove  him  to  frenzy.  The  head  of  the 
police,  who  had  got  away  from  the  crowd,  went  in  to  see  him  at  the  same 
time  as  an  adjutant,  who  came  to  announce  that  his  horses  were  ready. 
Both  were  pale,  and  the  head  of  the  police,  after  reporting  that  he  had 
discharged  the  commission  given  to  him,  informed  Count  Rastoptchin 
that  there  was  an  immense  crowd  of  people  in  his  courtyard  wanting  to 
see  him. 

Without  a  word  in  reply,  Count  Rastoptchin  got  up  and  walked  with 
rapid  steps  to  his  light,  sumptuously  furnished  drawing-room.  He  went 
up  to  the  balcony  door,  took  hold  of  the  door-handle,  let  go  of  it,  and 
moved  away  to  the  window,  from  which  the  whole  crowd  could  be  better 
seen.  The  tall  young  fellow  was  standing  in  the  front,  and  with  a  severe 
face,  waving  his  arms  and  saying  something.  The  blood-bespattered  smith 
stood  beside  him  with  a  gloomy  air.  Through  the  closed  windows  could 
be  heard  the  roar  of  voices. 

‘Is  the  carriage  ready?’  said  Rastoptchin,  moving  back  from  the 
window. 

‘Yes,  your  excellency,’  said  the  adjutant. 

Rastoptchin  went  again  to  the  balcony  doer. 

‘Why,  what  is  it  they  want?’  he  asked  the  head  of  the  police. 

‘Your  excellency,  they  say  they  have  come  together  to  go  to  fight  the 
French,  by  your  orders;  they  were  shouting  something  about  treachery. 
But  it  is  an  angry  crowd,  your  excellency.  I  had  much  ado  to  get  away. 
If  I  may  venture  to  suggest,  your  excellency  .  . 

‘Kindly  leave  me;  I  know  what  to  do  without  your  assistance,’  cried 
Rastoptchin  angrily.  He  stood  at  the  door  of  the  balcony  looking  at  the 
crowd.  ‘This  is  what  they  have  done  with  Russia!  This  is  what  they 
have  done  with  me!’  thought  Rastoptchin,  feeling  a  rush  of  irrepressible 
rage  against  the  undefined  some  one  to  whose  fault  what  was  happening 
could  be  set  down.  As  is  often  the  case  with  excitable  persons,  he  was 
possessed  by  fury,  while  still  seeking  an  object  for  it.  ‘Here  is  the  populace, 
the  dregs  of  the  people,’  he  thought,  looking  at  the  crowd,  ‘that  they  have 
stirred  up  by  their  folly.  They  want  a  victim,’  came  into  his  mind,  as  he 
watched  the  waving  arm  of  the  tall  fellow  in  front.  And  the  thought  struck 
him  precisely  because  he  too  wanted  a  victim,  an  object  for  his  wrath. 

‘Is  the  carriage  ready?’  he  asked  again. 

‘Yes,  your  excellency.  What  orders  in  regard  to  Yereshtchagin?  He  is 
waiting  at  the  steps,’  answered  the  adjutant. 

‘Ah!’  cried  Rastoptchin,  as  though  struck  by  some  sudden  recollection. 

And  rapidly  opening  the  door,  he  walked  resolutely  out  on  the  balcony. 
The  hum  of  talk  instantly  died  down,  caps  and  hats  were  lifted,  and  all 
eyes  were  raised  upon  the  governor. 

‘Good-day,  lads!  ’  said  the  count,  speaking  loudly  and  quickly.  ‘Thanks 
for  coming.  I’ll  come  out  to  you  in  a  moment,  but  we  have  first  to  deal 


838  WARANDPEACE 

with  a  criminal.  We  have  to  punish  the  wretch  by  whose  doing  Moscow 
is  ruined.  Wait  for  me!’  And  as  rapidly  he  returned  to  the  apartment, 
slamming  the  door  violently. 

An  approving  murmur  of  satisfaction  ran  through  the  crowd.  ‘He’ll 
have  all  the  traitors  cut  down,  of  course.  And  you  talk  of  the  French  .  .  . 
he'll  show  us  the  rights  and  the  wrongs  of  it  all!’  said  the  people,  as  it 
were  reproaching  one  another  for  lack  of  faith. 

A  few  minutes  later  an  officer  came  hurriedly  out  of  the  main  entrance, 
and  gave  some  order,  and  the  dragoons  drew  themselves  up  stiffly.  The 
crowd  moved  greedily’  up  from  the  balcony  to  the  front  steps.  Coming 
out  there  with  hasty  and  angry  steps,  Rastoptchin  looked  about  him 
hurriedly,  as  though  seeking  some  one. 

‘Where  is  he?’  he  said,  and  at  the  moment  he  said  it,  he  caught  sight 
of  a  young  man  with  a  long,  thin  neck,  and  half  of  his  head  shaven  and 
covered  with  short  hair,  coming  round  the  corner  of  the  house  between 
two  dragoons.  This  young  man  was  clothed  in  a  fox-lined  blue  cloth  coat, 
that  had  once  been  foppish  but  was  now  shabby,  and  in  filthy  convict’s 
trousers  of  fustian,  thrust  into  uncleaned  and  battered  thin  boots.  His 
uncertain  gait  was  clogged  by  the  heavy  manacles  hanging  about  his  thin, 
weak  legs. 

‘Ah!  ’  said  Rastoptchin,  hurriedly  turning  his  eyes  away  from  the  young 
man  in  the  fox-lined  coat  and  pointing  to  the  bottom  steps.  ‘Put  him  here!’ 

With  a  clank  of  manacles  the  young  man  stepped  with  effort  on  to  the 
step  indicated  to  him;  putting  his  finger  into  the  tight  collar  of  his  coat, 
he  turned  his  long  neck  twice,  and  sighing,  folded  his  thin,  unworkman¬ 
like  hands  before  him  with  a  resigned  gesture. 

For  several  seconds,  while  the  young  man  was  taking  up  his  position 
on  the  step,  there  was  complete  silence.  Only  at  the  back  of  the  mass 
of  people,  all  pressing  in  one  direction,  could  be  heard  sighs  and  groans 
and  sounds  of  pushing  and  the  shuffling  of  feet. 

Rastoptchin,  waiting  for  him  to  be  on  the  spot  he  had  directed,  scowled, 
and  passed  his  hand  over  his  face. 

‘Lads!’  he  said,  with  a  metallic  ring  in  his  voice,  ‘this  man, 
Vereshtchagin,  is  the  wretch  by  whose  doing  Moscow  is  lost.’ 

The  young  man  in  the  fox-lined  coat  stood  in  a  resigned  pose,  clasping 
his  hands  together  in  front  of  his  body,  and  bending  a  little  forward.  His 
wasted  young  face,  with  its  look  of  hopelessness  and  the  hideous  dis¬ 
figurement  of  the  half-shaven  head,  was  turned  downwards.  At  the  count’s 
first  words  he  slowly  lifted  his  head  and  looked  up  from  below  at  the 
count,  as  though  he  wanted  to  say  something  to  him,  or  at  least  to  catch 
his  eye.  But  Rastoptchin  did  not  look  at  him.  The  blue  vein  behind  the 
young  man’s  ear  stood  out  like  a  cord  on  his  long,  thin  neck,  and  all  at 
once  his  face  flushed  crimson. 

All  eyes  were  fixed  upon  him.  He  gazed  at  the  crowd,  and,  as  though 
made  hopeful  by  the  expression  he  read  on  the  faces  there,  he  smiled  a 
timid,  mournful  smile,  and  dropping  his  head  again,  shifted  his  feet  on 
the  step. 


WAR  AND  PEACE  839 

‘He  is  a  traitor  to  his  Tsar  and  his  country;  he  deserted  to  Bonaparte; 
,he  alone  of  all  the  Russians  has  disgraced  the  name  of  Russia,  and 
through  him  Moscow  is  lost,’  said  Rastoptchin  in  a  harsh,  monotonous 
voice;  but  all  at  once  he  glanced  down  rapidly  at  Vereshtchagin,  who 
still  stood  in  the  same  submissive  attitude.  As  though  that  glance  had 
driven  him  to  frenzy,  flinging  up  his  arms,  he  almost  yelled  to  the  crowd: 

‘You  shall  deal  with  him  as  you  think  fit!  I  hand  him  over  to  you!’ 

The  people  were  silent,  and  only  pressed  closer  and  closer  on  one  an¬ 
other.  To  bear  each  other’s  weight,  to  breathe  in  that  tainted  foulness, 
to  be  unable  to  stir,  and  to  be  expecting  something  vague,  uncomprehended 
and  awful,  was  becoming  unbearable.  The  men  in  the  front  of  the  crowd, 
who  saw  and  heard  all  that  was  passing  before  them,  all  stood  with  wide- 
open,  horror-struck  eyes  and  gaping  mouths,  straining  all  their  strength 
to  support  the  pressure  from  behind  on  their  backs. 

‘Beat  him!  .  .  .  Let  the  traitor  perish  and  not  shame  the  name  of 
Russia!’  screamed  Rastoptchin.  ‘Cut  him  down!  I  give  the  command!’ 
Hearing  not  the  words,  but  only  the  wrathful  tones  of  Rastoptchin’s 
voice,  the  mob  moaned  and  heaved  forward,  but  stopped  again. 

‘Count!’  .  .  .  the  timid  and  yet  theatrical  voice  of  Vereshtchagin 
broke  in  upon  the  momentary  stillness  that  followed.  ‘Count,  one  God  is 
above  us  .  .  .’  said  Vereshtchagin,  lifting  his  head,  and  again  the  thick 
vein  swelled  on  his  thin  neck  and  the  colour  swiftly  came  and  faded 
again  from  his  face.  He  did  not  finish  what  he  was  trying  to  say. 

‘Cut  him  down!  I  command  it!  .  .  .’  cried  Rastoptchin,  suddenly 
turning  as  white  as  Vereshtchagin  himself. 

‘Draw  sabres!’  shouted  the  officer  to  the  dragoons,  himself  drawing 
his  sabre. 

Another  still  more  violent  wave  passed  over  the  crowd,  and  reaching 
the  front  rows,  pushed  them  forward,  and  threw  them  staggering  right 
up  to  the  steps.  The  tall  young  man,  with  a  stony  expression  of  face  and 
his  lifted  arm  rigid  in  the  air,  stood  close  beside  Vereshtchagin.  ‘Strike 
at  him!’  the  officer  said  almost  in  a  whisper  to  the  dragoons;  and  one 
of  the  soldiers,  his  face  suddenly  convulsed  by  fury,  struck  Vereshtchagin 
on  the  head  with  the  flat  of  his  sword. 

Vereshtchagin  uttered  a  brief  ‘Ah!’  of  surprise,  looking  about  him  in 
alarm,  as  though  he  did  not  know  what  this  was  done  to  him  for.  A  similar 
moan  of  surprise  and  horror  ran  through  the  crowd. 

‘O  Lord!’  some  one  was  heard  to  utter  mournfully.  After  the  exclama¬ 
tion  of  surprise  that  broke  from  Vereshtchagin  he  uttered  a  piteous  cry 
of  pain,  and  that  cry  was  his  undoing.  The  barrier  of  human  feeling  that 
still  held  the  mob  back  was  strained  to  the  utmost  limit,  and  it  snapped 
instantaneously.  The  crime  had  been  begun,  its  completion  was  inevitable. 
The  piteous  moan  of  reproach  was  drowned  in  the  angry  and  menacing 
roar  of  the  mob.  Like  the  great  seventh  wave  that  shatters  a  ship,  that 
last,  irresistible  wave  surged  up  at  the  back  of  the  crowd,  passed  on  to  the 
foremost  ranks,  carried  them  off  their  feet  and  engulfed  all  together.  The 
draeoon  who  had  struck  the  victim  would  have  repeated  his  blow. 


840  WAR  AND  PEACE 

Vereshtchagin,  with  a  scream  of  terror,  putting  his  hands  up  before  him. 
dashed  into  the  crowd.  The  tall  young  man,  against  whom  he  stumbled 
gripped  Vereshtchagin ’s  slender  neck  in  his  hands,  and  with  a  savage 
shriek  fell  with  him  under  the  feet  of  the  trampling,  roaring  mob.  Some 
beat  and  tore  at  Vereshtchagin,  others  at  the  tall  young  man.  And  the 
screams  of  persons  crushed  in  the  crowd  and  of  those  who  tried  to  rescue 
the  tall  young  man  only  increased  the  frenzy  of  the  mob.  For  a  long  while 
the  dragoons  were  unable  to  get  the  bleeding,  half-murdered  factory  work¬ 
man  away.  And  in  spite  of  all  the  feverish  haste  with  which  the  mob 
strove  to  make  an  end  of  what  had  once  been  begun,  the  men  who  beat 
and  strangled  Vereshtchagin  and  tore  him  to  pieces  could  not  kill  him. 
The  crowd  pressed  on  them  on  all  sides,  heaved  from  side  to  side  like 
one  man  with  them  in  the  middle,  and  would  not  let  them  kill  him  out¬ 
right  or  let  him  go. 

‘Hit  him  with  an  axe,  eh?  .  .  .  they  have  crushed  him  .  .  .  Traitor, 
he  sold  Christ!  .  .  .  living  .  .  .  alive  .  .  .  serve  the  thief  right.  With 
a  bar!  ...  Is  he  alive?  .  .  .’ 

Only  when  the  victim  ceased  to  struggle,  and  his  shrieks  had  passed 
into  a  long-drawn,  rhythmic  death-rattle,  the  mob  began  hurriedly  to 
change  places  about  the  bleeding  corpse  on  the  ground.  Every  one  went 
up  to  it,  gazed  at  what  had  been  done,  and  pressed  back  horror-stricken, 
surprised,  and  reproachful. 

‘O  Lord,  the  people’s  like  a  wild  beast;  how  could  he  be  alive!’  was 
heard  in  the  crowd.  ‘And  a  young  fellow  too  .  .  .  must  have  been  a 
merchant’s  son,  to  be  sure,  the  people  .  .  .  they  do  say  it’s  not  the  right 
man  .  .  .  not  the  right  man!  .  .  .  O  Lord!  .  .  .  They  have  nearly 
murdered  another  man;  they  say  he’s  almost  dead  .  .  .  Ah,  the  peo¬ 
ple  .  .  .  who  wouldn’t  be  afraid  of  sin  .  .  were  saying  now  the  same 
people,  looking  with  rueful  pity  at  the  dead  body,  with  the  blue  face 
fouled  with  dust  and  blood,  and  the  long,  slender,  broken  neck. 

A  punctilious  police  official,  feeling  the  presence  of  the  body  unseemly 
in  the  courtyard  of  his  excellency,  bade  the  dragoons  drag  the  body  away 
into  the  street.  Two  dragoons  took  hold  of  the  mutilated  legs,  and  drew 
the  body  away.  The  dead,  shaven  head,  stained  with  blood  and  grimed 
with  dust,  was  trailed  along  the  ground,  rolling  from  side  to  side  on  the 
long  neck.  The  crowd  shrank  away  from  the  corpse. 

When  Vereshtchagin  fell,  and  the  crowd  with  a  savage  yell  closed  in 
and  heaved  about  him,  Rastoptchin  suddenly  turned  white,  and  instead 
of  going  to  the  back  entrance,  where  horses  were  waiting  for  him,  he 
strode  rapidly  along  the  corridor  leading  to  the  rooms  of  the  lower  story, 
looking  on  the  floor  and  not  knowing  where  or  why  he  was  going.  The 
count’s  face  was  white,  and  he  could  not  check  the  feverish  twitching  of 
his  lower  jaw. 

‘Your  excellency,  this  way  .  .  .  where  are  you  going?  .  .  .  this  way,’ 
said  a  trembling,  frightened  voice  behind  him.  Count  Rastoptchin  was 
incapable  of  making  any  reply.  Obediently  turning,  he  went  in  the  direc¬ 
tion  indicated.  At  the  back  entrance  stood  a  carriage.  The  distant  roar 


WAR  AND  PEACE  841 

>f  the  howling  mob  could  be  heard  even  there.  Count  Rastoptchin  hur- 
[riedly  got  into  the  carriage,  and  bade  them  drive  him  to  his  house  at 
pokolniky  beyond  the  town.  As  he  drove  out  into  Myasnitsky  Street  and 
ost  the  sound  of  the  shouts  of  the  mob,  the  count  began  to  repent.  He 
hought  with  dissatisfaction  now  of  the  excitement  and  terror  he  had 
oetrayed  before  his  subordinates.  ‘The  populace  is  terrible,  it  is  hideous. 
They  are  like  wolves  that  can  only  be  appeased  with  flesh,’  he  thought. 
Count!  there  is  one  God  over  us!’  Vereshtchagin’s  words  suddenly  re¬ 
curred  to  him,  and  a  disagreeable  chill  ran  down  his  back.  But  that 
feeling  was  momentary,  and  Count  Rastoptchin  smiled  contemptuously 
it  himself.  ‘I  had  other  duties.  The  people  had  to  be  appeased.  Many 
pther  victims  have  perished  and  are  perishing  for  the  public  good,’  he 
thought;  and  he  began  to  reflect  on  the  social  duties  he  had  towards  his 
family  and  towards  the  city  intrusted  to  his  care;  and  on  himself — not 
as  Fyodor  Vassilyevitch  Rastoptchin  (he  assumed  that  Fyodor  Vas¬ 
silyevitch  Rastoptchin  was  sacrificing  himself  for  le  bien  publique) — but 
as  governor  of  Moscow,  as  the  representative  of  authority  intrusted  with 
full  powers  by  the  Tsar.  ‘If  I  had  been  simply  Fyodor  Vassilyevitch,  my 
course  of  action  might  have  been  quite  different;  but  I  was  bound  to 
preserve  both  the  life  and  the  dignity  of  the  governor.’ 

Lightly  swayed  on  the  soft  springs  of  the  carriage,  and  hearing  no 
more  of  the  fearful  sounds  of  the  mob,  Rastoptchin  was  physically 
soothed,  and  as  is  always  the  case  simultaneously  with  physical  relief, 
his  intellect  supplied  him  with  grounds  for  moral  comfort.  The  thought 
that  reassured  Rastoptchin  was  not  a  new  one.  Ever  since'  the  world  has 
existed  and  men  have  killed  one  another,  a  man  has  never  committed  such 
a  crime  against  his  fellow  without  consoling  himself  with  the  same  idea. 
That  idea  is  le  bien  publique ,  the  supposed  public  good  of  others. 

To  a  man  not  swayed  by  passion  this  good  never  seems  certain;  but  a 
man  who  has  committed  such  a  crime  always  knows  positively  where  that 
public  good  lies.  And  Rastoptchin  now  knew  this. 

Far  from  reproaching  himself  in  his  meditations  on  the  act  he  had  just 
committed,  he  found  grounds  for  self-complacency  in  having  so  success¬ 
fully  made  use  of  an  occasion  so  a  propos  for  executing  a  criminal,  and 
at  the  same  time  satisfying  the  crowd.  ‘Vereshtchagin  had  been  tried 
and  condemned  to  the  death  penalty,’  Rastoptchin  reflected  (though 
Vereshtchagin  had  only  been  condemned  by  the  senate  to  hard  labour). 
‘He  was  a  spy  and  a  traitor;  I  could  not  let  him  go  unpunished,  and  so 
I  hit  two  birds  with  one  stone.  I  appeased  the  mob  by  giving  them  a 
victim,  and  I  punished  a  miscreant.’ 

Reaching  his  house  in  the  suburbs,  the  count  completely  regained  his 
composure  in  arranging  his  domestic  affairs. 

Within  half  an  hour  the  count  was  driving  with  rapid  horses  across 
the  Sokolniky  plain,  thinking  no  more  now  of  the  past,  but  absorbed  in 
thought  and  plans  for  what  was  to  come,  He  was  approaching  now  the 
Yauzsky  bridge,  where  he  had  been  told  that  Kutuzov  was.  In  his  own 
mind  he  was  preparing  the  biting  and  angry  speeches  he  would  make. 


S42  WARANDPEACE 

upbraiding  Kutuzov  for  his  deception.  He  would  make  that  old  court 
fox  feel  that  the  responsibility  for  all  the  disasters  bound  to  follow  the 
abandonment  of  Moscow,  and  the  ruin  of  Russia  (as  Rastoptchin  con-1 
sidered  it),  lay  upon  his  old,  doting  head.  Going  over  in  anticipation  what 
he  would  say  to  him,  Rastoptchin  wrathfully  turned  from  side  to  side  in 
the  carriage,  and  angrily  looked  about  him. 

The  Sokolniky  plain  was  deserted.  Only  at  one  end  of  it,  by  the  alms¬ 
house  and  lunatic  asylum,  there  were  groups  of  people  in  white  garments,  ! 
and  similar  persons  were  wandering  about  the  plain,  shouting  and 
gesticulating. 

One  of  them  was  running  right  across  in  front  of  Count  Rastoptchin’s  \ 
carriage.  And  Count  Rastoptchin  himself  and  his  coachman,  and  the 
dragoons,  all  gazed  with  a  vague  feeling  of  horror  and  curiosity  at  these 
released  lunatics,  and  especially  at  the  one  who  was  running  towards 
them. 

Tottering  on  his  long,  thin  legs  in  his  fluttering  dressing-gown,  this 
madman  ran  at  headlong  speed,  with  his  eyes  fixed  on  Rastoptchin, 
shouting  something  to  him  in  a  husky  voice,  and  making  signs  to  him  to 
stop.  The  gloomy  and  triumphant  face  of  the  madman  was  thin  and 
yellow,  with  irregular  tufts  of  beard  growing  on  it.  The  black,  agate¬ 
like  pupils  of  his  eyes  moved  restlessly,  showing  the  saffron-yellow  whites 
above.  ‘Stay!  stop,  I  tell  you!’  he  shouted  shrilly,  and  again  breathlessly 
fell  to  shouting  something  with  emphatic  gestures  and  intonations. 

He  reached  the  carriage  and  ran  alongside  it. 

‘Three  times  they  slew  me,  three  times  I  rose  again  from  the  dead. 
They  stoned  me,  they  crucified  me  ...  I  shall  rise  again  ...  I  shall 
rise  again  ...  I  shall  rise  again.  My  body  they  tore  to  pieces.  The 
kingdom  of  heaven  will  be  overthrown  .  .  .  Three  times  I  will  overthrow 
it,  and  three  times  I  will  set  it  up  again,’  he  screamed,  his  voice  growing 
shriller  and  shriller.  Count  Rastoptchin  suddenly  turned  white,  as  he  had 
turned  white  when  the  crowd  fell  upon  Vereshtchagin.  He  turned  away. 
‘G  ...  go  on,  faster!  ’  he  cried  in  a  trembling  voice  to  his  coachman. 

The  carriage  dashed  on  at  the  horses’  topmost  speed.  But  for  a  long 
while  yet  Count  Rastoptchin  heard  behind  him  the  frantic,  desperate 
scream  getting  further  away,  while  before  his  eyes  he  saw  nothing  but 
the  wondering,  frightened,  bleeding  face  of  the  traitor  in  the  fur-lined 
coat.  Fresh  as  that  image  was,  Rastoptchin  felt  now  that  it  was  deeply 
for  ever  imprinted  on  his  heart.  He  felt  clearly  now  that  the  bloody  print 
of  that  memory  would  never  leave  him,  that  the  further  he  went  the 
more  cruelly,  the  more  vindictively,  would  that  fearful  memory  rankle 
in  his  heart  to  the  end  of  his  life.  Fie  seemed  to  be  hearing  now  the  sound 
of  his  own  words:  ‘Tear  him  to  pieces,  you  shall  answer  for  it  to  me! — 
Why  did  I  say  these  words?  I  said  it  somehow  without  meaning  to  .  .  . 

I  might  not  have  said  them,’  he  thought,  ‘and  then  nothing  would  have 
happened.’  He  saw  the  terror-stricken,  and  then  suddenly  frenzied  face  of 
the  dragoon  who  had  struck  the  first  blow,  and  the  glance  of  silent,  timid 
reproach  cast  on  him  by  that  lad  in  the  fox-lined  coat.  ‘But  I  didn’t  do 


WAR  AND  PEACE  843 

it  on  my  own  account.  I  was  bound  to  act  in  that  way.  La  plebe  .  .  .  le 
traitre  .  .  .  le  bien  publique,  .  .  .’  he  mused. 

The  bridge  over  the  Yauza  was  still  crowded  with  troops.  It  was  hot. 
Kutuzov,  looking  careworn  and  weary,  was  sitting  on  a  bench  near  the 
bridge,  and  playing  with  a  whip  on  the  sand,  when  a  carriage  rattled 
noisily  up  to  him.  A  man  in  the  uniform  of  a  general,  wearing  a  hat  with 
plumes,  came  up  to  Kutuzov.  He  began  addressing  him  in  French,  his 
eyes  shifting  uneasily,  with  a  look  between  anger  and  terror  in  them. 
It  was  Count  Rastoptchin.  Fie  told  Kutuzov  that  he  had  come  here,  for 
since  Moscow  was  no  more,  the  army  was  all  that  was  left.  ‘It  might  have 
been  very  different  if  your  highness  had  not  told  me  you  would  not 
abandon  Moscow  without  a  battle;  all  this  would  not  have  been!  ’  said  he. 

Kutuzov  stared  at  Rastoptchin,  and,  as  though  not  understanding 
the  meaning  of  the  words  addressed  to  him,  he  strove  earnestly  to  decipher 
the  special  meaning  betrayed  at  that  minute  on  the  face  of  the  man 
addressing  him.  Rastoptchin  ceased  speaking  in  discomfiture.  Kutuzov 
slightly  shook  his  head,  and,  still  keeping  his  searching  eyes  on  Rastopt- 
chin’s  face,  he  murmured  softly: 

‘Yes,  I  won’t  give  up  Moscow  without  a  battle.’ 

Whether  Kutuzov  was  thinking  of  something  different  when  he  ut¬ 
tered  those  words,  or  said  them  purposely,  knowing  them  to  be  meaning¬ 
less,  Count  Rastoptchin  made  him  no  reply,  and  hastily  left  him.  And — 
stfange  to  tell!  the  governor  of  Moscow,  the  proud  Count  Rastoptchin, 
picking  up  a  horse  whip,  went  to  the  bridge,  and  fell  to  shouting  and 
driving  on  the  crowded  carts. 


XXVI 

At  four  o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  Murat’s  troops  entered  Moscow.  In 
front  rode  a  detachment  of  Wiirtemberg  hussars,  behind,  with  an  im¬ 
mense  suite,  rode  the  King  of  Naples  himself. 

Near  the  middle  of  Arbaty,  close  to  Nikola  Yavlenny,  Murat  halted 
to  await  information  from  the  detachment  in  advance  as  to  the  condition 
in  which  the  citadel  of  the  city,  ‘le  Kremlin,’  had  been  found. 

A  small  group  of  inhabitants  of  Moscow  had  gathered  about  Murat. 
All  stared  with  timid  astonishment  at  the  strange  figure  of  the  long¬ 
haired  commander,  decked  in  gold  and  feathers. 

‘Why,  is  this  their  Tsar  himself?  Nought  amiss  with  him,’  voices  were 
heard  saying  softly. 

An  interpreter  approached  the  group  of  gazers. 

‘Caps  .  .  .  caps  off,’  they  muttered,  turning  to  each  other  in  the  little 
:rowd.  The  interpreter  accosted  one  old  porter,  and  asked  him  if  it  were 
tar  to  the  Kremlin.  The  porter,  listening  with  surprise  to  the  unfamiliar 
Polish  accent,  and  not  recognising  the  interpreter’s  words  for  Russian, 
lad  no  notion  what  was  being  said  to  hirn,  and  took  refuge  behind 
he  others. 


844  WARANDPEACE 

Murat  approached  the  interpreter,  and  told  him  to  ask  where  were  the 
Russian  troops.  One  of  the  Russians  understood  this  question,  and 
several  voices  began  answering  the  interpreter  simultaneously.  A  French 
officer  from  the  detachment  in  advance  rode  up  to  Murat  and  reported 
that  the  gates  into  the  citadel  were  blocked  up,  and  that  probably  there 
was  an  ambush  there. 

‘Good,’  said  Murat,  and  turning  to  one  of  the  gentlemen  of  his  suite, 
he  commanded  four  light  cannons  to  be  moved  forward,  and  the  gates 
to  be  shelled  upon. 

The  artillery  came  trotting  out  from  the  column  following  Murat,  and 
advanced  along  Arbaty.  When  they  reached  the  end  of  Vosdvizhenka  the 
artillery  halted  and  drew  up  in  the  square.  Several  French  officers  super¬ 
intended  the  placing  of  the  cannon  some  distance  apart,  and  looked  at 
the  Kremlin  through  a  field-glass.  A  bell  was  ringing  in  the  Kremlin  for 
evening  service,  and  that  sound  troubled  the  French.  They  supposed 
that  it  was  the  call  to  arms.  Several  infantry  soldiers  ran  to  the  Kutaf- 
yev  gateway.  A  barricade  of  beams  and  planks  lay  across  the  gateway. 
Two  musket  shots  rang  out  from  the  gates,  just  as  an  officer  with  some 
men  were  running  up  to  them.  The  general  standing  by  the  cannons 
shouted  some  words  of  command  to  the  officer,  and  the  officer  and  the 
soldiers  ran  back. 

Three  more  shots  were  heard  from  the  gate.  One  shot  grazed  the  leg 
of  a  French  soldier,  and  a  strange  shout  of  several  voices  rose  from  be¬ 
hind  the  barricade.  Instantaneously,  as  though  at  the  word  of  command, 
the  expression  of  good  humour  and  serenity  on  the  faces  of  the  French 
general,  officers,  and  men  was  replaced  by  a  stubborn,  concentrated 
expression  of  readiness  for  conflict  and  suffering.  To  all  of  them,  from  the 
marshal  to  the  lowest  soldier,  this  place  was  not  Vosdvizhenka,  Mohova, 
Kutaf,  and  the  Troitsky  gates;  it  was  a  new  battlefield,  likely  to  be  the 
scene  of  a  bloody  conflict.  And  all  were  ready  for  that  conflict.  The 
shouts  from  the  gates  died  away.  The  cannons  were  moved  forward.  The 
artillerymen  quenched  the  burning  linstocks.  An  officer  shouted  ‘Fire!’ 
and  two  whistling  sounds  of  clinking  tin  rang  out  one  after  another.  The 
grapeshot  fell  rattling  on  the  stone  of  the  gateway,  on  the  beams  and 
screens  of  planks,  and  two  clouds  of  smoke  rolled  over  the  square. 

Some  instants  after  the  echoes  of  the  shots  had  died  away  over  the 
stone  Kremlin,  a  strange  sound  was  heard  over  the  heads  of  the  French. 
An  immense  flock  of  jackdaws  rose  above  the  walls  and  swept  round  in 
the  air  with  loud  caws,  and  the  whir  of  thousands  of  wings.  Together 
with  this  sound,  there  rose  a  solitary  human  cry  at  the  gate,  and  the  figure 
of  a  man  bareheaded,  in  a  long  peasant’s  coat,  came  into  sight  through 
the  smoke.  Holding  a  gun  up,  he  took  aim  at  the  French.  ‘Fire!  ’  repeated 
the  artillery  officer,  and  at  the  same  instant  one  rifle  shot  and  two  cannon 
shots  were  heard.  The  gate  was  again  hidden  in  smoke. 

Nothing  more  stirred  behind  the  barricade,  and  the  French  infantry 
soldiers  with  their  officers  passed  in  at  the  gate.  In  the  gateway  lay  three 


WARANDPEACE  845 

Tien  wounded  and  four  dead.  Two  men  in  long  peasant-coats  had  run 
iway  along  the  walls  toward  Znamenka. 

‘Clear  this  away,’  said  the  officer,  pointing  to  the  beams  and  the 
corpses;  and  the  French  soldiers  finished  off  the  wounded,  and  flung  the 
corpses  over  the  fence  below.  Who  these  men  were  nobody  knew.  ‘Clear 
this  away!  ’  was  all  that  was  said  of  them,  and  they  were  flung  away  that 
they  might  not  stink.  Thiers  has  indeed  devoted  some  eloquent  lines  to 
their  memories.  ‘These  wretches  had  invaded  the  sacred  citadel,  had  taken 
possession  of  the  guns  of  the  arsenal,  and  fired  (the  wretches)  on  the 
French.  Some  of  them  were  sabred,  and  the  Kremlin  was  purged  of 
their  presence.’ 

Murat  was  informed  that  the  way  had  been  cleared.  The  French  en¬ 
tered  the  gates,  and  began  pitching  their  camp  on  Senate-house  Square. 
The  soldiers  flung  the  chairs  out  of  the  windows  of  the  Senate-house  into 
the  square,  and  began  making  fires. 

Other  detachments  marched  across  the  Kremlin  and  encamped  in 
Moroseyka,  Lubyanka,  and  Pokrovka.  Others  pitched  their  camps  in 
Vosdvizhenka,  Znamenka,  Nikolskaya,  and  Tverskaya.  Not  finding  citi¬ 
zens  to  entertain  them,  the  French  everywhere  bivouacked  as  in  a  camp 
pitched  in  a  town,  instead  of  quartering  themselves  on  the  houses. 

Tattered,  hungry,  and  exhausted,  as  they  were,  and  dwindled  to  one- 
third  their  original  numbers,  the  French  soldiers  yet  entered  Moscow  in 
good  discipline.  It  was  a  harassed  and  exhausted,  yet  still  active  and 
menacing  army.  But  it  was  an  army  only  up  to  the  moment  when  the 
Soldiers  of  the  army  dispersed  all  over  the  town.  As  soon  as  the  soldiers 
began  to  disperse  about  the  wealthy,  deserted  houses,  the  army  was  lost 
for  ever,  and  in  its  place  was  a  multitude  of  men,  neither  citizens  nor 
soldiers,  but  something  nondescript  between,  known  as  marauders.  When 
five  weeks  later  these  same  men  set  out  from  Moscow,  they  no  longer 
made  up  an  army.  They  were  a  mob  of  marauders,  each  of  whom  carried 
or  dragged  along  with  him  a  mass  of  objects  he  regarded  as  precious  and 
useful.  The  aim  of  each  of  these  men  on  leaving  Moscow  was  not,  as  it 
had  been,  to  fight  as  a  soldier,  but  simply  to  keep  the  booty  he  had  ob¬ 
tained.  Like  the  ape,  who  slipping  his  hand  into  the  narrow  neck  of  a 
pitcher,  and  snatching  up  a  handful  of  nuts  inside  it,  will  not  open  his 
fist  for  fear  of  losing  his  prize,  even  to  his  own  ruin,  the  French  on 
leaving  Moscow  were  inevitably  bound  to  come  to  ruin,  because  they 
dragged  their  plunder  along  with  them,  and  it  seemed  as  impossible  to 
them  to  fling  away  their  booty  as  it  seems  to  the  ape  to  let  go  of  the 
nuts.  Ten  minutes  after  the  several  French  regiments  had  dispersed  about 
the  various  quarters  of  Moscow,  not  a  soldier  nor  an  officer  was  left  among 
them.  At  the  windows  of  the  houses  men  .could  be  seen  in  military  coats 
and  Hessian  boots,  laughing  and  strolling  through  the  rooms.  In  the 
(cellars,  in  the  storerooms  similar  men  were  busily  looking  after  the 
provisions;  in  the  courtyards  they  were  unlocking  or  breaking  open  the 
doors  of  sheds  and  stables;  in  the  kitchens  they  were  making  up  fires, 
and  with  bare  arms  mixing,  kneading,  and  baking,  and  frightening,  or 


846  VV  A  R  A  N  D  P  E  A  C  E 

trying  to  coax  and  amuse,  women  and  children.  Men  there  were  in  plenty 
everywhere,  in  all  the  shops  and  houses;  but  the  army  was  no  more.' 

That  day  one  order  after  another  was  issued  by  the  French  command¬ 
ers  forbidding  the  troops  to  disperse  about  the  town,  sternly  forbidding; 
violence  to  the  inhabitants,  and  pillaging,  and  proclaiming  that  a  general 
roll-call  was  to  take  place  that  evening.  But  in  spite  of  all  such  measures! 
the  men,  who  had  made  up  an  army,  flowed  about  the  wealthy,  deserted 
city,  so  richly  provided  with  luxuries  and  comforts.  Like  a  starved  herd, 
that  keeps  together  crossing  a  barren  plain,  but  at  once  on  reaching  rich 
pastures  inevitably  strays  apart  and  scatters  over  them,  the  army  was 
irresistibly  lured  into  scattering  over  the  wealthy  town. 

Moscow  was  without  its  inhabitants,  and  the  soldiers  were  sucked  up 
in  her,  like  water  into  sand,  as  they  flowed  away  irresistibly  in  all  direc¬ 
tions  from  the  Kremlin,  which  they  had  entered  first.  Cavalry  soldiers, 
who  had  entered  a  merchant’s  house  abandoned  with  all  its  belongings,', 
and  finding  stabling  for  their  horses  and  to  spare,  yet  went  on  to  take  I 
the  house  next  door,  which  seemed  to  them  better.  Many  took  several 
houses,  chalking  their  names  on  them,  and  quarrelled  and  even  fought 
with  other  companies  for  their  possession.  Soldiers  had  no  sooner  sue-  i 
ceeded  in  securing  quarters  than  they  ran  along  the  street  to  look  at  the 
town,  and  on  hearing  that  everything  had  been  abandoned,  hurried  off 
where  objects  of  value  could  be  carried  off  for  nothing.  The  officers  fol¬ 
lowed  to  check  the  soldiers,  and  were  involuntarily  lured  into  doing  the 
same.  In  Carriage  Row  shops  had  been  abandoned  stocked  with  carriages,, 
and  the  generals  flocked  thither  to  choose  coaches  and  carriages  for 
themselves.  The  few  inhabitants  who  had  stayed  on  invited  the  officers 
into  their  houses,  hoping  thereby  to  secure  themselves  against  being 
robbed.  Wealth  there  was  in  abundance:  there  seemed  no  end  to  it. 
Everywhere  all  round  the  parts  occupied  by  the  French  there  were  unex¬ 
plored  regions  unoccupied  beyond,  in  which  the  French  fancied  there 
were  even  more  riches  to  be  found.  And  Moscow  absorbed  them  further 
and  further  into  herself.  Just  as  when  water  flows  over  dry  land,  water 
and  dry  land  alike  disappear  and  are  lost  in  mud,  so  when  the  hungry 
army  entered  the  wealthy,  deserted  city,  the  army  and  the  wealth  of  the 
city  both  perished;  and  fires  and  marauding  bands  sprang  up  where 
they  had  been. 

The  French  ascribed  the  burning  of  Moscow  au  patriotisme  jeroce  de 
Rastoptchine ;  the  Russians  to  the  savagery  of  the  French.  In  reality, 
explanations  of  the  fire  of  Moscow,  in  the  sense  of  the  conflagration 
being  brought  home  to  the  door  of  any  one  person  or  group  of  persons, 
there  have  never  been,  and  never  could  be.  Moscow  was  burned  because 
she  was  placed  in  conditions  in  which  any  town  built  of  wood  was  bound 
to  be  burned,  quite  apart  from  the  question  whether  there  were  or  were 
not  one  hundred  and  thirty  inefficient  fire-engines  in  the  town.  Moscow 
was  sure  to  be  burned,  because  her  inhabitants  had  gone  away,  as  in¬ 
evitably  as  a  heap  of  straw  is  sure  to  be  burned  where  sparks  are  scat- 


WARANDPEACE  847 

;ered  on  it  for  several  days  in  succession.  A  town  of  wooden  houses,  in 
which  when  the  police  and  the  inhabitants  owning  the  houses  are  in 
>ossession  of  it,  fires  are  of  daily  occurrence,  cannot  escape  being  burned 
vhen  its  inhabitants  are  gone  and  it  is  filled  with  soldiers  smoking  pipes, 
naking  fires  in  Senate-house  Square  of  the  Senate-house  chairs,  and 
:ooking  themselves  meals  twice  a  day.  In  times  of  peace,  whenever  troops 
ire  quartered  on  villages  in  any  district,  the  number  of  fires  in  the  dis- 
rict  at  once  increases.  How  greatly  must  the  likelihood  of  fires  be  in¬ 
creased  in  an  abandoned  town,  built  of  wood,  and  occupied  by  foreign 
•oldiers !  Le  patriotisme  jeroce  de  Rastopt chine  and  the  savagery  of  the 
French  do  not  come  into  the  question.  Moscow  was  burned  through  the 
>ipes,  the  kitchen  stoves,  and  camp-fires,  through  the  recklessness  of  the 
■nemy’s  soldiers,  who  lived  in  the  houses  without  the  care  of  house¬ 
holders.  Even  if  there  were  cases  of  incendiarism  (which  is  very  doubtful, 
because  no  one  had  any  reason  for  incendiarism,  and  in  any  case  such  a 
rime  is  a  troublesome  and  dangerous  one),  there  is  no  need  to  accept 
ncendiarism  as  the  cause,  for  the  conflagration  would  have  been  inevi- 
able  anyway  without  it. 

Soothing  as  it  was  to  the  vanity  of  the  French  to  throw  the  blame  on  the 
erocity  of  Rastoptchin,  and  to  that  of  the  Russians  to  throw  the  blame 
in  the  miscreant  Bonaparte,  or  later  on  to  place  the  heroic  torch  in  the 
land  of  its  patriot  peasantry,  we  cannot  disguise  from  ourselves  that  there 
;ould  be  no  such  direct  cause  of  the  fire,  since  Moscow  was  as  certain  to 
>e  burned  as  any  village,  factory,  or  house  forsaken  by  its  owners,  and 
ised  as  a  temporary  shelter  and  cooking-place  by  strangers.  Moscow 
ras  burned  by  her  inhabitants,  it  is  true;  but  not  by  the  inhabitants  who 
lad  lingered  on,  but  by  the  inhabitants  who  had  abandoned  her.  Moscow 
lid  not,  like  Berlin,  Vienna,  and  other  towns,  escape  harm  while  in  the 
iccupation  of  the  enemy,  simply  because  her  inhabitants  did  not  receive 
he  French  with  the  keys,  and  the  bread  and  salt  of  welcome,  but  aban- 
loned  her. 

XXVII 

'he  process  of  the  absorption  of  the  French  into  Moscow  in  a  widening 
ircle  in  all  directions  did  not,  till  the  evening  of  the  2nd  of  September, 
each  the  quarter  of  the  town  in  which  Pierre  was  staying. 

After  the  two  last  days  spent  in  solitude  and  exceptional  conditions, 
’ierre  was  in  a  condition  approaching  madness.  One  haunting  idea  had 
omplete  possession  of  him.  He  could  not  have  told  how  or  when  it  had 
ome  to  him,  but  that  idea  had  now  such  complete  possession  of  him  that 
e  remembered  nothing  in  the  past,  and  understood  nothing  in  the 
resent;  and  everything  he  saw  and  heard  seemed  passing  in  a  dream. 

Pierre  had  left  his  own  house  simply  to  escape  from  the  complicated 
ingle  woven  about  him  by  the  demands  of  daily  life,  which  in  his  con- 
ition  at  that  time  he  was  incapable  of  unravelling.  He  had  gone  to  Osip 
•lexyevitch’s  house  on  the  pretext  of  sorting  out  the  books  and  papers 


S4S  WARANDPEACE 

of  the  deceased.  Simply  he  was  in  search  of  a  quiet  home  of  rest  from  th 
storm  of  life,  and  his  memories  of  Osip  Alexyevitch  were  connected  in  hi 
soul  with  a  whole  world  of  calm,  solemn,  and  eternal  ideals,  in  every  wa- 
the  reverse  of  the  tangled  whirl  of  agitation  into  which  he  felt  himsel 
being  drawn.  He  was  in  search  of  a  quiet  refuge,  and  he  certainly  fount 
it  in  Osip  Alexyevitch’s  study.  When,  in  the  deathlike  stillness  of  th 
study,  he  sat  with  his  elbows  on  the  dusty  writing-table  of  his  deceasei 
friend,  there  passed  in  calm  and  significant  succession  before  his  menta 
vision  the  impressions  of  the  last  few  days,  especially  of  the  battle  o, 
Borodino,  and  of  that  overwhelming  sense  of  his  own  pettiness  and  falsit; 
in  comparison  with  the  truth  and  simplicity  and  force  of  that  class  o 
men,  who  were  mentally  referred  to  by  him  as  ‘they.’  When  Gerasin 
roused  him  from  his  reverie,  the  idea  occurred  to  Pierre  that  he  wouL 
take  part  in  the  defence  of  Moscow  by  the  people,  which  was,  he  knew 
expected.  And  with  that  object  he  had  asked  Gerasim  to  get  him  ; 
peasant’s  coat  and  a  pistol,  and  had  told  him  that  he  intended  to  concea 
his  name,  and  to  remain  in  Osip  Alexyevitch’s  house.  Then  during  th 
first  day  of  solitude  and  idleness  (Pierre  tried  several  times  in  vain  to  fi 
his  attention  on  the  masonic  manuscripts)  there  rose  several  time 
vaguely  to  his  mind  the  idea  that  had  occurred  to  him  in  the  past  of  th 
cabalistic  significance  of  his  name  in  connection  with  the  name  of  Bona 
parte.  But  the  idea  that  he,  I’Russe  Besuhov,  was  destined  to  put  an  en< 
to  the  power  of  the  Beast,  had  as  yet  only  come  to  him  as  one  of  thos 
dreams  that  flit  idly  through  the  brain,  leaving  no  trace  behind.  Wheil 
after  buying  the  peasant’s  coat,  simply  with  the  object  of  taking  part  ii! 
the  defence  of  Moscow  by  the  people,  Pierre  had  met  the  Rostovs,  am 
Natasha  said  to  him,  ‘You  are  staying?  Ah,  how  splendid  that  is!’  th 
idea  had  flashed  into  his  mind  that  it  really  might  be  splendid,  even  ij 
they  did  take  Moscow,  for  him  to  remain,  and  to  do  what  had  been  fore 
told  for  him  to  do. 

Next  day  with  the  simple  aim  of  not  sparing  himself  and  not  doing  les 
than  they  would  do,  he  had  gone  out  to  the  Three  Hills  barrier.  But  whe 
he  came  back,  convinced  that  Moscow  would  not  be  defended,  he  sud 
denly  felt  that  what  had  only  occurred  to  him  before  as  a  possibility,  ha> 
now  become  something  necessary  and  inevitable.  He  must  remain  i 
Moscow,  concealing  his  name,  must  meet  Napoleon,  and  kill  him,  so  a 
either  to  perish  or  to  put  an  end  to  the  misery  of  all  Europe,  which  was  i 
Pierre’s  opinion  entirely  due  to  Napoleon  alone. 

Pierre  knew  all  the  details  of  the  German  student’s  attempt  on  Na 
poleon’s  life  at  Vienna  in  1809,  and  knew  that  that  student  had  been  sho 
And  the  danger  to  which  he  would  be  exposing  his  own  life  in  carryin 
out  his  design  excited  him  even  more  violently. 

Two  equally  powerful  feelings  drew  Pierre  irresistibly  to  his  desigi 
The  first  was  the  craving  for  sacrifice  and  suffering  through  the  sense  c 
the  common  calamity,  the  feeling  that  had  impelled  him  to  go  to  Mot 
haisk  on  the  25th,  and  to  place  himself  in  the  very  thick  of  the  battlb 
and  now  to  run  away  from  his  own  house,  to  give  up  his  accustome 


WARANDPEACE  84a 

uxury  and  comfort,  to  sleep  without  undressing  on  a  hard  sofa,  and  to 
;at  the  same  food  as  Gerasim.  The  other  was  that  vague  and  exclusively 
Russian  feeling  of  contempt  for  everything  conventional,  artificial, 
luman,  for  everything  that  is  regarded  by  the  majority  of  men  as  the 
ugliest  good  in  the  world.  Pierre  had  for  the  first  time  experienced  that 
strange  and  fascinating  feeling  in  the  Slobodsky  palace,  when  he  suddenly 
elt  that  wealth  and  power  and  life,  all  that  men  build  up  and  guard  with 
such  effort,  is  only  worth  anything  through  the  joy  with  which  it  can  all 
ie  cast  away. 

It  was  the  same  feeling  that  impels  the  volunteer-recruit  to  drink  up 
lis  last  farthing,  the  drunken  man  to  smash  looking-glasses  and  window- 
janes  for  no  apparent  cause,  though  he  knows  it  will  cost  him  his  little 
ill;  the  feeling  through  which  a  man  in  doing  things,  vulgarly  speaking, 
senseless,  as  it  w’ere,  proves  his  personal  force  and  power,  by  manifesting 
he  presence  of  a  higher  standard  of  judging  life,  outside  mere  human 
imitations. 

Ever  since  the  day  when  Pierre  first  experienced  this  feeling  in  the 
ilobodsky  palace,  he  had  been  continually  under  the  influence  of  it,  but 
t  was  only  now  that  it  found  full  satisfaction.  Moreover  at  the  present 
moment  Pierre  was  supported  in  his  design,  and  prevented  from  abanaon- 
ng  it,  by  the  steps  he  had  already  taken  in  that  direction.  His  flight  from 
ms  own  house,  and  his  disguise,  and  his  pistol,  and  his  statement  to  the 
Rostovs  that  he  should  remain  in  Moscow, — all  would  have  been  devoid 
if  meaning,  would  have  been  indeed  absurd  and  laughable  (a  point  to 
•vhich  Pierre  was  sensitive)  if  after  all  that  he  had  simply  gone  out  of 
vloscow  like  other  people. 

Pierre’s  physical  state,  as  is  always  the  case,  corresponded  with  his 
noral  condition. The  coarse  faretowhichhewas  unused, the vodkahedrank 
luring  those  days,  the  lack  of  wine  and  cigars,  his  dirty,  unchanged  linen, 
nd  two  half-sleepless  nights,  spent  on  a  short  sofa  without  bedding,  all  re- 
luced  Pierre  to  a  state  of  nervous  irritability  bordering  on  madness. 

It  was  two  o’clock  in  the  afternoon.  The  French  had  already  entered 
doscow.  Pierre  knew  this,  but  instead  of  acting,  he  only  brooded  over  his 
nterprise,  going  over  all  the  minutest  details  of  it.  In  his  dreams  Pierre 
lever  clearly  pictured  the  very  act  of  striking  the  blow,  nor  the  death  of 
Napoleon,  but  with  extraordinary  vividness  and  mournful  enjoyment 
iwelt  on  his  own  end  and  his  heroic  fortitude. 

‘Yes,  one  man  for  all,  I  must  act  or  perish!’  he  thought.  ‘Yes,  I  will 
pproach  .  .  .  and  then  all  at  once  .  .  .  with  a  pistol  or  a  dagger!’ 
hought  Pierre.  ‘But  that  doesn’t  matter.  It’s  not  I  but  the  Hand  of 
’rovidence  punishes  you.  ...  I  shall  say’  (Pierre  pondered  over  the 
iVords  he  would  utter  as  he  killed  Napoleon).  ‘Well,  take  me,  execute 
,ne!’  Pierre  would  murmur  to  himself,  bowing  his  head  with  a  sad  but 
irm  expression  on  his  face. 

While  Pierre  was  standing  in  the  middle  of  the  room,  musing  in  this 
ashion,  the  door  of  the  study  opened,  and  Makar  Alexyevitch — always 
litherto  so  timid — appeared  in  the  doorway,  completely  transformed. 


Ssc  WAR  AND  PEACE 

Iiis  dressing-gown  was  hanging  open.  His  face  was  red  and  distorted  \ 
He  was  unmistakably  drunk.  On  seeing  Pierre  he  was  for  the  first  minute 
disconcerted,  but  observing  discomfiture  in  Pierre’s  face  too,  he  was  at 
once  emboldened  by  it ;  and  with  his  thin,  tottering  legs  walked  into  the 
middle  of  the  room. 

‘They  have  grown  fearful,’  he  said,  in  a  husky  and  confidential  voice, 
‘I  say:  I  will  not  surrender,  I  say  ...  eh,  sir?’  He  paused  and  suddenly 
catching  sight  of  the  pistol  on  the  table,  snatched  it  with  surprising 
rapidity  and  ran  out  into  the  corridor. 

Gerasim  and  the  porter,  who  had  followed  Makar  Alexyevitch,  stopped 
him  in  the  vestibule,  and  tried  to  get  the  pistol  away  from  him.  Pierre 
coming  out  of  the  study  looked  with  repugnance  and  compassion  at  the 
half-insane  old  man.  Makar  Alexyevitch,  frowning  with  effort,  succeeded 
in  keeping  the  pistol,  and  was  shouting  in  a  husky  voice,  evidently 
imagining  some  heroic  scene. 

‘To  arms!  Board  them!  You  shan’t  get  it!’  he  was  shouting. 

‘Give  over,  please,  give  over.  Do  me  the  favour,  sir,  please  be  quiet, 
There  now,  if  you  please,  sir,  .  .  .’  Gerasim  was  saying,  cautiously 
trying  to  steer  Makar  Alexyevitch  by  his  elbows  towards  the  door. 

‘Who  are  you?  Bonaparte!  .  .  .’  yelled  Makar  Alexyevitch. 

‘That’s  not  the  thing,  sir.  You  come  into  your  room  and  rest  a  little, 
Let  me  have  the  pistol  now.’ 

‘Away,  base  slave!  Don’t  touch  me!  Do  you  see?’  screamed  Makai 
Alexyevitch,  brandishing  the  pistol.  ‘Run  them  down!’ 

‘Take  hold!’  Gerasim  whispered  to  the  porter. 

They  seized  Makar  Alexyevitch  by  the  arms  and  dragged  him  towards 
the  door. 

The  vestibule  was  filled  with  the  unseemly  sounds  of  scuffling  and 
drunken,  husky  gasping. 

Suddenly  a  new  sound,  a  shrill,  feminine  shriek,  was  heard  from  the 
porch,  and  the  cook  ran  into  the  vestibule. 

‘They!  Merciful  heavens!  .  .  .  My  goodness,  here  they  are!  Four  of 
them,  horsemen! ’  she  screamed. 

Gerasim  and  the  porter  let  Makar  Alexyevitch  go,  and  in  the  hush  that 
followed  in  the  corridor  they  could  distinctly  hear  several  hands  knock¬ 
ing  at  the  front  door. 


XXVIII 

Having  inwardly  resolved  that  until  the  execution  of  his  design,  he  ought 
to  disguise  his  station  and  his  knowledge  of  French,  Pierre  stood  at  the 
half-open  door  into  the  corridor,  intending  to  conceal  himself  at  once  as 
soon  as  the  French  entered.  But  the  French  entered,  and  Pierre  did  not 
leave  the  door;  an  irresistible  curiosity  kept  him  there. 

There  were  two  of  them.  One — an  officer,  a  tall,  handsome  man  of 
gallant  bearing;  the  other,  obviously  a  soldier  or  officer’s  servant,  a  squat, 
thin,  sunburnt  man,  with  hollow  cheeks  and  a  dull  expression.  The  officer 


WAR  AND  PEACE  851 

walked  first,  limping  and  leaning  on  a  stick.  After  advancing  a  few  steps, 
the  officer,  apparently  making  up  his  mind  that  these  would  be  good 
quarters,  stopped,  turned  round  and  shouted  in  a  loud,  peremptory  voice 
to  the  soldiers  standing  in  the  doorway  to  put  up  the  horses.  Having  done 
this  the  officer,  with  a  jaunty  gesture,  crooking  his  elbow  high  in  the  air, 
stroked  his  moustaches  and  put  his  hand  to  his  hat. 

‘Bonjour,  la  compagnie!’  he  said  gaily,  smiling  and  looking  about  him. 

No  one  made  any  reply. 

‘Vous  etes  le  bourgeois ?’  the  officer  asked,  addressing  Gerasim. 

|  Gerasim  looked  back  with  scared  inquiry  at  the  officer. 

‘Quartire,  quartire,  logement /  said  the  officer,  looking  down  with  a 
condescending  and  good-humoured  smile  at  the  little  man.  ‘The  French 
are  good  lads.  Don’t  let  us  be  cross,  old  fellow/  he  went  on  in  French, 
flapping  the  scared  and  mute  Gerasim  on  the  shoulder.  ‘I  say,  does  no 
one  speak  French  in  this  establishment?’  he  added,  looking  round  and 
meeting  Pierre’s  eyes.  Pierre  withdrew  from  the  door. 

The  officer  turned  again  to  Gerasim.  He  asked  him  to  show  him  over 
the  house. 

‘Master  not  here — no  understand  ...  me  you  .  .  .’  said  Gerasim, 
trying  to  make  his  words  more  comprehensible  by  saying  them  in  reverse 
order. 

The  French  officer,  smiling,  waved  his  hands  in  front  of  Gerasim’s 
nose,  to  give  him  to  understand  that  he  too  failed  to  understand  him,  and 
walked  with  a  limp  towards  the  door  where  Pierre  was  standing.  Pierre 
was  about  to  retreat  to  conceal  himself  from  him,  but  at  that  very  second 
he  caught  sight  of  Makar  Alexyevitch  peeping  out  of  the  open  kitchen 
door  with  a  pistol  in  his  hand.  With  a  madman’s  cunning,  Makar  Alexye¬ 
vitch  eyed  the  Frenchmen,  and  lifting  the  pistol,  took  aim.  ‘Run  them 
down!!!’  yelled  the  drunkard,  pressing  the  trigger.  The  French  officer 
turned  round  at  the  scream,  and  at  the  same  instant  Pierre  dashed  at  the 
drunken  man.  Just  as  Pierre  snatched  at  the  pistol  and  jerked  it  up, 
Makar  Alexyevitch  succeeded  at  last  in  pressing  the  trigger,  and  a  deaf¬ 
ening  shot  rang  out,  wrapping  every  one  in  a  cloud  of  smoke.  The  French¬ 
man  turned  pale  and  rushed  back  to  the  door. 

Forgetting  his  intention  of  concealing  his  knowledge  of  French,  Pierre- 
pulled  away  the  pistol,  and  throwing  it  on  the  ground,  ran  to  the  officer 
and  addressed  him  in  French.  ‘You  are  not  wounded?’  he  said. 

‘I  think  not/  answered  the  officer,  feeling  himself;  ‘but  I  have  had  a 
narrow  escape  this  time/  he  added,  pointing  to  the  broken  plaster  in  tha 
wall. 

|  ‘Who  is  this  man?’  he  asked,  looking  sternly  at  Pierre. 

‘Oh,  I  am  really  in  despair  at  what  has  happened/  said  Pierre  quickly, 
quite  forgetting  his  part.  ‘It  is  a  madman,  an  unhappy  creature,  who  did 
not  know  what  he  was  doing.’ 

The  officer  went  up  to  Makar  Alexyevitch  and  took  him  by  the  collar. 

Makar  Alexyevitch  pouting  out  his  lips,  nodded,  as  he  leaned  against 
the  wall,  as  though  dropping  asleep. 


852  WARANDPEACE 

‘Brigand,  you  shall  pay  for  it,’  said  the  Frenchman,  letting  go  of  him 
‘We  are  clement  after  victory,  but  we  do  not  pardon  traitors,’  he  added 
with  gloomy  dignity  in  his  face,  and  a  fine,  vigorous  gesture. 

Pierre  tried  in  French  to  persuade  the  officer  not  to  be  severe  with  this 
drunken  imbecile.  The  Frenchman  listened  in  silence,  with  the  same 
gloomy  air,  and  then  suddenly  turned  with  a  smile  to  Pierre.  For  several 
seconds  he  gazed  at  him  mutely.  His  handsome  face  assumed  an  expres¬ 
sion  of  melodramatic  feeling,  and  he  held  out  his  hand. 

‘You  have  saved  my  life.  You  are  French,’  he  said.  For  a  Frenchman, 
the  deduction  followed  indubitably.  An  heroic  action  could  only  be  per¬ 
formed  by  a  Frenchman,  and  to  save  the  life  of  him,  M.  Ramballe,  cap¬ 
tain  of  the  13th  Light  Brigade,  was  undoubtedly  a  most  heroic  action. 

But  however  indubitable  this  logic,  and  well  grounded  the  conviction 
the  officer  based  on  it,  Pierre  thought  well  to  disillusion  him  on  the  subject. 

‘I  am  Russian,’  he  said  quickly. 

‘Tell  that  to  others,’  said  the  Frenchman,  smiling  and  waving  his  finger 
before  his  nose.  ‘You  shall  tell  me  all  about  it  directly,’  he  said.  ‘Charmed 
to  meet  a  compatriot.  Well,  what  are  we  to  do  with  this  man?’  he  added, 
applying  to  Pierre  now  as  though  to  a  comrade.  If  Pierre  were  indeed 
not  a  Frenchman,  he  would  hardly  on  receiving  that  appellation — the 
most  honourable  in  the  world — care  to  disavow  it,  was  what  the  expres¬ 
sion  and  tone  of  the  French  officer  suggested.  To  his  last  question  Pierre 
explained  once  more  who  Makar  Alexyevitch  was.  He  explained  that  just 
before  his  arrival  the  drunken  imbecile  had  carried  off  a  loaded  pistol,' 
which  they  had  not  succeeded  in  getting  from  him,  and  he  begged  him  to1 
let  his  action  go  unpunished.  The  Frenchman  arched  his  chest,  and  made 
a  majestic  gesture  with  his  hand. 

‘You  have  saved  my  life!  You  are  a  Frenchman.  You  ask  me  to  pardon 
him.  I  grant  you  his  pardon.  Let  this  man  be  released,’  the  French  officer 
pronounced  with  rapidity  and  energy,  and  taking  the  arm  of  Pierre — 
promoted  to  be  a  Frenchman  for  saving  his  life — he  was  walking  with 
him  into  the  room. 

The  soldiers  in  the  yard,  hearing  the  shot,  had  come  into  the  vestibule 
to  ask  what  had  happened,  and  to  offer  their  services  in  punishing  the 
offender;  but  the  officer  sternly  checked  them. 

‘You  will  be  sent  for  when  you  are  wanted,’  he  said.  The  soldiers  with¬ 
drew.  The  orderly,  who  had  meanwhile  been  in  the  kitchen,  came  in  to 
the  officer. 

‘Captain,  they  have  soup  and  a  leg  of  mutton  in  the  kitchen,’  he  said. 
‘Shall  I  bring  it  up?’ 

‘Yes,  and  the  wine,’  said  the  captain. 


XXIX 

As  the  French  officer  drew  Pierre  with  him  into  the  room,  the  latter 
thought  it  his  duty  to  assure  the  captain  again  that  he  was  not  a  French- 


WARANDPEACE  853 

ian,  and  would  have  withdrawn,  but  the  French  officer  would  not  hear 
jf  it.  He  was  so  courteous,  polite,  good-humoured,  and  genuinely  grateful 
p  him  for  saving  his  life  that  Pierre  had  not  the  heart  to  refuse,  and 
it  down  with  him  in  the  dining-room,  the  first  room  they  entered.  To 
'ierre’s  asseveration  that  he  was  not  a  Frenchman,  the  captain,  plainly 
'nable  to  comprehend  how  any  one  could  refuse  so  flattering  a  title, 
hrugged  his  shoulders,  and  said  that  if  he  insisted  in  passing  for  a  Rus- 
ian,  so  be  it,  but  that  in  spite  of  that  he  should  yet  feel  bound  to  him 
ir  ever  by  sentiments  of  gratitude  for  the  defence  of  his  life. 

If  this  man'  had  been  endowed  with  even  the  slightest  faculty  of  per- 
eiving  the  feelings  of  others,  and  had  had  the  faintest  inkling  of  Pierre’s 
entiments,  the  latter  would  probably  have  left  him.  But  his  lively  im- 
enetrability  to  everything  not  himself  vanquished  Pierre. 

‘Frenchman  or  Russian  prince  incognito,’  said  the  Frenchman,  looking 
t  Pierre’s  fine,  though  dirty  linen,  and  the  ring  on  his  finger;  ‘I  owe  my 
fe  to  you,  and  I  offer  you  my  friendship.  A  Frenchman  never  forgets  an 
isult  or  a  service.  I  offer  you  my  friendship.  That’s  all  1  say.’ 

In  the  tones  of  the  voice,  the  expression  of  the  face,  and  the  gestures 
f  the  officer,  there  was  so  much  naive  good  nature  and  good  breeding 
in  the  French  sense)  that  Pierre  unconsciously  responded  with  a  smile 
0  his  smile,  as  he  took  his  outstretched  hand. 

‘Captain  Ramballe  of  the  13th  Light  Brigade,  decorated  for  the  affair 
f  the  7th  September,’  he  introduced  himself,  an  irrepressible  smile  of 
omplacency  lurking  under  his  moustache.  ‘Will  you  tell  me  now  to 
vhom  I  have  the  honour  of  speaking  so  agreeably,  instead  of  remaining 
jn  the  ambulance  with  that  madman’s  ball  in  my  body?’ 

Pierre  answered  that  he  would  not  tell  him  his  name,  and  was  beginning 
vith  a  blush,  while  trying  to  invent  a  name,  to  speak  of  the  reasons  for 
Vhich  he  was  unable  to  do  so,  but  the  Frenchman  hurriedly  interrupted 
dm. 

‘Enough!  ’  he  said.  “I  understand  your  reasons;  you  are  an  officer  .  .  . 

,  staff  officer,  perhaps.  You  have  borne  arms  against  us.  That’s  not  my 
msiness.  I  owe  you  my  life.  That’s  enough  for  me.  I  am  at  your  disposal, 
/ou  are  a  nobleman?’  he  added,  with  an  intonation  of  inquiry.  Pierre 
flowed. 

‘Your  baptismal  name,  if  you  please?  I  ask  nothing  more.  M.  Pierre, 
'ou  say?  Perfect!  That’s  all  I  want  to  know.’ 

When  they  had  brought  in  the  mutton,  an  omelette,  a  samovar,  vodka, 
,nd  wine  from  a  Russian  cellar  brought  with  them  by  the  French,  Ram- 
ialle  begged  Pierre  to  share  his  dinner;  and  at  once  with  the  haste  and 
;reediness  of  a  healthy,  hungry  man,  set  to  work  on  the  viands  himself, 
nunching  vigorously  with  his  strong  teeth,  and  continually  smacking 
lis  lips  and  exclaiming,  ‘Excellent I  exquisl’  His  face  became  flushed 
md  perspiring.  Pierre  was  hungry,  and  pleased  to  share  the  repast.  Morel, 
he  orderly,  brought  in  a  pot  of  hot  water,  and  put  a  bottle  of  red  wine 
0  warm  in  it.  He  brought  in  too  a  bottle  of  kvass  from  the  kitchen  for 
hem  to  taste.  This  beverage  was  already  known  to  the  French,  and  had 


854  WAR  AND  PEACE 

received  a  nickname.  They  called  it  limonade  de  cochon,  and  More 
praised  this  ‘pigs’  lemonade,’  which  he  had  found  in  the  kitchen.  Bu 
as  the  captain  had  the  wine  they  had  picked  up  as  they  crossed  Moscow 
he  left  the  kvass  for  Morel,  and  attacked  the  bottle  of  bordeaux.  H 
wrapped  a  napkin  round  the  bottle,  and  poured  out  wine  for  himself  am 
Pierre.  The  wine,  and  the  satisfaction  of  his  hunger,  made  the  captaii 
even  more  lively,  and  he  chatted  away  without  a  pause  all  dinner-time 

‘Yes,  my  dear  M.  Pierre,  I  owe  you  a  fine  votive  candle  for  saving  mi 
from  that  maniac.  I  have  bullets  enough  in  my  body,  you  know.  Here  i 
one  from  Wagram’  (he  pointed  to  his  side),  ‘and  two  from  Smolensk 
(he  showed  the  scar  on  his  cheek).  ‘And  this  leg  which  won’t  walk,  a 
you  see.  It  was  at  the  great  battle  of  la  Moskowa  on  the  7th  that  I  go 
that.  Sacre  Dieu,  it  was  fine !  You  ought  to  have  seen  that ;  it  was  a  delugi 
of  fire.  You  cut  us  out  a  tough  job;  you  can  boast  of  that,  my  word  01 
it!  And  on  my  word,  in  spite  of  the  cough  I  caught,  I  should  be  ready  t( 
begin  again.  I  pity  those  who  did  not  see  it.’ 

‘I  was  there,’  said  Pierre. 

‘Really!’  pursued  the  Frenchman.  ‘Well,  so  much  the  better.  You  ar< 
fine  enemies,  though.  The  great  redoubt  was  well  held,  by  my  pipe.  Anc 
you  made  us  pay  heavily  for  it  too.  I  was  at  it  three  times,  as  I’m  sitting! 
here.  Three  times  we  were  upon  the  cannons,  and  three  times  we  wer< 
driven  back  like  cardboard  figures.  Oh,  it  was  fine,  M.  Pierre.  Your  grena¬ 
diers  were  superb,  God’s  thunder.  I  saw  them  six  times  in  successior 
close  the  ranks  and  march  as  though  on  parade.  Fine  fellows.  Our  king 
of  Naples,  who  knows  all  about  it,  cried,  Bravo!  Ah,  ah,  soldiers  like  our-! 
selves,’  he  said  after  a  moment’s  silence.  ‘So  much  the  better,  so  muck 
the  better,  M.  Pierre.  Terrible  in  war  .  .  .  gallant,  with  the  fair’  (he 
winked  with  a  smile) — ‘there  you  have  the  French,  M.  Pierre,  eh?’ 

The  captain  was  so  naively  and  good-humouredly  gay  and  obtuse  and 
self-satisfied  that  Pierre  almost  winked  in  response,  as  he  looked  good- 
humouredly  at  him.  Probably  the  word  ‘gallant’  brought  the  captain  to 
reflect  on  the  state  of  things  in  Moscow. 

‘By  the  way,  tell  me,  is  it  true  that  all  the  women  have  left  Moscow? 
What,  a  queer  idea!  What  had  they  to  fear?’ 

‘Would  not  the  French  ladies  quit  Paris,  if  the  Russians  were  to  enter 
it?’  said  Pierre. 

‘Ha — ha — ha!  .  .  .’  The  Frenchman  gave  vent  to  a  gay,  sanguine 
chuckle,  slapping  Pierre  on  the  shoulder.  ‘That’s  a  good  one,  that  is,’ 
he  went  on.  ‘Paris  .  .  .  But  Paris  .  .  .’ 

‘Paris  is  the  capital  of  the  world,’  said  Pierre,  finishing  the  sentence 
for  him. 

The  captain  looked  at  Pierre.  He  had  the  habit  of  stopping  short  in 
the  middle  of  conversation,  and  staring  intently  with  his  laughing, 
genial  eyes. 

‘Well,  if  you  had  not  told  me  you  are  a  Russian,  I  would  have  wagered 
you  were  a  Parisian.  You  have  that  indescribable  something  .  .  .’  and 
uttering  this  compliment,  he  again  gazed  at  him  mutely. 


855 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘I  have  been  in  Paris.  I  spent  years  there,’  said  Pierre. 

‘One  can  see  that!  Paris!  A  man  who  does  not  know  Paris  is  a  savage 
.  .  .  A  Parisian  can  be  told  two  leagues  off.  Paris — it  is  Talma,  la  Du- 
schenois,  Potier,  the  Sorbonne,  the  boulevards.’  Perceiving  that  the  con¬ 
clusion  of  his  phrase  was  somewhat  of  an  anticlimax,  he  added  hurriedly, 
"There  is  only  one  Paris  in  the  world.  .  .  .  You  have  been  in  Paris,  and 
you  remain  Russian.  Well,  I  don’t  think  the  less  of  you  for  that.’ 

After  the  days  he  had  spent  alone  with  his  gloomy  thoughts,  Pierre, 
under  the  influence  of  the  wine  he  had  drunk,  could  not  help  taking  pleas¬ 
ure  in  conversing  with  this  good-humoured  and  naive  person. 

‘To  return  to  your  ladies,  they  are  said  to  be  beautiful.  What  a  silly 
idea  to  go  and  bury  themselves  in  the  steppes,  when  the  French  army 
.is  in  Moscow.  What  a  chance  they  have  lost.  Your  peasants  are  different; 
but  you  civilised  people  ought  to  know  better  than  that.  We  have  taken 
Vienna,  Berlin,  Madrid,  Naples,  Rome,  Warsaw — all  the  capitals  in  the 
world.  We  are  feared,  but  we  are  loved.  We  are  worth  knowing.  And  then 
the  Emperor  .  .  .’  he  was  beginning,  but  Pierre  interrupted  him. 

‘The  Emperor,’  repeated  Pierre,  and  his  face  suddenly  wore  a  mourn¬ 
ful  and  embarrassed  look.  ‘What  of  the  Emperor?’ 

‘The  Emperor?  He  is  generosity,  mercy,  justice,  order,  genius — that 
is  the  Emperor.  It  is  I,  Ramballe,  who  tell  you  that.  I  was  his  enemy  eight 
years  ago.  My  father  was  an  emigrant  count.  But  he  has  conquered  me, 
that  man.  He  has  taken  hold  of  me.  I  could  not  resist  the  spectacle  of 
the  greatness  and  glory  with  which  he  was  covering  France.  When  I 
understood  what  he  wanted,  when  I  saw  he  was  preparing  a  bed  of  laurels 
•for  us,  I  said  to  myself:  “That  is  a  monarch.”  And  I  gave  myself  up  to 
him.  Oh  yes,  he  is  the  greatest  man  of  the  centuries,  past  and  to  come.’ 

‘And  is  he  in  Moscow?’  Pierre  asked,  hesitating  and  looking  guilty. 

The  Frenchman  gazed  at  Pierre’s  guilty  face,  and  grinned. 

‘No,  he  will  make  his  entry  to-morrow,’  he  said,  and  went  on  w’ith  his 
talk. 

Their  conversation  was  interrupted  by  several  voices  shouting  at  the 
gates,  and  Morel  coming  in  to  tell  the  captain  that  some  Wurtemberg 
hussars  had  come  and  wanted  to  put  up  their  horses  in  the  yard  in  which 
the  captain’s  had  been  put  up.  The  difficulty  arose  chiefly  from  the 
hussars  not  understanding  what  was  said  to  them. 

The  captain  bade  the  senior  sergeant  be  brought  to  him,  and  in  a 
stern  voice  asked  him  to  what  regiment  he  belonged,  who  was  his  com¬ 
manding  officer,  and  on  what  pretext  he  dared  attempt  to  occupy  quarters 
already  occupied.  The  German,  who  knew  very  little  French,  succeeded 
in  answering  the  first  two  questions,  but  in  reply  to  the  last  one,  which 
he  did  not  understand,  he  answered  in  broken  French  and  German  that 
he  was  quartermaster  of  the  regiment,  and  had  received  orders  from  his 
superior  officer  to  occupy  all  the  houses  in  the  row.  Pierre,  who  knew  Ger¬ 
man,  translated  the  German’s  words  to  the  captain,  and  translated  the 
:aptain’s  answer  back  for  the  Wurtemberg  hussar.  On  understanding 
svhat  was  said  to  him,  the  German  gave  in,  and  took  his  men  away. 


Ss6  WARANDPEACE 

The  captain  went  out  to  the  entrance  and  gave  some  loud  commands. 

When  he  came  back  into  the  room,  Pierre  was  sitting  where  he  had  been 
sitting  before,  with  his  head  in  his  hands.  His  face  expressed  suffering. 
He  really  was  at  that  moment  suffering.  As  soon  as  the  captain  had  gone 
out,  and  Pierre  had  been  left  alone,  he  suddenly  came  to  himself,  and 
recognised  the  position  he  was  in.  It  was  not  that  Moscow  had  been 
taken,  not  that  these  lucky  conquerors  were  making  themselves  at  home 
there  and  patronising  him,  bitterly  as  Pierre  felt  it,  that  tortured  him  at 
that  moment.  He  was  tortured  by  the  consciousness  of  his  own  weakness. 
The  few  glasses  of  wine  he  had  drunk,  the  chat  with  this  good-natured 
fellow,  had  dissipated  that  mood  of  concentrated  gloom,  which  he  had 
been  living  in  for  the  last  few  days,  and  which  was  essential  for  carrying 
out  his  design.  The  pistol  and  the  dagger  and  the  peasant’s  coat  were 
ready,  Napoleon  was  making  his  entry  on  the  morrow.  Pierre  felt  it  as 
praiseworthy  and  as  beneficial  as  ever  to  slay  the  miscreant ;  but  he  felt 
now  that  he  would  not  do  it.  He  struggled  against  the  consciousness  of 
his  own  weakness,  but  he  vaguely  felt  that  he  could  not  overcome  it, 
that  his  past  gloomy  train  of  ideas,  of  vengeance,  murder,  and  self- 
sacrifice,  had  been  blown  away  like  dust  at  contact  with  the  first  human 
being. 

The  captain  came  into  the  room,  limping  a  little,  and  whistling  some 
tune. 

The  Frenchman’s  chatter  that  had  amused  Pierre  struck  him  now  as 
revolting.  And  his  whistling  a  tune,  and  his  gait,  and  his  gesture  in  twist¬ 
ing  his  moustaches,  all  seemed  insulting  to  Pierre  now. 

‘I’ll  go  away  at  once,  I  won’t  say  another  word  to  him,’  thought  Pierre. 
He  thought  this,  yet  went  on  sitting  in  the  same  place.  Some  strange 
feeling  of  weakness  riveted  him  to  his  place ;  he  longed  to  get  up  and  go, 
and  could  not. 

The  captain,  on  the  contrary,  seemed  in  exceedingly  good  spirits.  He 
walked  a  couple  of  times  up  and  down  the  room.  His  eyes  sparkled  and 
his  moustaches  slightly  twitched  as  though  he  were  smiling  to  himself  at 
some  amusing  notion. 

‘Charming  fellow  the  colonel  of  these  Wiirtembergers,’  he  said  all  at 
once.  ‘He’s  a  German,  but  a  good  fellow  if  ever  there  was  one.  But  a 
German.’ 

He  sat  down  facing  Pierre. 

‘By  the  way,  you  know  German?’ 

Pierre  looked  at  him  in  silence. 

‘How  do  you  say  “ asile ”  in  German?’  j  I 

‘ Asile ?’  repeated  Pierre.  1  Asile  in  German  is  Unterkunjt.’ 

‘What  do  you  say?’  the  captain  queried  quickly  and  doubtfully. 

‘Unterkunft,’  repeated  Pierre. 

‘Outer koff,’  said  the  captain,  and  for  several  seconds  he  looked  at  Pierre 
with  his  laughing  eyes.  ‘The  Germans  are  awful  fools,  aren’t  they,  M. 
Pierre?’  he  concluded. 


WAR  AND  PEACE  857 

‘Well,  another  bottle  of  this  Moscow  claret,  eh?  Morel,  warm  us  an¬ 
other  bottle!’  the  captain  shouted  gaily. 

Morel  brought  candles  and  a  bottle  of  wine.  The  captain  looked  at 
Pierre  in  the  candle-light,  and  was  obviously  struck  by  the  troubled  face 
of  his  companion.  With  genuine  regret  and  sympathy  in  his  face,  Ram- 
balle  approached  Pierre,  and  bent  over  him. 

‘Eh,  we  are  sad!’  he  said,  touching  Pierre  on  the  hand.  ‘Can  I  have 
hurt  you?  No,  really,  have  you  anything  against  me?’  he  questioned. 
‘Perhaps  it  is  owing  to  the  situation  of  affairs?’ 

Pierre  made  no  reply,  but  looked  cordially  into  the  Frenchman’s  eyes. 
This  expression  of  sympathy  was  pleasant  to  him. 

‘My  word  of  honour,  to  say  nothing  of  what  I  owe  you,  I  have  a  liking 
for  you.  Can  I  do  anything  for  you?  Dispose  of  me.  It  is  for  life  and 
death.  With  my  hand  and  my  heart,  I  say  so,’  he  said,  slapping  himself 
on  the  chest. 

‘Thank  you,’  said  Pierre.  The  captain  gazed  at  Pierre  as  he  had  gazed 
at  him  when  he  learnt  the  German  for  ‘refuge,’  and  his  face  suddenly 
brightened. 

‘Ah,  in  that  case,  I  drink  to  our  friendship,’  he  cried  gaily,  pouring  out 
two  glasses  of  wine. 

Pierre  took  the  glass  and  emptied  it.  Ramballe  emptied  his,  pressed 
Pierre’s  hand  once  more,  and  leaned  his  elbow  on  the  table  in  a  pose  of 
pensive  melancholy. 

‘Yes,  my  dear  friend,  such  are  the  freaks  of  fortune,’  he  began.  ‘Who 
would  have  said  I  should  be  a  soldier  and  captain  of  dragoons  in  the 
service  of  Bonaparte,  as  we  used  to  call  him.  And  yet  here  I  am  at  Mos¬ 
cow  with  him.  I  must  tell  you,  my  dear  fellow,’  he  continued  in  the 
mournful  and  measured  voice  of  a  man  who  intends  to  tell  a  long  story, 
‘our  name  is  one  of  the  most  ancient  in  France.’ 

And  with  the  easy  and  naive  unreserve  of  a  Frenchman,  the  captain  told 
Pierre  the  history  of  his  forefathers,  his  childhood,  boyhood,  and  man¬ 
hood,  and  all  his  relations,  his  fortunes,  and  domestic  affairs.  ‘Ma  pauvre 
mere,’  took,  of  course,  a  prominent  part  in  this  recital. 

‘But  all  that  is  only  the  setting  of  life;  the  real  thing  is  love.  Love! 
Eh,  M.  Pierre?’  he  said,  warming  up.  ‘Another  glass.’ 

Pierre  again  emptied  his  glass,  and  filled  himself  a  third. 

‘0  women!  women!  ’  and  the  captain,  gazing  with  moist  eyes  at  Pierre, 
began  talking  of  love  and  his  adventures  with  the  fair  sex.  They  were 
very  numerous,  as  might  readily  be  believed,  judging  from  the  officer’s 
conceited,  handsome  face  and  the  eager  enthusiasm  with  which  he  talked 
of  women.  Although  all  Ramballe’s  accounts  of  his  love  affairs  were  char¬ 
acterised  by  that  peculiar  nastiness  in  which  the  French  find  the  unique 
charm  and  poetry  of  love,  the  captain  told  his  stories  with  such  genuine 
conviction  that  he  was  the  only  man  who  had  tasted  and  known  all  the 
sweets  of  love,  and  he  described  the  women  he  had  known  in  such  an 
llluring  fashion  that  Pierre  listened  to  him  with  curiosity. 

It  was  evident  that  I’amour  the  Frenchman  was  so  fond  of  was  neither 


SsS  WAR  AND  PEACE 

that  low  and  simple  kind  of  love  Pierre  had  at  one  time  felt  for  his  wife 
nor  the  romantic  love,  exaggerated  by  himself,  that  he  felt  for  Natasha 
For  both  those  kinds  of  love  Ramballe  had  an  equal  contempt — one  was 
Vamour  des  charretiers,  the  other  Vamour  des  nigauds.  L’amour  foi 
which  the  Frenchman  had  a  weakness  consisted  principally  in  an  un¬ 
natural  relation  to  the  woman,  and  in  combinations  of  monstrous  circum¬ 
stances  which  lent  the  chief  charm  to  the  feeling. 

Thus  the  captain  related  the  touching  history  of  his  love  for  a  fas¬ 
cinating  marquise  of  five-and-thirty,  and  at  the  same  time  for  a  charm¬ 
ing,  innocent  child  of  seventeen,  the  daughter  of  the  fascinating  mar¬ 
quise.  The  conflict  of  generosity  between  mother  and  daughter,  ending 
in  the  mother  sacrificing  herself  and  offering  her  daughter  in  marriage 
to  her  lover,  even  now,  though  it  was  a  memory  in  the  remote  past,  moved 
the  captain  deeply.  Then  he  related  an  episode  in  which  the  husband 
played  the  part  of  the  lover,  and  he — the  lover — the  part  of  the  husband 
and  several  comic  episodes  among  his  reminiscences  of  Germany,  where 
U liter kunft  means  asile,  where  the  husbands  eat  cabbage  soup,  and  where 
the  young  girls  are  too  flaxen-haired. 

The  last  episode  was  one  in  Poland,  still  fresh  in  the  captain’s  memory 
and  described  by  him  with  rapid  gestures  and  a  glowing  face.  The  story 
was  that  he  had  saved  the  life  of  a  Pole — the  episode  of  saving  life  was, 
continually  cropping  up  in  the  captain’s  anecdotes — and  that  Pole  had 
intrusted  to  his  care  his  bewitching  wife,  a  Parisian  in  heart,  while  he 
himself  entered  the  French  service.  The  captain  had  been  happy,  the 
bewitching  Polish  lady  had  wanted  to  elope  with  him;  but  moved  by  a 
magnanimous  impulse,  the  captain  had  restored  the  wife  to  the  hus-; 
band  with  the  words:  ‘I  saved  your  life,  and  I  save  your  honour.’ 

As  he  repeated  these  words,  the  captain  wiped  his  eyes  and  shook 
himself,  as  though  to  shake  off  the  weakness  that  overcame  him  at  this 
touching  recollection. 

As  men  often  do  at  a  late  hour  at  night,  and  under  the  influence  of 
wine,  Pierre  listened  to  the  captain’s  stories,  and  while  he  followed  and 
understood  all  he  told  him,  he  was  also  following  a  train  of  personal 
reminiscences  which  had  for  some  reason  risen  to  his  imagination.  As 
he  listened  to  those  love  affairs,  his  own  love  for  Natasha  suddenly  came 
into  his  mind,  and  going  over  all  the  pictures  of  that  love  in  his  imagina¬ 
tion,  he  mentally  compared  them  with  Ramballe’s  stories.  As  he  heard 
the  account  of  the  conflict  between  love  and  duty,  Pierre  saw  before  him 
every  detail  of  the  meeting  with  the  object  of  his  love  at  the  Suharevj 
Tower.  That  meeting  had  not  at  the  time  made  much  impression  on  him; 
he  had  not  once  thought  of  it  since.  But  now  it  seemed  to  him  that  there 
was  something  very  significant  and  romantic  in  that  meeting. 

‘Pyotr  Kirillitch,  come  here,  I  recognise  you’;  he  could  hear  her  words 
now,  could  see  her  eyes,  her  smile,  her  travelling  cap,  and  the  curl  peep¬ 
ing  out  below  it  .  .  .  and  he  felt  that  there  was  something  moving, 
touching  in  all  that. 


WAR  AND  PEACE  859 

When  he  had  finished  his  tale  about  the  bewitching  Polish  lady,  the 
:aptain  turned  to  Pierre  with  the  inquiry  whether  he  had  had  any  similar 
experience  of  self-sacrifice  for  love  and  envy  of  a  lawful  husband. 

Pierre,  roused  by  this  question,  lifted  his  head  and  felt  an  irresistible 
mpulse  to  give  expression  to  the  ideas  in  his  mind.  He  began  to  explain 
hat  he  looked  upon  love  for  woman  somewhat  differently.  He  said  he 
lad  all  his  life  long  loved  one  woman,  and  still  loved  her,  and  that  that 
voman  could  never  be  his. 

‘Tiens!’  said  the  captain. 

Then  Pierre  explained  that  he  had  loved  this  woman  from  his  earliest 
/outh,  but  had  not  dared  to  think  of  her  because  she  was  too  young, 
ind  he  had  been  an  illegitimate  son,  with  no  name  of  his  own.  Then 
vhen  he  had  received  a  name  and  wealth,  he  had  not  dared  think  of  her 
because  he  loved  her  too  much,  because  he  set  her  too  high  above  all  the 
vorld,  and  so  even  more  above  himself.  On  reaching  this  point,  Pierre 
sked  the  captain,  did  he  understand  that. 

The  captain  made  a  gesture  expressing  that  whether  he  understood 
t  or  not,  he  begged  him  to  proceed. 

‘Platonic  love;  moonshine  .  .  .’  he  muttered.  The  wine  he  had  drunk, 
r  an  impulse  of  frankness,  or  the  thought  that  this  man  did  not  know, 
nd  never  would  know,  any  of  the  persons  concerned  in  his  story,  or  all 
'ogether  loosened  Pierre’s  tongue.  With  faltering  lips  and  with  a  far¬ 
way  look  in  his  moist  eye,  he  told  all  his  story ;  his  marriage  and  the  story 
f  Natasha’s  love  for  his  dearest  friend  and  her  betrayal  of  him,  and  all 
is  own  simple  relations  with  her.  In  response  to  questions  from  Ram- 
alle,  he  told  him,  too,  what  he  had  at  first  concealed — his  position  in 
ociety — and  even  disclosed  his  name. 

What  impressed  the  captain  more  than  anything  else  in  Pierre’s  story 
Vas  the  fact  that  Pierre  was  very  wealthy,  that  he  had  two  palatial 
ouses  in  Moscow,  and  that  he  had  abandoned  everything,  and  yet  had 
ot  left  Moscow,  but  was  staying  in  the  town  concealing  his  name  and 
tation. 

Late  in  the  night  they  went  out  together  into  the  street.  The  night 
'as  warm  and  clear.  On  the  left  there  was  the  glow  of  the  first  fire  that 
roke  out  in  Moscow,  in  Petrovka.  On  the  right  a  young  crescent  moon 
:ood  high  in  the  sky,  and  in  the  opposite  quarter  of  the  heavens  hung 
le  brilliant  comet  which  was  connected  in  Pierre’g  heart  with  his  love, 
t  the  gates  of  the  yard  stood  Gerasim,  the  cook,  and  two  Frenchmen, 
ierre  could  hear  their  laughter  and  talk,  incomprehensible  to  one  an¬ 
ther.  They  were  looking  at  the  glow  of  the  fire  burning  in  the  town. 

There  was  nothing  alarming  in  a  small  remote  fire  in  the  immense  city. 
Gazing  at  the  lofty,  starlit  sky,  at  the  moon,  at  the  comet  and  the  glow 
’  the  fire,  Pierre  felt  a  thrill  of  joyous  and  tender  emotion.  ‘Plow  fair  it 
1  is!  what  more  does  one  want?’  he  thought.  And  all  at  once,  when  he 
called  his  design,  his  head  seemed  going  round;  he  felt  so  giddy  that 
;  leaned  against  the  fence  so  as  not  to  fall. 


S6o 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

Without  taking  leave  of  his  new  friend,  Pierre  left  the  gate  with  un 
steady  steps,  and  going  back  to  his  room  lay  down  on  the  sofa  and  at  onci 
fell  asleep. 


XXX 

From  various  roads,  and  with  various  feelings,  the  inhabitants  runninj 
and  driving  away  from  Moscow,  and  the  retreating  troops,  gazed  at  thi 
glow  of  the  first  fire  that  broke  out  in  the  city  on  the  2nd  of  September. 

The  Rostovs’  party  stopped  for  that  night  at  Mytishtchy,  twenty  verst 
from  Moscow.  They  had  started  so  late  on  the  1st  of  September,  the  roa< 
had  been  so  blocked  by  waggons  and  troops,  so  many  things  had  been  for 
gotten,  and  servants  sent  back  to  get  them,  that  they  had  decided  to  hal 
for  the  first  night  five  versts  from  Moscow.  The  next  morning  they  wake< 
late,  and  there  were  again  so  many  delays  that  they  only  reached  Grea 
Mytishtchy.  At  ten  o’clock  the  Rostov  family,  and  the  wounded  soldier 
travelling  with  them,  had  all  found  places  for  the  night  in  the  yards  am 
huts  of  the  greater  village.  The  servants,  the  Rostovs’  coachmen,  and  th 
orderlies  of  the  wounded  officers,  after  settling  their  masters  for  the  night 
supped,  fed  their  horses,  and  came  out  into  the  porch  of  a  hut. 

In  the  next  hut  lay  Raevsky’s  adjutant  with  a  broken  wrist,  and  th 
terrible  pain  made  him  moan  incessantly,  and  these  moans  had  a  grue 
some  sound  in  the  autumn  darkness  of  the  night.  On  the  first  night  thi 
adjutant  had  spent  the  night  in  a  building  in  the  same  yard  as  the  hu 
in  which  the  Rostovs  slept.  The  countess  declared  that  she  had  no 
closed  her  eyes  all  night  from  that  moaning,  and  at  Mytishtchy  she  hat! 
moved  into  a  less  comfortable  hut  simply  to  get  further  away  from  th 
wounded  man.  One  of  the  servants  noticed  in  the  dark  night  sky,  abov 
the  high  carriage  standing  at  the  entry,  another  small  glow  of  fire.  On 
such  glow  had  been  seen  long  before,  and  every  one  knew  it  was  Littl 
Mytishtchy,  which  had  been  set  on  fire  by  Mamonov’s  Cossacks. 

‘I  say,  mates,  there’s  another  fire,’  said  the  man.  All  of  them  looke 
towards  the  glow. 

‘Why,  they  told  us  Mamonov’s  Cossacks  had  fired  Little  Mytishtchy 
‘Nay!  that’s  not  Mytishtchy,  it’s  further.’  ‘Look  ’ee,  it’s  in  Moscoi 
seemingly.’  Two  of  the  men  left  the  porch,  went  to  a  carriage  and  squatte 
on  the  step.  ‘It’s  more  to  the  left!  Why,  Mytishtchy  is  away  yonder,  an 
that’s  quite  the  other  side.’ 

Several  more  men  joined  the  first  group. 

‘I  say  it  is  flaring,’  said  one;  ‘that’s  a  fire  in  Moscow,  my  friends;  eithe 
in  Sushtchovsky  or  in  Rogozhsky.’ 

No  one  answered  this  remark.  And  for  a  good  while  all  these  men  gaze 
in  silence  at  the  flames  of  this  new  conflagration  glowing  far  away.  A 
old  man,  the  count’s  valet  (as  he  was  called),  Danilo  Terentyitch,  can- 
up  to  the  crowd  and  called  Mishka. 

‘What  are  you  gaping  at?  .  .  .  The  count  may  ask  for  you  and  nc 
body  to  be  found;  go  and  put  the  clothes  together.’ 


WAR  AND  PEACE  86 1 

‘Oh,  I  only  ran  out  for  some  water,’  said  Mishka. 

‘And  what  do  you  say,  Danilo  Terentyitch?  that’s  a  fire  in  Moscow, 
isn’t  it?’  said  one  of  the  footmen. 

Danilo  Terentyitch  made  no  reply,  and  for  a  long  while  all  were  mute 
igain.  The  glow  spread  wider,  and  flickered  further  and  further  away. 

‘God  have  mercy!  ...  a  wind  and  the  drought  .  .  .’  said  a  voice 
again. 

‘Look  ’ee,  how  it’s  spreading.  O  Lord!  why,  one  can  see  the  jackdaws! 
Lord,  have  mercy  on  us  poor  sinners!’ 

‘They’ll  put  it  out,  never  fear.’ 

j  ‘Who’s  to  put  it  out?’  cried  the  voice  of  Danilo  Terentyitch,  silent  till 
hat  moment.  His  voice  was  quiet  and  deliberate.  ‘Moscow  it  is,  mates,’ 
le  said;  ‘it's  she,  our  mother,  the  white  city  .  .  .’  his  voice  broke,  and 
|ie  suddenly  burst  into  the  sobs  of  old  age.  And  it  seemed  as  though  all 
lad  been  only  waiting  for  that  to  grasp  the  import  for  all  of  that  glow  they 
vere  watching.  Sighs  were  heard  and  muttered  prayers,  and  the  sobs  of  the 
ild  valet. 

XXXI 

'he  valet  on  going  in  informed  the  count  that  Moscow  was  on  fire.  The 
ount  put  on  his  dressing-gown  and  went  out  to  look.  With  him  went 
onya,  who  had  not  yet  undressed,  and  Madame  Schoss,  Natasha  and  the 
ountess  were  left  alone  within.  Petya  was  no  longer  with  the  family; 
,e  had  gone  on  ahead  with  his  regiment  marching  to  Troitsa. 

The  countess  wept  on  hearing  that  Moscow  was  in  flames.  Natasha, 
ale,  with  staring  eyes,  sat  on  the  bench  under  the  holy  images,  the  spot 
diere  she  had  first  thrown  herself  down  on  entering,  and  took  no  notice 
f  her  father’s  words.  She  was  listening  to  the  never-ceasing  moan  of  the 
djutant,  audible  three  huts  away. 

‘Oh!  how  awful!’  cried  Sonya,  coming  in  chilled  and  frightened  from 
,ae  yard.  ‘I  do  believe  all  Moscow  is  burning;  there’s  an  awful  fire! 
ratasha,  do  look;  you  can  see  now  from  the  window  here,’  she  said, 
pviously  trying  to  distract  her  friend’s  mind.  But  Natasha  stared  at  her, 
b  though  she  did  not  understand  what  was  asked  of  her,  and  fixed  her 
/es  again  on  the  corner  of  the  stove.  Natasha  had  been  in  this  petrified 
mdition  ever  since  the  morning,  when  Sonya,  to  the  amazement  and 
iger  of  the  countess,  had  for  some  incomprehensible  reason  thought  fit 
i  inform  Natasha  of  Prince  Andrey’s  wound,  and  his  presence  among 
ieir  train.  The  countess  had  been  angry  with  Sonya,  as  she  was  very 
irely  angry.  Sonya  had  cried  and  begged  forgiveness,  and  now  she 
jaited  all  the  while  on  her  friend,  as  though  trying  to  atone  for  her  fault, 
j  ‘Look,  Natasha,  how  frightfully  it’s  burning,’  said  Sonya. 

;  ‘What’s  burning?’  asked  Natasha.  ‘Oh  yes,  Moscow.’ 

And  to  get  rid  of  Sonya,  and  not  hurt  her  by  a  refusal,  she  moved  her 
'ad  towards  the  window,  looking  in  such  a  way  that  it  was  evident  she 
iuld  see  nothing,  and  sat  down  again  in  the  same  attitude  as  before. 


S62 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘But  you  didn’t  see?’ 

‘Yes,  I  really  did  see,’  she  declared  in  a  voice  that  implored  to  be  left 
in  peace. 

Both  the  countess  and  Sonya  could  readily  understand  that  Moscow, 
the  burning  of  Moscow,  anything  whatever  in  fact,  could  be  of  no  interest 
to  Natasha. 

The  count  carne  in  again  behind  the  partition  wall  and  lay  down.  The 
countess  went  up  to  Natasha,  put  the  back  of  her  hand  to  her  head,  as 
she  did  when  her  daughter  was  ill,  then  touched  her  forehead  with  her 
lips,  as  though  to  find  out  whether  she  were  feverish,  and  kissed  her. 

‘You  are  chilled?  You  are  all  shaking.  You  should  lie  down,’  she  said 

‘Lie  down?  Yes,  very  well,  I’ll  lie  down.  I’ll  lie  down  in  a  minute,’  saic 
Natasha. 

When  Natasha  had  been  told  that  morning  that  Prince  Andrey  wa' 
seriously  wounded,  and  was  travelling  with  them,  she  had  at  the  firs! 
moment  asked  a  great  many  questions,  how  and  why  and  where  was  he 
going;  whether  he  were  dangerously  wounded,  and  whether  she  couk 
see  him.  But  after  she  had  been  told  that  she  could  not  see  him,  tha 
his  wound  was  a  serious  one,  but  that  his  life  was  not  in  danger,  thougl 
she  plainly  did  not  believe  what  was  told  her,  she  saw  that  she  would  ge 
the  same  answer  whatever  she  said,  and  gave  up  asking  questions  anc 
speaking  at  all.  All  the  way  Natasha  had  sat  motionless  in  the  corner  o 
the  carriage  with  those  wide  eyes,  the  look  in  which  the  countess  knev| 
so  well  and  dreaded  so  much.  And  she  was  sitting  in  just  the  same  wa} 
now  on  the  bench  in  the  hut.  She  was  brooding  on  some  plan;  she  wa: 
making,  or  already  by  now  had  made  some  decision,  in  her  own  mind— 
that  the  countess  knew,  but  what  that  decision  was  she  did  not  know,  ant 
that  alarmed  and  worried  her. 

‘Natasha,  undress,  darling,  get  into  my  bed.’ 

For  the  countess  only  a  bed  had  been  made  up  on  a  bedstead.  Madam' 
Schoss  and  the  two  girls  were  to  sleep  on  hay  on  the  floor. 

‘No,  mamma,  I’ll  lie  here  on  the  floor,’  said  Natasha  irritably;  sh 
went  to  the  window  and  opened  it.  The  moans  of  the  adjutant  could  b 
heard  more  distinctly  from  the  open  window.  She  put  her  head  out  int> 
the  damp  night  air,  and  the  countess  saw  her  slender  neck  shaking  wit: 
sobs  and  heaving  against  the  window  frame.  Natasha  knew  it  was  no 
Prince  Andrey  moaning.  She  knew  that  Prince  Andrey  was  in  the  sam 
block  of  huts  as  they  were  in,  that  he  was  in  the  next  hut  just  across  th 
porch,  but  that  fearful  never  ceasing  moan  made  her  sob.  The  countes 
exchanged  glances  with  Sonya. 

‘Go  to  bed,  darling,  go  to  bed,  my  pet,’  said  the  countess,  lightly  touch 
ing  Natasha’s  shoulder.  ‘Come,  go  to  bed.’ 

‘Oh  yes  .  .  .  I’ll  go  to  bed  at  once,  at  once,’  said  Natasha,  hurriedl 
undressing,  and  breaking  the  strings  of  her  petticoats.  Dropping  off  he 
dress,  and  putting  on  a  dressing-jacket,  she  sat  down  on  the  bed  mad 
up  on  the  floor,  tucking  her  feet  under  her,  and  flinging  her  short,  fir 
hair  over  her  shoulder,  began  plaiting  it.  Her  thin,  long,  practised  fingei 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


S63 

rapidly  and  deftly  divided,  plaited,  and  tied  up  her  hair.  Natasha’s 
head  turned  from  side  to  side  as  usual  as  she  did  this,  but  her  eyes, 
feverishly  wide,  looked  straight  before  her  with  the  same  fixed  stare. 
When  her  toilet  for  the  night  was  over,  Natasha  sank  softly  down  on  to 
the  sheet  laid  on  the  hay  nearest  the  door. 

‘Natasha,  you  lie  in  the  middle,’  said  Sonya. 

‘I’ll  stay  here,’  said  Natasha.  ‘And  do  go  to  bed,’  she  added  in  a  tone 
of  annoyance.  And  she  buried  her  face  in  the  pillow. 

The  countess,  Madame  Schoss,  and  Sonya  hurriedly  undressed  and 
went  to  bed.  The  lamp  before  the  holy  images  was  the  only  light  left  in 
the  room.  But  out  of  doors  the  fire  at  Little  Mytishtchy  lighted  the  coun¬ 
try  up  for  two  versts  round,  and  there  was  a  noisy  clamour  of  peasants 
shouting  at  the  tavern  across  the  street,  which  Mamonov’s  Cossacks  had 
broken  into,  and  the  moan  of  the  adjutant  could  be  heard  unceasingly 
through  everything. 

1  For  a  long  while  Natasha  listened  to  the  sounds  that  reached  her  from 
within  and  without,  and  she  did  not  stir.  She  heard  at  first  her  mother’s 
prayers  and  sighs,  the  creaking  of  her  bed  under  her,  Madame  Schoss’s 
familiar,  whistling  snore,  Sonya’s  soft  breathing.  Then  the  countess  called 
to  Natasha.  Natasha  did  not  answer. 

‘I  think  she's  asleep,  mamma,’  answered  Sonya. 

The  countess,  after  a  brief  silence, . spoke  again,  but  this  time  no  one 
answered  her. 

,  Soon  after  this  Natasha  caught  the  sound  of  her  mother’s  even  breath¬ 
ing.  Natasha  did  not  stir,  though  her  little  bare  foot,  poking  out  below 
the  quilt,  felt  frozen  against  the  uncovered  floor. 

A  cricket  chirped  in  a  crack,  as  though  celebrating  a  victory  over  all 
the  world.  A  cock  crowed  far  away,  and  another  answered  close  by.  The 
*  shouts  had  died  away  in  the  tavern,  but  the  adjutant’s  moaning  went  on 
still  the  same.  Natasha  sat  up. 

‘Sonya!  Are  you  asleep?  Mamma!’  she  whispered.  No  one  answered. 
Slowly  and  cautiously  Natasha  got  up,  crossed  herself,  and  stepped 
cautiously  with  her  slender,  supple,  bare  feet  on  to  the  dirty,  cold  floor. 
The  boards  creaked.  With  nimble  feet  she  ran  like  a  kitten  a  few  steps, 
and  took  hold  of  the  cold  door-handle. 

It  seemed  to  her  that  something  with  heavy,  rhythmical  strokes  was 
banging  on  all  the  walls  of  the  hut;  it  was  the  beating  of  her  own  heart, 
n  torn  with  dread,  with  love  and  terror. 

j  She  opened  the  door,  stepped  over  the  lintel,  and  on  to  the  damp,  cold 
earth  of  the  passage  outside.  The  cold  all  about  her  refreshed  her.  Her 
bare  foot  felt  a  man  asleep;  she  stepped  over  him,  and  opened  the  door  of 
the  hut  in  which  Prince  Andrey  was  lying. 

In  that  hut  it  was  dark.  A  tallow  candle  with  a  great,  smouldering 
wick  stood  on  a  bench  in  the  further  corner,  by  a  bed,  on  which  some¬ 
thing  was  lying. 

I  Ever  since  she  had  been  told  in  the  morning  of  Prince  Andrey’s  wound 
and  his  presence  there,  Natasha  had  resolved  that  she  must  see  him.  She 


S64  WAR  AND  PEACE 

could  not  have  said  why  this  must  be,  but  she  knew  their  meeting  would 
be  anguish  to  her,  and  that  made  her  the  more  certain  that  it  must  be 
inevitable. 

All  day  long  she  had  lived  in  the  hope  that  at  night  she  would  see  him. 
But  now  when  the  moment  had  come,  a  terror  came  over  her  of  what  she 
would  see.  How  had  he  been  disfigured?  What  was  left  of  him?  Was  he 
like  that  unceasing  moan  of  the  adjutant?  Yes,  he  was  all  over  like  that. 
In  her  imagination  he  was  that  awful  moan  of  pain  personified.  When 
she  caught  sight  of  an  undefined  mass  in  the  corner,  and  took  his  raised 
knees  under  the  quilt  for  his  shoulders,  she  pictured  some  fearful  body 
there,  and  stood  still  in  terror.  But  an  irresistible  force  drew  her  for¬ 
ward.  She  made  one  cautious  step,  another,  and  found  herself  in  the  mid¬ 
dle  of  the  small  hut,  cumbered  up  with  baggage.  On  the  bench,  under  the 
holy  images,  lay  another  man  (this  was  Timohin),  and  on  the  floor  were 
two  more  figures  (the  doctor  and  the  valet). 

The  valet  sat  up  and  muttered  something.  Timohin,  in  pain  from  a 
wound  in  his  leg,  was  not  asleep,  and  gazed,  all  eyes,  at  the  strange 
apparition  of  a  girl  in  a  white  night-gown,  dressing-jacket,  and  nightcap. 
The  valet’s  sleepy  and  frightened  words  ‘What  is  it?  What  do  you  want?’ 
only  made  Natasha  hasten  towards  the  figure  lying  in  the  corner.  How¬ 
ever  fearfully  unlike  a  human  shape  that  figure  might  be  now,  she  must 
see  him.  She  passed  by  the  valet,  the  smouldering  candle  flickered  up, 
and  she  saw  clearly  Prince  Andrey,  lying  with  his  arms  stretched  out  on 
the  quilt,  looking  just  as  she  had  always  seen  him. 

He  was  just  the  same  as  ever;  but  the  flush  on  his  face,  his  shining 
eyes,  gazing  passionately  at  her,  and  especially  the  soft,  childlike  neck, 
showing  above  the  lay-down  collar  of  the  nightshirt,  gave  him  a  peculiarly 
innocent,  childlike  look,  such  as  she  had  never  seen  in  him  before.  She 
ran  up  to  him  and  with  a  swift,  supple,  youthful  movement  dropped  on 
her  knees. 

He  smiled,  and  held  out  his  hand  to  her. 


XXXII 

Seven  days  had  passed  since  Prince  Andrey  had  found  himself  in  the 
ambulance  station  on  the  field  of  Borodino.  All  that  time  he  had  been 
in  a  state  of  almost  continual  unconsciousness.  The  fever  and  inflamma¬ 
tion  of  the  bowels,  which  had  been  injured,  were,  in  the  opinion  of  the 
doctor  accompanying  the  wounded,  certain  to  carry  him  off.  But  on  the 
seventh  day  he  ate  with  relish  a  piece  of  bread  with  some  tea,  and  the 
doctor  observed  that  the  fever  was  going  down.  Prince  Andrey  had  re¬ 
gained  consciousness  in  the  morning.  The  first  night  after  leaving  Mos¬ 
cow  had  been  fairly  warm,  and  Prince  Andrey  had  spent  the  night  in  his 
carriage.  But  at  Mytishtchy  the  wounded  man  had  himself  asked  to  be 
moved  and  given  tea.  The  pain  caused  by  moving  him  into  the  hut  had 
made  Prince  Andrey  groan  aloud  and  lose  consciousness  again.  When 


WAR  AND  PEACE  865 

he  had  been  laid  on  his  camp  bedstead,  he  lay  a  long  while  with  closed 
eyes  without  moving.  Then  he  opened  his  eyes  and  whispered  softly, 
‘How  about  the  tea?’  The  doctor  was  struck  by  this  instance  of  con¬ 
sciousness  of  the  little  details  of  daily  life.  He  felt  his  pulse,  and  to  his 
surprise  and  dissatisfaction  found  that  the  pulse  was  stronger.  The  doc¬ 
tor’s  dissatisfaction  was  due  to  the  fact  that  he  felt  certain  from  his  ex¬ 
perience  that  Prince  Andrey  could  not  live,  and  that  if  he  did  not  die 
now,  he  would  only  die  a  little  later  with  even  greater  suffering.  With 
Prince  Andrey  was  the  red-nosed  major  of  his  regiment,  Timohin,  who 
had  joined  him  in  Moscow  with  a  wound  in  his  leg  received  at  the  same 
battle  of  Borodino.  The  doctor,  the  prince’s  valet,  and  coachman,  and 
two  orderlies  were  in  charge  of  them. 

Tea  was  given  to  Prince  Andrey.  He  drank  it  eagerly,  looking  with 
feverish  eyes  at  the  door  in  front  of  him,  as  though  trying  to  understand 
and  recall  something. 

‘No  more.  Is  Timohin  here?’  he  asked. 

Timohin  edged  along  the  bench  towards  him. 

‘I  am  here,  your  excellency.’ 

‘How  is  your  wound?’ 

‘Mine?  All  right.  But  how  are  you?’ 

Prince  Andrey  pondered  again,  as  though  he  were  recollecting  some¬ 
thing. 

‘Could  not  one  get  a  book  here?’  he  said. 

‘What  book?’ 

‘The  Gospel!  I  haven’t  one.’ 

The  doctor  promised  to  get  it,  and  began  questioning  the  prince  about 
his  symptoms.  Prince  Andrey  answered  all  the  doctor’s  questions  ration¬ 
ally,  though  reluctantly,  and  then  said  that  he  wanted  a  support  put 
under  him,  as  it  was  uncomfortable  and  very  painful  for  him  as  he  was. 
The  doctor  and  the  valet  took  off  the  military  cloak,  with  which  he  was 
covered,  and  puckering  up  their  faces  at  the  sickly  smell  of  putrefying 
flesh  that  came  from  the  wound,  began  to  look  in^a  the  terrible  place. 
The  doctor  was  very  much  troubled  about  something;  he  made  some 
changes,  turning  the  wounded  man  over  so  that  he  groaned  again,  and 
again  lost  consciousness  from  the  pain  when  they  turned  him  over.  He 
began  to  be  delirious,  and  kept  asking  for  the  book  to  be  brought  and  to 
be  put  under  him.  ‘What  trouble  would  it  be  to  you?’  he  kept  saying. 
‘I  haven’t  it,  get  it  me,  please, — put  it  under  me  just  for  a  minute,’  he 
said  in  a  piteous  voice. 

The  doctor  went  outside  to  wash  his  hands. 

‘Ah,  you  have  no  conscience,  you  fellows  really,’  the  doctor  was  saying 
to  the  valet,  who  was  pouring  water  over  his  hands.  ‘For  one  minute  I 
didn’t  look  after  you.  Why,  it’s  such  suffering  that  I  wonder  how  he 
bears  it.’ 

‘I  thought  we  did  put  it  under  him  right,  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,’ 
said  the  valet. 

Prince  Andrey  had  for  the  first  time  grasped  where  he  was  and  what 


S66 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

was  happening  to  him,  and  had  recollected  that  he  had  been  wounded  and 
how  at  the  moment  when  the  carriage  had  stopped  at  Mytishtchy,  and 
he  had  asked  to  be  taken  into  the  hut.  Losing  consciousness  again  from 
the  pain,  he  came  fully  to  himself  once  more  in  the  hut  while  he  was 
drinking  tea.  And  thereupon  again,  going  over  in  his  memory  all  that 
had  happened  to  him,  the  most  vivid  picture  in  his  mind  was  of  that  mo¬ 
ment  at  the  ambulance  station  when  at  the  sight  of  the  sufferings  of  a 
man  he  had  not  liked,  those  new  thoughts  had  come  to  him  with  such 
promise  of  happiness.  And  those  thoughts — though  vague  now  and  shape¬ 
less — took  possession  of  his  soul  again.  He  remembered  that  he  had  now 
some  new  happiness,  and  that  that  happiness  had  something  to  do  with 
the  Gospel.  That  was  why  he  asked  for  the  Gospel.  But  the  position  he 
had  been  laid  in,  without  support  under  his  wound,  and  the  new  change 
of  position,  put  his  thoughts  to  confusion  again;  and  it  was  only  in  the 
complete  stillness  of  the  night  that  he  came  to  himself  again  for  the  third 
time.  Every  one  was  asleep  around  him.  A  cricket  was  chirping  across 
the  passage;  some  one  was  shouting  and  singing  in  the  street;  cock¬ 
roaches  were  rustling  over  the  table,  the  holy  images  and  the  walls;  a 
big  fly  flopped  on  his  pillow  and  about  the  tallow  candle  that  stood  with 
a  great,  smouldering  wick  beside  him. 

His  soul  was  not  in  its  normal  state.  A  man  in  health  usually  thinks, 
feels  and  remembers  simultaneously  an  immense  number  of  different 
things,  but  he  has  the  power  and  the  faculty  of  selecting  one  series  of  ideas 
or  phenomena  and  concentrating  all  his  attention  on  that  series.  A  man 
in  health  can  at  the  moment  of  the  profoundest  thought  break  off  to  say 
a  civil  word  to  any  one  who  comes  in,  and  then  return  again  to  his 
thoughts.  Prince  Andrey’s  soul  was  not  in  a  normal  condition  in  this  re¬ 
spect.  All  the  faculties  of  his  soul  were  clearer  and  more  active  than 
ever,  but  they  acted  apart  from  his  will.  The  most  diverse  ideas  and 
images  had  possession  of  his  mind  at  the  same  time.  Sometimes  his  brain 
suddenly  began  to  work,  and  with  a  force,  clearness,  and  depth  with 
which  it  had  never  been  capable  of  working  in  health.  But  suddenly  the 
train  of  thought  broke  off  in  the  midst,  to  be  replaced  by  some  unexpected 
image,  and  the  power  to  go  back  to  it  was  wanting.  ‘Yes,  a  new  happiness 
was  revealed  to  me,  that  could  not  be  taken  away  from  man,’  he  thought, 
as  he  lay  in  the  still,  half-dark  hut,  gazing  before  him  v/ith  feverishly 
wide,  staring  eyes.  ‘Happiness  beyond  the  reach  of  material  forces,  out¬ 
side  material,  external  influences  on  man,  the  happiness  of  the  soul  alone, 
the  happiness  of  love!  To  feel  it  is  in  every  man’s  power,  but  God  alone 
can  know  it  and  ordain  it.  But  how  did  God  ordain  this  law?  Whv  the 
Son?  .  .  .’  And  all  at  once  that  train  of  thought  broke  off,  and  Prince 
Andrey  heard  (not  knowing  whether  in  delirium  or  in  actual  fact  he 
heard  it)  a  kind  of  soft,  whispering  voice,  incessantly  beating  time: 
‘Piti-pitt-piti,’  and  then  ‘i-ti-ti,’  and  again,  ‘ipiti-piti-piti,’  and  again 
‘iti-ti.’  And  to  the  sound  of  this  murmuring  music  Prince  Andrey  felt  as 
though  a  strange,  ethereal  edifice  of  delicate  needles  or  splinters  were 
being  raised  over  his  face,  over  the  very  middle  of  it.  He  felt  that  (hard 


WAR  AND  PEACE  867 

though  it  was  for  him)  he  must  studiously  preserve  his  balance  that  this 
rising  edifice  might  not  fall  to  pieces;  but  yet  it  was  failing  to  pieces,  and 
slowly  rising  up  again  to  the  rhythmic  beat  of  the  murmuring  music. 

‘It  is  stretching  out,  stretching  out,  and  spreading  and  stretching  out!’ 
Prince  Andrey  said  to  himself.  While  he  listened  to  the  murmur  and  felt 
that  edifice  of  needles  stretching  out,  and  rising  up,  Prince  Andrey  saw 
by  glimpses  a  red  ring  of  light  round  the  candle,  and  heard  the  rustling 
of  the  cockroaches  and  the  buzzing  of  the  fly  as  it  flopped  against  his 
pillow  and  his  face.  And  every  time  the  fly  touched  his  face,  it  gave  him 
a  stinging  sensation,  but  yet  it  surprised  him  that  though  the  fly  struck 
him  in  the  very  centre  of  the  rising  edifice,  it  did  not  shatter  it.  But, 
apart  from  all  this,  there  was  one  other  thing  of  importance.  That  was 
the  white  thing  at  the  door;  that  was  a  statue  of  the  sphinx,  which  op¬ 
pressed  him  too. 

‘But  perhaps  it  is  my  shirt  on  the  table,’  thought  Prince  Andrey,  ‘and 
that’s  my  legs,  and  that’s  the  door,  but  why  this  straining  and  moving 
and  piti-piti-piti  and  ti-ti  and  piti-piti-piti  .  .  .  Enough,  cease,  be  still, 
please,’  Price  Andrey'  besought  some  one  wearily.  And  all  at  once 
thought  and  feeling  floated  to  the  surface  again  with  extraordinary  clear¬ 
ness  and  force. 

‘Yes,  love  (he  thought  again  with  perfect  distinctness),  but  not  that 
love  that  loves  for  something,  to  gain  something,  or  because  of  some¬ 
thing,  but  that  love  that  I  felt  for  the  first  time,  when  dying,  I  saw  my 
enemy  and  yet  loved  him.  I  knew  that  feeling  of  love  which  is  the  very 
essence  of  the  soul,  for  which  no  object  is  needed.  And  I  know  that  blissful 
feeling  now  too.  To  love  one’s  neighbours;  to  love  one’s  enemies.  To 
love  everything — to  love  God  in  all  His  manifestations.  Some  one  dear 
to  one  can  be  loved  with  human  love;  but  an  enemy  can  only  be  loved 
with  divine  love.  And  that  was  why  I  felt  such  joy  when  I  felt  that  I 
loved  that  man.  What  happened  to  him?  Is  he  alive?  .  .  .  Loving 
with  human  love,  one  may  pass  from  love  to  hatred;  but  divine  love 
cannot  change.  Nothing,  not  even  death,  nothing  can  shatter  it.  It  is  the 
very  nature  of  the  soul.  And  how  many  people  I  have  hated  in  my  life. 
And  of  all  people  none  I  have  loved  and  hated  more  than  her.’  And  he 
vividly  pictured  Natasha  to  himself,  not  as  he  had  pictured  her  in  the 
past,  only  with  the  charm  that  had  been  a  joy  to  him;  for  the  first  time 
he  pictured  to  himself  her  soul.  And  he  understood  her  feeling,  her  suffer¬ 
ings,  her  shame,  and  her  penitence.  Now,  for  the  first  time,  he  felt  all  the 
cruelty  of  his  abandonment,  saw  all  the  cruelty  of  his  rupture  with  her. 
‘If  it  were  only  possible  for  me  to  see  her  once  more  .  .  .  once,  looking 
into  those  eyes,  to  say  .  .  .’ 

Piti-piti-piti  iti-ti,  ipiti-piti — boom,  the  fly  flapped  .  .  .  And  his 
attention  passed  all  at  once  into  another  world  of  reality  and  delirium,  in 
which  something  peculiar  was  taking  place.  In  that  place  the  edifice  was 
still  rising,  unshattered;  something  was  still  stretching  out,  the  candle 
was  still  burning,  with  a  red  ring  round  it ;  the  same  shirt-sphinx  still  lay 
by  the  door.  But  besides  all  this,  something  creaked,  there  was  a  whiff 


868 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

of  fresh  air,  and  a  new  white  sphinx  appeared  standing  before  the  door¬ 
way.  And  that  sphinx  had  the  white  face  and  shining  eyes  of  that  very 
Natasha  he  had  been  dreaming  of  just  now. 

‘Oh,  how  wearisome  this  everlasting  delirium  is!’  thought  Prince 
Andrey,  trying  to  dispel  that  face  from  his  vision.  But  that  face  stood 
before  him  with  the  face  of  reality,  and  that  face  was  coming  closer. 
Prince  Andrey  tried  to  go  back  to  the  world  of  pure  thought,  but  he 
could  not,  and  he  was  drawn  back  into  the  realm  of  delirium.  The  soft  i 
murmuring  voice  kept  up  its  rhythmic  whisper,  something  was  oppress¬ 
ing  him,  and  rising  up,  and  the  strange  face  stood  before  him.  Prince 
Andrey  rallied  all  his  forces  to  regain  his  senses;  he  stirred  a  little,  and 
suddenly  there  was  a  ringing  in  his  ears  and  a  dimness  before  his  eyes,  and 
like  a  man  sinking  under  water,  he  lost  consciousness. 

When  he  came  to  himself,  Natasha,  the  very  living  Natasha,  whom  of 
all  people  in  the  world  he  most  longed  to  love  with  that  new,  pure,  divine 
love  that  had  now  been  revealed  to  him,  was  on  her  knees  before  him. 
He  knew  that  it  was  the  real,  living  Natasha,  and  did  not  wonder,  but 
quietly  rejoiced.  Natasha,  on  her  knees,  in  terro’r,  but  without  moving 
(she  could  not  have  moved),  gazed  at  him,  restraining  her  sobs.  Her 
face  was  white  and  rigid.  There  was  only  a  sort  of  quiver  in  the  lower 
part  of  it. 

Prince  Andrey  drew  a  sigh  of  relief,  smiled,  and  held  out  his  hand. 

‘Your’  he  said.  ‘What  happiness!’ 

With  a  swift  but  circumspect  movement,  Natasha  came  nearer,  still 
kneeling,  and  carefully  taking  his  hand  she  bent  her  face  over  it  and 
began  kissing  it,  softly  touching  it  with  her  lips. 

‘Forgive  me!’  she  said  in  a  whisper,  lifting  her  head  and  glancing  at 

him.  ‘Forgive  me!’ 

‘I  love  you,’  said  Prince  Andrey. 

‘Forgive  .  .  .’ 

‘Forgive  what?’  asked  Prince  Andrey. 

‘Forgive  me  for  what  I  di  .  .  .  id,’  Natasha  murmured  in  a  hardly 
audible,  broken  whisper,  and  again  and  again  she  softly  put  her  lips 
to  his  hand. 

‘I  love  thee  more,  better  than  before,’  said  Prince  Andrey,  lifting  her 
face  with  his  hand  so  that  he  could  look  into  her  eyes. 

Those  eyes,  swimming  with  happy  tears,  gazed  at  him  with  timid  com¬ 
miseration  and  joyful  love.  Natasha’s  thin,  pale  face,  with  its  swollen 
lips,  was  more  than  ugly — it  looked  terrible.  But  Prince  Andrey  did  not 
see  her  face,  he  saw  the  shining  eyes,  which  were  beautiful.  They  heard 
talk  behind  them. 

Pyotr,  the  valet,  by  now  wide  awake,  had  waked  up  the  doctor.  Timo- 

hin,  who  had  not  slept  all  night  for  the  pain  in  his  leg,  had  been  long 
watching  all  that  was  happening,  and  huddled  up  on  his  bench,  carefully 
wrapping  his  bare  person  up  in  the  sheet. 

‘Why,  what’s  this?’  said  the  doctor,  getting  up  from  his  bed  on  the  floor. 
‘Kindly  retire,  madam.’ 


WAR  AND  PEACE  869 

At  that  moment  there  was  a  knock  at  the  door;  a  maid  had  been  sent 
by  the  countess  in  search  of  her  daughter. 

Like  a  sleep-walker  awakened  in  the  midst  of  her  trance,  Natasha 
walked  out  of  the  room,  and  getting  back  to  her  hut,  sank  sobbing  on 
her  bed. 

From  that  day  at  all  the  halts  and  resting-places  on  the  remainder  of 
the  Rostovs’  journey,  Natasha  never  felt  Bolkonsky’s  side,  and  the  doctor 
was  forced  to  admit  that  he  had  not  expected  from  a  young  girl  so  much 
fortitude,  nor  skill  in  nursing  a  wounded  man. 

Terrible  as  it  was  to  the  countess  to  think  that  Prince  Andrey  might 
(and  very  probably,  too,  from  what  the  doctor  said)  die  on  the  road  in 
her  daughter’s  arms,  she  could  not  resist  Natasha.  Although  with  the 
renewal  of  affectionate  relations  between  Prince  Andrey  and  Natasha 
the  idea  did  occur  that  in  case  he  recovered  their  old  engagement  would 
be  renewed,  no  one — least  of  all  Natasha  and  Prince  Andrey — spoke  of 
this.  The  unsettled  question  of  life  and  death  hanging,  not  only  over 
Prince  Andrey,  but  over  all  Russia,  shut  off  all  other  considerations. 


XXXIII 

Pierre  waked  up  late  on  the  3rd  of  September.  His  head  ached,  the 
clothes  in  which  he  had  slept  without  undressing  fretted  his  body,  and 
he  had  a  vague  sense  in  his  heart  of  something  shameful  he  had  done  the 
evening  before.  That  something  shameful  was  his  talk  with  Captain 
Ramballe. 

His  watch  told  him  it  was  eleven,  but  it  seemed  a  particularly  dull  day. 
Pierre  stood  up,  rubbed  his  eyes,  and  seeing  the  pistol  with  its  engraved 
stock — Gerasim  had  put  it  back  on  the  writing-table — Pierre  remembered 
where  he  was  and  what  was  in  store  for  him  that  day. 

‘Am  I  not  too  late  already?’  Pierre  wondered. 

No,  probably  he  would  not  make  his  entry  into  Moscow  before  twelve 
o’clock.  Pierre  did  not  allow  himself  to  reflect  on  what  lay  before  him, 
but  made  haste  to  act. 

Setting  his  clothes  to  rights,  Pierre  took  up  the  pistol  and  was  about 
to  set  off.  But  then  for  the  first  time  it  occurred  to  him  to  wonder  how, 
if  not  in  his  hand,  he  was  to  carry  the  weapon  in  the  street.  Even  under 
his  full  coat  it  would  be  hard  to  conceal  a  big  pistol.  It  could  not  be  put 
in  his  sash,  nor  under  his  arm,  without  being  noticeable.  Moreover,  the 
pistol  was  now  unloaded,  and  Pierre  could  not  succeed  in  reloading  it  in 
time.  ‘The  dagger  will  do  as  well,’  Pierre  said  to  himself;  though,  in  con¬ 
sidering  how  he  should  carry  out  his  design,  he  had  more  than  once  de¬ 
cided  that  the  great  mistake  made  by  the  student  in  1809  was  that  he  had 
tried  to  kill  Napoleon  with  a  dagger.  But  Pierre’s  chief  aim  seemed  to  be, 
not  so  much  to  succeed  in  his  project,  as  to  prove  to  himself  that  he  was 
not  renouncing  his  design,  but  was  doing  everything  to  carry  it  out.  Pierre 


8ro  WAR  AND  PEACE 

hurriedly  took  the  blunt,  notched  dagger  in  a  green  scabbard,  which  he 
had  bought,  together  with  the  pistol,  at  the  Suharev  Tower,  and  hid  it 
under  his  waistcoat. 

Tying  the  sash  round  his  peasant’s  coat,  and  pulling  his  cap  forward, 
Pierre  walked  along  the  corridor,  trying  to  avoid  making  a  noise  and 
meeting  the  captain,  and  slipped  out  into  the  street. 

The  fire,  at  which  he  had  gazed  so  indifferently  the  evening  before,  had 
sensibly  increased  during  the  night.  Moscow  was  on  fire  at  various  points. 
There  were  fires  at  the  same  time  in  Carriage  Row,  Zamoskvoryetche,  the 
Bazaar,  and  Povarsky,  and  the  timber  market  near  Dorogomilov  bridge 
and  the  barges  in  the  river  Moskva  were  in  a  blaze. 

Pierre’s  way  lay  across  a  side  street  to  Povarsky,  and  from  there  across 
Arbatv  to  the  chapel  of  Nikola  Yavlenny,  where  he  had  long  before  in 
his  fancy  fixed  on  the  spot  at  which  the  deed  ought  to  be  done.  Most  of 
the  houses  had  their  gates  and  shutters  closed.  The  streets  and  lanes  were 
deserted;  there  was  a  smell  of  burning  and  smoke  in  the  air.  Now  and 
then  he  met  Russians  with  uneasy  and  timid  faces,  and  Frenchmen  with 
a  look  of  the  camp  about  them,  walking  in  the  middle  of  the  road.  Both 
looked  at  Pierre  with  surprise.  Apart  from  his  great  height  and  stoutness, 
and  the  look  of  gloomy  concentration  and  suffering  in  his  face  and  whole 
figure,  Russians  stared  at  Pierre  because  they  could  not  make  out  to 
what  class  he  belonged.  Frenchmen  looked  after  him  with  surprise,  be¬ 
cause,  while  all  other  Russians  stared  timidly  and  inquisitively  at  them, 
Pierre  walked  by  without  noticing  them.  At  the  gates  of  a  house,  three 
Frenchmen,  disputing  about  something  with  some  Russians,  who  did  not 
understand  their  meaning,  stopped  Pierre  to  ask  whether  he  knew 
French. 

Pierre  shook  his  head  and  walked  on.  In  another  lane  a  sentinel,  on 
guard  by  a  green  caisson,  shouted  at  him,  and  it  was  only  at  the  repe¬ 
tition  of  his  menacing  shout,  and  the  sound  of  his  picking  up  his 
gun,  that  Pierre  grasped  that  he  ought  to  have  passed  the  street  on 
the  other  side.  He  heard  and  saw  nothing  around  him.  With  haste  and 
horror  he  bore  within  him  his  intention  as  something  strange  and  fearful 
to  him,  fearing — from  the  experience  of  the  previous  night — to  lose  it. 
But  Pierre  was  not  destined  to  carry  his  design  in  safety  to  the  spot  to 
which  he  was  bending  his  steps.  Moreover,  if  he  had  not  been  detained  on 
the  road,  his  design  could  not  have  been  carried  out,  because  Napoleon 
had  four  hours  earlier  left  the  Dorogomilov  suburb,  and  crossed  Arbaty 
to  the  Kremlin;  and  he  was  by  then  sitting  in  the  royal  study  in  the 
Kremlin  palace  in  the  gloomiest  temper,  giving  circumstantial  orders 
for  immediately  extinguishing  the  fires,  preventing  pillage,  and  reassur¬ 
ing  the  inhabitants.  But  Pierre  knew  nothing  of  that;  entirely  engrossed 
in  what  lay  before  him,  he  was  suffering  the  anguish  men  suffer  when 
they  persist  in  undertaking  a  task  impossible  for  them — not  from  its 
inherent  difficulties,  but  from  its  incompatibility  with  their  own  nature. 
He  was  tortured  by  the  dread  that  he  would  be  weak  at  the  decisive 
moment,  and  so  would  lose  his  respect  for  himself. 


WAR  AND  PEACE  87' 

Though  he  saw  and  heard  nothing  around  him,  he  instinctively  found 
his  way,  and  took  the  right  turning  to  reach  Povarsky. 

As  Pierre  got  nearer  to  Povarsky  Street,  the  smoke  grew  thicker  and 
thicker,  and  the  air  was  positively  warm  from  the  heat  of  the  conflagra¬ 
tion.  Tongues  of  flame  shot  up  here  and  there  behind  the  house-tops. 
He  met  more  people  in  the  streets,  and  these  people  were  in  great  excite¬ 
ment.  But  though  Pierre  felt  that  something  unusual  was  happening 
around  him,  he  did  not  grasp  the  fact  that  he  was  getting  near  the  fire. 
As  he  walked  along  a  path,  across  the  large  open  space  adjoining  on  one 
side  Povarsky  Street,  and  on  the  other  side  the  gardens  of  Prince  Gruzin¬ 
sky,  Pierre  suddenly  heard  close  by  him  the  sound  of  a  woman,  crying 
desperately.  He  stood  still,  as  though  awakened  from  a  dream,  and  raised 
his  head. 

On  the  dried-up,  dusty  grass  on  one  side  of  the  path  lay  heaps  of 
household  belongings  piled  up:  feather-beds,  a  samovar,  holy  images, 
and  boxes.  On  the  ground,  near  the  boxes,  sat  a  thin  woman,  no  longer 
young,  with  long,  projecting  front  teeth,  dressed  in  a  black  cloak  and  cap. 
This  woman  was  weeping  violently,  swaying  to  and  fro,  and  ‘muttering 
something.  Two  little  girls,  from  ten  to  twelve  years  old,  dressed  in  dirty, 
short  frocks  and  cloaks,  were  gazing  at  their  mother,  with  an  expression 
of  stupefaction  on  their  pale,  frightened  faces.  A  little  boy  of  seven,  in 
a  coat  and  a  huge  cap,  obviously  not  his  own,  was  crying  in  an  old  nurse’s 
arms.  A  bare-legged,  dirty  servant-girl  was  sitting  on  a  chest;  she  had  let 
down  her  flaxen  hair,  and  was  pulling  out  the  singed  hairs,  sniffing  at 
them.  The  husband,  a  short,  stooping  man,  in  a  uniform,  with  little,  wheel¬ 
shaped  whiskers,  and  smooth  locks  of  hair,  peeping  out  from  under  his 
cap,  which  was  stuck  erect  on  his  head,  was  moving  the  chests  from  under 
one  another  with  an  immovable  face,  dragging  garments  of  some  sort 
from  under  them. 

The  woman  almost  flung  herself  at  Pierre’s  feet  as  soon  as  she  saw  him. 

‘Merciful  heavens,  good  Christian  folk,  save  me,  help  me,  kind  sir! 

.  .  .  somebody,  help  me,’  she  articulated  through  her  sobs.  ‘My  little 
girl!  .  .  .  My  daughter!  .  .  .  My  youngest  girl  left  behind!  .  .  . 
She’s  burnt!  Oo  .  .  .  er!  What  a  fate  I  have  nursed  thee  for  .  .  . 
Ooo!  ’ 

‘Hush,  Marya  Nikolaevna,’  the  husband  said  in  a  low  voice  to  his  wife, 
evidently  only  to  justify  himself  before  an  outsider. 

‘Sister  must  have  taken  her,  nothing  else  can  have  happened  to  her!’ 
he  added. 

‘Monster,  miscreant!’  the  woman  screeched  furiously,  her  tears  sud¬ 
denly  ceasing.  ‘There  is  no  heart  in  you,  you  have  no  feeling  for  your  own 
child.  Any  other  man  would  have  rescued  her  from  the  fire.  But  he  is  a 
monster,  not  a  man,  not  a  father.  You  are  a  noble  man,’  the  woman 
turned  to  Pierre  sobbing  and  talking  rapidly.  ‘The  row  was  on  fire — they 
rushed  in  to  tell  us.  The  girl  screamed:  Fire!  We  rushed  to  get  our  things 
out.  Just  as  we  were,  we  escaped.  .  -  .  This  is  all  we  could  snatch  up 
•  .  ,  the  blessed  images,  we  look  at  the  children,  and  the  bed  that  was 


872  WARANDPEACE 

my  dowry,  and  all  the  rest  is  lost.  Katitchka’s  missing.  Ooo!  O  Lord! 

.  .  .’  and  again  she  broke  into  sobs.  ‘My  darling  babe!  burnt!  burnt !’ 

‘But  where,  where  was  she  left?’  said  Pierre. 

From  the  expression  of  his  interested  face,  the  woman  saw  that  this 
man  might  help  her. 

‘Good,  kind  sir!’  she  screamed,  clutching  at  his  legs.  ‘Benefactor,  set 
my  heart  at  rest  anyway  .  .  .  Aniska,  go,  you  slut,  show  the  way,’  she 
bawled  to  the  servant-girl,  opening  her  mouth  wide  in  her  anger,  and 
displaying  her  long  teeth  more  than  ever. 

‘Show  the  way,  show  me,  I  ...  I  ...  I’ll  do  something,’  Pierre 
gasped  hurriedly. 

The  dirty  servant-girl  came  out  from  behind  the  box,  put  up  her  hair, 
and  sighing,  walked  on  in  front  along  the  path  with  her  coarse,  bare  feet. 

Pierre  felt  as  though  he  had  suddenly  come  back  to  life  after  a  heavy 
swoon.  Pie  drew  his  head  up,  his  eyes  began  to  shine  with  the  light  of 
life,  and  with  rapid  steps  he  followed  the  girl,  overtook  her,  and  went 
into  Povarsky  Street.  The  whole  street  was  full  of  clouds  of  black  smoke. 
Tongues  of  flame  shot  up  here  and  there  out  of  these  clouds.  A  great 
crowd  had  gathered  in  front  of  the  fire.  In  the  middle  of  the  street  stood 
a  French  general,  saying  something  to  those  about  him.  Pierre,  accom¬ 
panied  by  the  servant-girl,  was  approaching  the  place  where  the  French 
general  stood;  but  the  French  soldiers  stopped  him. 

‘Can’t  pass,’  a  voice  shouted  to  him. 

‘This  way,  master,’  bawled  the  girl.  ‘We’ll  cut  across  Nikoliny  by 
the  lane.’ 

Pierre  turned  back,  breaking  into  a  run  now  and  then  to  keep  pace 
with  her.  The  girl  ran  across  the  street,  turned  into  a  lane  on  the  left, 
and  passing  three  houses,  turned  in  at  a  gate  on  the  right. 

‘It’s  just  here,’  she  said,  and  running  across  a  yard,  she  opened  a  little 
gate  in  a  paling-fence,  and  stopping  short,  pointed  out  to  Pierre  a  small 
wooden  lodge,  which  was  blazing  away  brightly.  One  side  of  it  had  fallen 
in,  the  other  was  on  fire,  and  flames  peeped  out  at  the  window-holes  and 
under  the  roof. 

As  Pierre  went  in  at  the  little  gate,  he  felt  the  rush  of  heat,  and 
involuntarily  stopped  short. 

‘Which,  which  is  your  house?’  he  asked. 

‘Oooh!’  wailed  the  servant-girl,  pointing  to  the  lodge.  ‘That’s  it,  that 
same  was  our  lodging.  Sure,  you’re  burnt  to  death,  our  treasure,  Katit- 
chka,  my  precious  little  missy,  ooh!’  wailed  Aniska,  at  the  sight  of  the 
fire  feeling  the  necessity  of  giving  expression  to  her  feelings  too. 

Pierre  darted  up  to  the  lodge,  but  the  heat  was  so  great  that  he  could 
not  help  describing  a  curve  round  it,  and  found  himself  close  to  a  big 
house,  which  was  as  yet  only  on  fire  on  one  side,  at  the  roof.  A  group  of 
French  soldiers  were  swarming  round  it.  Pierre  could  not  at  first  make 
out  what  these  Frenchmen  were  about,  dragging  something  out  of  the 
house.  But  seeing  a  French  soldier  in  front  of  him  beating  a  peasant  with 
a  blunt  cutlass,  and  taking  from  him  a  fur-lined  coat,  Pierre  became 


WAR  AND  PEACE  873 

vaguely  aware  that  pillaging  was  going  on  here — but  he  had  no  time  to 
dwell  on  the  idea. 

The  sound  of  the  rumble  and  crash  of  falling  walls  and  ceilings;  the 
roar  and  hiss  of  the  flames,  and  the  excited  shouts  of  the  crowd ;  the  sight 
of  the  hovering  clouds  of  smoke — here  folding  over  into  black  masses, 
there  drawing  out  and  lighted  up  by  gleaming  sparks;  and  the  flames — 
here  like  a  thick  red  sheaf,  and  there  creeping  like  golden  fish-scales 
over  the  walls;  the  sense  of  the  heat  and  smoke  and  rapidity  of  move¬ 
ment,  all  produced  on  Pierre  the  usual  stimulating  effect  of  a  conflagra¬ 
tion.  That  effect  was  particularly  strong  on  Pierre,  because  all  at  once, 
at  the  sight  of  the  fire,  he  felt  himself  set  free  from  the  ideas  weighing 
upon  him.  He  felt  young,  gay,  ready,  and  resolute.  He  ran  round  the 
lodge  on  the  side  of  the  house,  and  was  about  to  run  into  that  part  which 
was  still  standing,  when  he  heard  several  voices  shouting  immediately 
above  his  head,  followed  by  the  crash  and  bang  of  something  heavy 
falling  close  by. 

Pierre  looked  round,  and  saw  at  the  windows  of  the  house  some  French 
soldiers,  who  had  just  dropped  out  a  drawer  of  a  chest,  filled  with  some 
metallic  objects.  Some  more  French  soldiers  standing  below  went  up  to 
the  drawer. 

‘Well,  what  does  that  fellow  want?’  one  of  the  French  soldiers  shouted, 
referring  to  Pierre. 

‘A  child  in  the  house.  Haven’t  you  seen  a  child?’  said  Pierre. 

‘What’s  the  fellow  singing?  Get  along,  do!’  shouted  voices;  and  one 
of  the  soldiers,  evidently  afraid  Pierre  might  take  it  into  his  head  to 
snatch  the  silver  and  bronzes  from  them,  pounced  on  him  in  a  menacing 
fashion. 

‘A  child?’  shouted  a  Frenchman  from  above.  ‘I  did  hear  something  cry¬ 
ing  in  the  garden.  Perhaps  it’s  the  fellow’s  brat.  Must  be  humane,  you 
know.’ 

‘Where  is  it?’  asked  Pierre. 

‘This  way!’  the  French  soldier  shouted  to  him  from  the  window  point¬ 
ing  to  the  garden  behind  the  house.  ‘Wait,  I’ll  come  down.’ 

And  in  a  minute  the  Frenchman,  a  black-eyed  fellow,  with  a  patch 
on  his  cheek,  in  his  shirt-sleeves,  did  in  fact  jump  out  of  a  window  on 
the  ground  floor,  and  slapping  Pierre  on  the  shoulder,  he  ran  with 
him  to  the  garden.  ‘Make  haste,  you  fellows,’  he  shouted  to  his  comrades, 
‘it’s  beginning  to  get  hot.’  Running  behind  the  house  to  a  sanded  path, 
the  Frenchman  pulled  Pierre  by  the  arm,  and  pointed  out  to  him  a  cir¬ 
cular  space.  Under  a  garden  seat  lay  a  girl  of  three  years  old,  in  a 
Vink  frock. 

‘Here’s  your  brat.  Ah,  a  little  girl.  So  much  the  better,’  said  the 
Frenchman.  ‘Good-bye.  Must  be  humane,  we  are  all  mortal,  you  know’; 
and  the  Frenchman,  with  the  patch  on  his  cheek,  ran  back  to  his 
comrades. 

Pierre,  breathless  with  joy,  ran  up  to  the  child,  and  would  have  taken 
her  in  his  arms.  But  seeing  a  stranger,  the  little  girl — a  scrofulous-looking, 


874  WARANDPEACE 

unattractive  child,  very  like  her  mother— screamed  and  ran  away.  Pierre 
caught  her,  however,  and  lifted  her  up  in  his  arms;  she  squealed  in  des¬ 
perate  fury,  and  tried  to  tear  herself  out  of  Pierre’s  arms  with  her  little 
hands,  and  to  bite  him  with  her  dirty,  dribbling  mouth.  Pierre  had  a 
sense  of  horror  and  disgust,  such  as  he  had  felt  at  contact  with  some  . 
little  beast.  But  he  made  an  effort  to  overcome  it,  and  not  to  drop  the  : 
child,  and  ran  with  it  back  to  the  big  house.  By  now,  however,  it  was 
impossible  to  get  back  by  the  same  way;  the  servant-girl,  Aniska,  was 
nowhere  to  be  seen,  and  with  a  feeling  of  pity  and  loathing,  Pierre  held 
close  to  him,  as  tenderly  as  he  could,  the  piteously  howling,  and  sopping 
wet  baby,  and  ran  across  the  garden  to  seek  some  other  way  out. 


XXXIV 

When  Pierre,  after  running  across  courtyards  and  by-lanes,  got  back 
with  his  burden  to  Prince  Gruzinsky’s  garden,  at  the  corner  of  Povarsky, 
he  did  not  for  the  first  moment  recognise  the  place  from  which  he  had 
set  out  to  look  for  the  baby:  it  was  so  packed  with  people  and  goods, 
dragged  out  of  the  houses.  Besides  the  Russian  families  with  their  be¬ 
longings  saved  from  the  fire,  there  were  a  good  many  French  soldiers 
here  too  in  various  uniforms.  Pierre  took  no  notice  of  them.  He  was  in 
haste  to  find  the  family,  and  to  restore  the  child  to  its  mother,  so  as  to 
be  able  to  go  back  and  save  some  one  else.  It  seemed  to  Pierre  that  he 
had  a  great  deal  more  to  do,  and  to  do  quickly.  Warmed  up  by  the  heat 
and  running,  Pierre  felt  even  more  strongly  at  that  minute  the  sense  of 
youth,  eagerness,  and  resolution,  which  had  come  upon  him  when  he  was 
running  to  save  the  baby. 

The  child  was  quiet  now,  and  clinging  to  Pierre’s  coat  with  her  little 
hands,  she  sat  on  his  arm,  and  looked  about  her  like  a  little  wild  beast. 
Pierre  glanced  at  her  now  and  then,  and  smiled  slightly.  He  fancied  he 
saw  something  touchingly  innocent  in  the  frightened,  sickly  little  face. 

Neither  the  official  nor  his  wife  were  in  the  place  where  he  had  left 
them.  With  rapid  steps,  Pierre  walked  about  among  the  crowd,  scanning 
the  different  faces  he  came  across.  He  could  not  help  noticing  a  Georgian 
or  Armenian  family,  consisting  of  a  very  old  man,  of  a  handsome  Oriental 
cast  of  face,  dressed  in  a  new  cloth-faced  sheepskin  and  new  boots;  an 
old  woman  of  a  similar  type;  and  a  young  woman.  The  latter — a  very 
young  woman — struck  Pierre  as  a  perfect  example  of  Oriental  beauty, 
with  her  sharply  marked,  arched,  black  eyebrows,  her  extraordinarily 
soft,  bright  colour  and  beautiful,  expressionless,  oval  face.  Among  the 
goods  flung  down  in  the  crowd  in  the  grass  space,  in  her  rich  satin  mantle, 
and  the  bright  lilac  kerchief  on  her  head,  she  suggested  a  tender,  tropical 
plant,  thrown  down  in  the  snow.  She  was  sitting  on  the  baggage  a  little 
behind  the  old  woman,  and  her  big,  black,  long-shaped  eyes,  with  their 
long  lashes,  were  fixed  immovably  on  the  ground.  Evidently  she  was 
aware  of  her  beauty,  and  fearful  because  of  it.  Her  face  struck  Pierre, 


WAR  AND  PEACE  S75 

ind  in  his  haste  he  looked  round  at  her  several  times  as  he  passed  along 
Dy  the  fence.  Reaching  the  fence,  and  still  failing  to  find  the  people  he 
vas  looking  for,  Pierre  stood  still  and  looked  round. 

Pierre’s  figure  was  more  remarkable  than  ever  now  with  the  baby  in  his 
irms,  and  several  Russians,  both  men  and  women,  gathered  about  him. 

‘Have  you  lost  some  one,  good  sir?  Are  you  a  gentleman  yourself,  or 
vhat?  Whose  baby  is  it?’  they  asked  him. 

Pierre  answered  that  the  baby  belonged  to  a  woman  in  a  black  mantle, 
vho  had  been  sitting  at  this  spot  with  her  children;  and  asked  whether 
iny  one  knew  her,  and  where  she  had  gone. 

‘Why,  it  must  be  the  Anferovs,’  said  an  old  deacon  addressing  a  pock- 
narked  peasant  woman.  ‘Lord,  have  mercy  on  us!  Lord,  have  mercy 
m  us!’  he  added,  in  his  professional  bass. 

‘The  Anferovs,’  said  the  woman.  ‘Why,  the  Anferovs  have  been  gone 
;ince  early  this  morning.  It  will  either  be  Marya  Nikolaevna’s  or 
vanova’s.’ 

‘He  says  a  woman,  and  Marya  Nikolaevna’s  a  lady,’  said  a  house-serf. 
‘You  know  her,  then;  a  thin  woman — long  teeth,’  said  Pierre. 

‘To  be  sure,  Marya  Nikolaevna.  They  moved  off  into  the  garden  as 
,oon  as  these  wolves  pounced  down  on  us,’  said  the  woman,  indicating  the 
french  soldiers. 

‘0  Lord,  have  mercy  on  us!’  the  deacon  added  again, 
j  ‘You  go  on  yonder,  they  are  there.  It’s  she,  for  sure.  She  was  quite 
beside  herself  with  crying,’  said  the  woman  again.  ‘It’s  she.  Here  this 
,vay.’ 

But  Pierre  was  not  heeding  the  woman.  For  several  seconds  he  had  been 
;azing  intently  at  what  was  passing  a  few  paces  from  him.  Lie  was  looking 
t  the  Armenian  family  and  two  French  soldiers,  who  had  approached 
hem.  One  of  these  soldiers,  a  nimble,  little  man,  was  dressed  in  a  blue 
oat,  with  a  cord  tied  round  for  a  belt.  Fie  had  a  nightcap  on  his  head, 
nd  his  feet  were  bare.  Another,  whose  appearance  struck  Pierre  par- 
icularly,  was  a  long,  round-shouldered,  fair-haired,  thin  man,  with 
londerous  movements  and  an  idiotic  expression  of  face.  Fie  was  dressed 
1  a  frieze  tunic,  blue  trousers  and  big,  torn,  high  boots.  The  little  bare- 
DOted  Frenchman  in  the  blue  coat,  on  going  up  to  the  Armenians,  said 
Something,  and  at  once  took  hold  of  the  old  man’s  legs,  and  the  old  man 
egan  immediately  in  haste  pulling  off  his  boots.  The  other  soldier  in  the 
i-inic  stopped  facing  the  beautiful  Armenian  girl,  with  his  hands  in  his 
lockets,  and  stared  at  her  without  speaking  or  moving. 

‘Take  it,  take  the  child,’  said  Pierre,  handing  the  child  to  the  peasant 
oman,  and  speaking  with  peremptory  haste.  ‘You  give  her  to  them,  you 
ike  her,’  he  almost  shouted  to  the  woman,  setting  the  screaming  child 
a  the  ground,  and  looking  round  again  at  the  Frenchmen  and  the 
rmenian  family.  The  old  man  was  by  now  sitting  barefoot.  The  little 
renchman  had  just  taken  the  second  boot  from  him,  and  was  slapping 
le  boots  together.  The  old  man  was  saying  something  with  a  sob,  but 
1  that  Pierre  only  saw  in  a  passing  glimpse.  His  whole  attention  was 


876  WARANDPEACE 

absorbed  by  the  Frenchman  in  the  tunic,  who  had  meanwhile,  with  a 
deliberate,  swinging  gait,  moved  up  to  the  young  woman,  and  taking  his 
hands  out  of  his  pockets,  caught  hold  of  her  neck. 

The  beautiful  Armenian  still  sat  in  the  same  immobile  pose,  with  her 
long  lashes  drooping,  and  seemed  not  to  see  and  not  to  feel  what  the 
soldier  was  doing  to  her. 

While  Pierre  ran  the  few  steps  that  separated  him  from  the  Frenchman, 
the  long  soldier  in  the  tunic  had  already  torn  the  necklace  from  the 
Armenian  beauty’s  neck,  and  the  young  woman,  clutching  at  her  neck 
with  both  hands,  screamed  shrilly. 

‘Let  that  woman  alone!  ’  Pierre  roared  in  a  voice  hoarse  with  rage,  and 
seizing  the  long,  stooping  soldier  by  the  shoulders  he  shoved  him  away. 
The  soldier  fell  down,  got  up,  and  ran  away.  His  comrade,  dropping  the 
boots,  pulled  out  his  sword,  and  moved  up  to  Pierre  in  a  menacing 
attitude. 

‘Voyons,  pas  de  betises!’  he  shouted. 

Pierre  was  in  that  transport  of  frenzy  in  which  he  remembered  nothing, 
and  his  strength  was  increased  tenfold.  He  dashed  at  the  barefoot  French¬ 
man,  and  before  he  had  time  to  draw  his  cutlass,  he  knocked  him  down, 
and  was  pommelling  him  with  his  fists.  Shouts  of  approval  were  heard 
from  the  crowd  around,  and  at  the  same  moment  a  patrol  of  French 
Uhlans  came  riding  round  the  corner.  The  Uhlans  trotted  up  to  Pierre, 
and  the  French  soldiers  surrounded  him.  Pierre  had  no  recollection  of 
what  followed.  He  remembered  that  he  beat  somebody,  and  was  beaten, 
and  that  in  the  end  he  found  that  his  hands  were  tied,  that  a  group  of 
French  soldiers  were  standing  round  him,  ransacking  his  clothes. 

‘Lieutenant,  he  has  a  dagger,’  were  the  first  words  Pierre  grasped  the 
meaning  of. 

‘Ah,  a  weapon,’  said  the  officer,  and  he  turned  to  the  barefoot  soldier 
who  had  been  taken  with  Pierre.  ‘Very  good,  very  good;  you  can  tell  al! 
your  story  at  the  court-martial,’  said  the  officer.  And  then  he  turned  tc 
Pierre:  ‘Do  you  know  French?’ 

Pierre  looked  about  him  with  bloodshot  eyes,  and  made  no  reply 
Probably  his  face  looked  very  terrible;  for  the  officer  said  something  in  a 
whisper,  and  four  more  Uhlans  left  the  rest,  and  stationed  themselves 
both  sides  of  Pierre. 

‘Do  you  speak  French?’  the  officer,  keeping  his  distance,  repeated  the 
question.  ‘Call  the  interpreter.’  From  the  ranks  a  little  man  came  for¬ 
ward,  in  a  Russian  civilian  dress.  Pierre,  from  his  dress  q.nd  speech,  at 
once  recognised  in  him  a  French  shopman  from  some  Moscow  shop. 

‘He  doesn’t  look  like  a  common  man,’  said  the  interpreter,  scanning 
Pierre. 

‘Oh,  oh,  he  looks  very  like  an  incendiary,’  said  the  officer.  ‘Ask  hin 
who  he  is,’  he  added. 

‘Who  are  you?’  asked  the  interpreter  in  his  Frenchified  Russian.  ‘Yo: 
must  answer  the  officer.’ 


WARANDPEACE  877 

‘I  will  not  say  who  I  am.  I  am  your  prisoner.  Take  me  away.  Pierre 
said  suddenly  in  French. 

‘Ah !  ah !  ’  commented  the  officer,  knitting  his  brows ;  ‘well,  march  then !  ’ 

A  crowd  had  gathered  around  the  Uhlans.  Nearest  of  all  to  Pierre  stood 
the  pock-marked  peasant  woman  with  the  child.  When  the  patrol  was 
moving,  she  stepped  forward : 

‘Why,  where  are  they  taking  you,  my  good  soul?’  she  said.  ‘The  child! 
what  am  I  to  do  with  the  child  if  it’s  not  theirs?’  she  cried. 

‘What  does  she  want,  this  woman?’  asked  the  officer. 

Pierre  was  like  a  drunken  man.  His  excitement  was  increased  at  the 
sight  of  the  little  girl  he  had  saved. 

‘What  does  she  want?’  he  said.  ‘She  is  carrying  my  daughter,  whom  I 
have  just  saved  from  the  flames,’  he  declared.  ‘Good-bye!’  and  utterly 
at  a  loss  to  explain  to  himself  the  aimless  lie  he  had  just  blurted  out,  he 
strode  along  with  a  resolute  and  solemn  step  between  the  Frenchmen. 

The  patrol  of  Uhlans  was  one  of  those  that  had  been  sent  out  by 
Durosnel’s  orders  through  various  streets  of  Moscow  to  put  a  stop  to 
pillage,  and  still  more  to  capture  the  incendiaries,  who  in  the  genera! 
opinion  of  the  French  officers  in  the  higher  ranks  on  that  day  were  caus¬ 
ing  the  fires.  Patrolling  several  streets,  the  Uhlans  arrested  five  more 
suspicious  characters,  a  shopkeeper,  two  divinity  students,  a  peasant,  and 
a  house-serf — all  Russians — besides  several  French  soldiers  engaged  in 
billage.  But  of  all  these  suspicious  characters  Pierre  seemed  to  them  the 
most  suspicious  of  all. 

When  they  had  all  been  brought  for  the  night  to  a  big  house  on 
Zubovsky  rampart,  which  had  been  fixed  upon  as  a  guardhouse,  Pierre 
,vas  put  apart  from  the  rest  under  strict  guard. 


PART  XII 


I 

In  the  higher  circles  in  Petersburg  the  intricate  conflict  between  the 
parties  of  Rumyantsev,  of  the  French,  of  Marya  Fyodorovna,  of  the 
Tsarevitch,  and  the  rest  was  going  on  all  this  time  with  more  heat 
than  ever,  drowned,  as  always,  by  the  buzzing  of  the  court  drones. 
But  the  easy,  luxurious  life  of  Petersburg,  troubled  only  about  phan¬ 
tasms,  the  reflection  of  life,  went  on  its  old  way;  and  the  course  of 
that  life  made  it  a  difficult  task  to  believe  in  the  danger  and  the 
difficult  position  of  the  Russian  people.  There  were  the  same  levees- 
and  balls,  the  same  French  theatre,  the  same  court  interests,  the  same 
interests  and  intrigues  in  the  government  service.  It  was  only  in  the 
very  highest  circles  that  efforts  were  made  to  recollect  the  difficulty  ot 
the  real  position.  There  was  whispered  gossip  of  how  the  two  Em¬ 
presses  had  acted  in  opposition  to  one  another  in  these  difficult  cir¬ 
cumstances.  The  Empress  Marya  Fyodorovna,  anxious  for  the  welfare 
of  the  benevolent  and  educational  institutions  under  her  patronage,  had. 
arrangements  made  for  the  removal  of  all  the  institutes  to  Kazan,  and 
all  the  belongings  of  these  establishments  were  already  packed.  The 
Empress  Elizaveta  Alexyevna  on  being  asked  what  commands  she  was 
graciously  pleased  to  give,  had  been  pleased  to  reply  that  in  regard  tc 
state  matters  she  could  give  no  commands,  since  that  was  all  in  the 
Tsar’s  hands;  as  far  as  she  personally  was  concerned,  she  had  gra¬ 
ciously  declared,  with  her  characteristic  Russian  patriotism,  that  she 
would  be  the  last  to  leave  Petersburg. 

On  the  26th  of  August,  the  very  day  of  the  battle  of  Borodino,  there 
was  a  soiree  at  Anna  Pavlovna’s,  the  chief  attraction  of  which  was  tc 
be  the  reading  of  the  Metropolitan’s  letter,  written  on  the  occasion  ol 
his  sending  to  the  Tsar  the  holy  picture  of  Saint  Sergey.  This  letter  was 
looked  upon  as  a  model  of  patriotic  ecclesiastical  eloquence.  It  was  tc 
be  read  by  Prince  Vassily  himself,  who  was  famed  for  his  fine  elocution 
(He  used  even  to  read  aloud  in  the  Empress’s  drawing-room.)  Thd 
beauty  of  his  elocution  was  supposed  to  lie  in  the  loud,  resonant  voice 
varying  between  a  despairing  howl  and  a  tender  whine,  in  which  he 
rolled  off  the  words  quite  independently  of  the  sense,  so  that  a  howl  fel 
on  one  word  and  a  whine  on  others  quite  at  random.  This  reading,  a: 
was  always  the  case  with  Anna  Pavlovna’s  entertainments,  had  a  po 
litical  significance.  She  was  expecting  at  this  soiree  several  importan 
personages  who  were  to  be  made  to  feel  ashamed  of  patronising  th< 

878 


WARANDPEACE  879 

;?nch  theatre,  and  to  be  roused  to  patriotic  fervour.  A  good  many 
33ple  had  already  arrived,  but  Anna  Pavlovna  did  not  yet  see  those 
rsons  whose  presence  in  her  drawing-room  was  necessary,  and  she 
*s  therefore  starting  general  topics  of  conversation  before  proceeding 
the  reading. 

The  news  of  the  day  in  Petersburg  was  the  illness  of  Countess 
i zuhov.  The  countess  had  been  taken  ill  a  few  days  previously;  she 
id  missed  several  entertainments,  of  which  she  was  usually  the  orna- 
mt,  and  it  was  said  that  she  was  seeing  no  one,  and  that  instead  of 
;  celebrated  Petersburg  physicians,  who  usually  attended  her,  she 
d  put  herself  into  the  hands  of  some  Italian  doctor,  who  was  treating 
r  on  some  new  and  extraordinary  method. 

Everybody  was  very  well  aware  that  the  charming  countess’s  illness 
ts  due  to  inconveniences  arising  from  marrying  two  husbands  at 
ice,  and  that  the  Italian  doctor’s  treatment  consisted  in  the  removal 
:  such  inconvenience.  But  in  the  presence  of  Anna  Pavlovna  no  one 
ntured  to  think  about  that  view  of  the  question,  or  even,  as  it  were, 
know  what  they  did  know  about  it. 

'They  say  the  poor  countess  is  very  ill.  The  doctor  says  it  is  angina 
c  tor  is.’ 

‘Angine?  Oh,  that’s  a  terrible  illness.’ 

fThey  say  the  rivals  are  reconciled,  thanks  to  the  angine  .  .  .’  The 
ird  angine  was  repeated  with  great  relish. 

‘I  am  told  the  old  count  is  touching.  He  cried  like  a  child  when 
je  doctor  told  him  there  was  danger.’ 

‘Oh,  it  would  be  a  terrible  loss.  She  is  a  fascinating  woman.’ 

'You  speak  of  the  poor  countess,’  said  Anna  Pavlovna,  coming  up. 
sent  to  inquire  after  her.  I  was  told  she  was  going  on  better.  Oh,  no 
ubt  of  it,  she  is  the  most  charming  woman  in  the  world,’  said  Anna 
vlovna,  with  a  smile  at  her  own  enthusiasm.  ‘We  belong  to  different 
mps,  but  that  does  not  prevent  me  from  appreciating  her  as  she 
serves.  She  is  very  unhappy,’  added  Anna  Pavlovna. 

Supposing  that  by  these  last  words  Anna  Pavlovna  had  slightly 
ited  the  veil  of  mystery  that  hung  over  the  countess’s  illness,  one 
wary  young  man  permitted  himself  to  express  surprise  that  no  well- 
own  doctor  had  been  called  in,  and  that  the  countess  should  be 
rated  by  a  charlatan,  who  might  make  use  of  dangerous  remedies. 
‘Your  information  may  be  better  than  mine,’  cried  Anna  Pavlovna, 
ling  upon  the  inexperienced  youth  with  sudden  viciousness,  ‘but  I 
ve  it  on  good  authority  that  this  doctor  is  a  very  learned  and  skilful 
in.  He  is  the  private  physician  of  the  Queen  of  Spain.’ 

And  having  thus  annihilated  the  young  man,  Anna  Pavlovna  turned 
Bilibin,  who  was  talking  in  another  group  about  the  Austrians,  and 
d  his  forehead  puckered  up  in  wrinkles  in  readiness  to  utter  un  mot. 
‘I  think  it  is  charming!’  he  was  saying  of  the  diplomatic  note  which 
d  been  sent  to  Vienna  with  the  Austrian  flags  taken  by  Wittgenstein, 
heros  de  Petropol,’  as  he  was  called  at  Petersburg. 


88o 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘What?  what  was  it?’  Anna  Pavlovna  inquired,  creating  a  silens 
for  the  mot  to  be  heard,  though  she  had  in  fact  heard  it  before. 

And  Bilibin  repeated  the  precise  words  of  the  diplomatic  despaU 
he  had  composed. 

‘The  Emperor  sends  back  the  Austrian  flags,’  said  Bilibin;  ‘drapeai 
amis  et  egares  qn’il  a  tro'uves  hors  de  la  route,’  Bilibin  concluded,  lettii 
the  wrinkles  run  off  his  forehead. 

‘Charming,  charming!’  said  Prince  Vassily. 

‘The  road  to  Warsaw,  perhaps,’  Prince  Ippolit  said  loudly,  to  tl 
general  surprise.  Everybody  looked  at  him,  at  a  loss  to  guess  what  1 
meant.  Prince  Ippolit,  too,  looked  about  him  with  light-hearted  wondt 
He  had  no  more  notion  than  other  people  what  was  meant  by  li 
words.  In  the  course  of  his  diplomatic  career  he  had  more  than  on 
noticed  that  words  suddenly  uttered  in  that  way  were  accepted  , 
highly  diverting,  and  on  every  occasion  he  uttered  in  that  way  the  fir 
words  that  chanced  to  come  to  his  tongue.  ‘May  be,  it  will  come  out  i 
right,’  he  thought,  ‘and  if  it  doesn’t,  they  will  know  how  to  give  son 
turn  to  it.’  And  the  awkward  silence  that  reigned  was  in  fact  broki 
by  the  entrance  of  the  personage  of  defective  patriotism  whom  Am 
Pavlovna  was  'waiting  for  to  convert  to  a  better  mind;  and  smilir, 
and  shaking  her  finger  at  Prince  Ippolit,  she  summoned  Prince  Vassi 
to  the  table,  and  setting  two  candles  and  a  manuscript  before  him,  si 
begged  him  to  begin.  There  was  a  general  hush. 

‘Most  high  and  gracious  Emperor  and  Tsar!’  Prince  Vassily  boomi 
out  sternly,  and  he  looked  round  at  his  audience  as  though  to  inqui 
whether  any  one  had  anything  to  say  against  that.  But  nobody  sa 
anything.  ‘The  chief  capital  city,  Moscow,  the  New  Jerusalem,  receiv 
her  Messiah’ — he  threw  a  sudden  emphasis  on  the  ‘her’ — ‘even  as 
mother  in  the  embraces  of  her  zealous  sons,  and  through  the  gatherii 
darkness,  foreseeing  the  dazzling  glory  of  thy  dominion,  sings  aloud 
triumph:  “Hosanna!  Blessed  be  He  that  cometh!”  ’ 

Prince  Vassily  uttered  these  last  words  in  a  tearful  voice. 

Bilibin  scrutinised  his  nails  attentively,  and  many  of  the  audien 
were  visibly  cowed,  as  though  wondering  what  they  had  done  wron 
Anna  Pavlovna  murmured  the  words  over  beforehand,  as  old  womi 
whisper  the  prayer  to  come  at  communion:  ‘Let  the  base  and  insole 
Goliath  .  .  .’  she  whispered. 

Prince  Vassily  continued: 

‘Let  the  base  and  insolent  Goliath  from  the  borders  of  France  e 
compass  the  realm  of  Russia  with  the  horrors  of  death;  lowly  faith,  t 
sling  of  the  Russian  David,  shall  smite  a  swift  blow  at  the  head  of  li 
pride  that  thirsteth  for  blood.  This  holy  image  of  the  most  venerat 
Saint  Sergey,  of  old  a  zealous  champion  of  our  country’s  welfare, 
borne  to  your  Imperial  Majesty.  I  grieve  that  my  failing  strength  hi 
ders  me  from  the  joy  of  your  most  gracious  presence.  Fervent  prayo 
I  am  offering  up  to  Heaven,  and  the  Almighty  will  exalt  the  faithf. 
and  fulfil  in  His  mercy  the  hopes  of  your  Majesty.’ 


WAR  AND  PEACE  88 1 

‘Quel  force!  Quel  style!’  was  murmured  in  applause  of  the  reader  and 
te  author.  Roused  by  this  appeal,  Anna  Pavlovna’s  guests  continued 
ir  a  long  while  talking  of  the  position  of  the  country,  and  made  various 
srmises  as  to  the  issue  of  the  battle  to  be  fought  in  a  few  days. 

‘You  will  see,’  said  Anna  Pavlovna,  ‘that  to-morrow  on  the  Em- 
I  ror’s  birthday  we  shall  get  news.  I  have  a  presentiment  of  something 
Eiod.’ 

II 

,nna  Pavlovna’s  presentiment  was  in  fact  fulfilled.  Next  day,  during 
ie  special  service  at  court  in  honour  of  the  Tsar’s  birthday,  Prince 
blkonsky  was  called  out  of  church  and  received  a  despatch  from 
■ince  Kutuzov.  This  was  the  despatch  Kutuzov  had  sent  off  on  the 
|y  of  the  battle  from  Tatarinovo.  Kutuzov  wrote  that  the  Russians 
lid  not  retreated  a  single  step,  that  the  French  had  lost  far  more  than 
ur  troops,  that  he  was  writing  off  in  haste  from  the  field  of  uattle 
I'fore  he  had  time  to  collect  the  latest  intelligence.  So  it  had  been  a 
ctory,  it  appeared.  And  at  once,  without  leaving  church,  the  assem- 
led  court  offered  up  thanks  to  the  Creator  for  His  succour,  and  for 
ie  victory. 

Anna  Pavlovna’s  presentiment  had  been  fulfilled,  and  the  whole 
lorning  a  mood  of  joyous  festivity  prevailed  in  the  town.  Every  one 
icepted  the  victory  as  a  conclusive  one,  and  some  people  were  already 
!.‘ginning  to  talk  of  Napoleon’s  having  been  taken  prisoner,  of  his 
isposition,  and  the  selection  of  a  new  sovereign  for  France. 

At  a  distance  from  the  scene  of  action  and  amid  the  conditions  of 
urt  life,  it  is  very  difficult  for  events  to  be  reflected  in  their  true 
rce  and  dimensions.  Public  events  are  involuntarily  grouped  about 
me  private  incident.  So  in  this  case,  the  courtiers’  rejoicing  was  as 
uch  due  to  the  fact  of  the  news  of  this  victory  having  arrived  precisely 
1  the  Tsar’s  birthday  as  to  the  fact  of  the  victory  itself.  It  was  like  a 
ccessfully  arranged  surprise.  Kutuzov’s  despatches  had  spoken,  too, 
the  Russian  losses,  and  among  them  had  mentioned  the  names  of 
utchkov,  Bagration,  and  Kutaissov.  The  melancholy  side,  too,  of  the 
ent  was  unconsciously  in  this  Petersburg  world  concentrated  about  a 
igle  incident — the  death  of  Kutaissov.  Every  one  knew  him,  the  Tsar 
,ed  him,  he  was  young  and  interesting.  All  met  that  day  with  the 
jprds : 

‘How  wonderful  it  should  have  happened  so!  Just  in  the  Te  Deum. 
ut  what  a  loss — Kutaissov!  Ah,  what  a  pity!’ 

‘What  did  I  tell  you  about  Kutuzov?’  Prince  Vassily  said  now  with 
e  pride  of  a  prophet.  ‘I  always  said  he  was  the  only  man  capable  of 
nquering  Napoleon.’ 

But  next  day  no  news  came  from  the  army,  and  the  public  voice 
ygan  to  waver.  The  courtiers  suffered  agonies  over  the  agonies  of 
ispense  which  the  Tsar  was  suffering. 


SS2 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Think  of  the  Emperor’s  position!’  the  courtiers  said;  and  they  n 
longer  sang  the  praises  of  Kutuzov  as  two  days  before,  but  upbraide 
him  as  the  cause  of  the  Tsar’s  uneasiness  that  day.  Prince  Vassily  n 
longer  boasted  of  his  protege  Kutuzov,  but  was  mute  when  the  corr 
mander-in-chief  was  the  subject  of  conversation.  Moreover,  on  th 
evening  of  that  day  everything  seemed  to  conspire  to  throw  the  Peters 
burg  world  into  agitation  and  uneasiness:  a  terrible  piece  of  news  cam 
to  add  to  their  alarms.  Countess  Elena  Bezuhov  died  quite  suddenl 
of  the  terrible  illness  which  had  been  so  amusing  to  talk  about.  A 
larger  gatherings  every  one  repeated  the  official  story  that  Countes 
Bezuhov  had  died  of  a  terrible  attack  of  angina  pectoris,  but  in  int 
mate  circles  people  told  in  detail  how  the  Queen  of  Spain’s  own  medics 
attendant  had  prescribed  to  Ellen  small  doses  of  a  certain  drug  t 
bring  about  certain  desired  results;  but  that  Ellen,  tortured  by  the  of 
count’s  suspecting  her,  and  by  her  husband’s  not  having  answered  he 
letter  (that  unfortunate,  dissipated  Pierre),  had  suddenly  taken  a 
enormous  dose  of  the  drug  prescribed,  and  had  died  in  agonies  befor 
assistance  could  be  given.  The  story  ran  that  Prince  Vassily  and  th 
old  count  had  been  going  to  take  proceedings  against  the  Italian;  bu 
the  latter  had  produced  notes  in  his  possession  from  the  unhappy  de 
ceased  of  such  a  character  that  they  had  promptly  let  him  go. 

Conversation  centred  round  three  melancholy  facts — the  Tsar’s  stat 
of  suspense,  the  loss  of  Kutaissov,  and  the  death  of  Ellen. 

On  the  third  day  after  Kutuzov’s  despatch,  a  country  gentlemai 
arrived  in  Petersburg  from  Moscow,  and  the  news  of  the  surrender  01 
Moscow  to  the  French  was  all  over  the  town.  This  was  awful!  Think  o 
the  position  of  the  Emperor!  Kutuzov  was  a  traitor,  and,  during  th 
‘visits  of  condolence’  paid  to  Prince  Vassily  on  the  occasion  of  hi 
daughter’s  death,  when  he  spoke  of  Kutuzov,  whose  praises  he  had  one 
sung  so  loudly — it  was  pardonable  in  his  grief  to  forget  what  he  ha< 
said  before — he  said  that  nothing  else  was  to  be  expected  from  a  blim 
and  dissolute  old  man. 

‘I  only  wonder  how  such  a  man  could  possibly  be  trusted  with  th 
fate  of  Russia.’ 

So  long  as  the  news  was  not  official,  it  was  still  possible  to  doubt  it 
truth;  but  next  day  the  following  communication  arrived  from  Coun 
Rastoptchin: 

‘Prince  Kutuzov’s  adjutant  has  brought  me  a  letter  in  which  he  ask 
me  to  furnish  police-officers  to  escort  the  army  to  the  Ryazan  road 
He  says  that  he  is  regretfully  abandoning  Moscow.  Sire!  Kutuzov’ 
action  decides  the  fate  of  that  capital  and  of  your  empire.  Russia  wil 
shudder  to  learn  of  the  abandonment  of  the  city,  where  the  greatness  o 
Russia  is  centred,  where  are  the  ashes  of  our  forefathers.  I  am  followin' 
the  army.  I  have  had  everything  carried  away;  all  that  is  left  me  is  t 
weep  over  the  fate  of  my  country.’ 

On  receiving  this  communication,  the  Tsar  sent  Prince  Volkonsk; 
with  the  following  rescript  to  Kutuzov: 


WAR  AND  PEACE  883 

‘Prince  Mihail  Ilarionovitch!  I  have  received  no  communication  from 
>u  since  the  29th  of  August.  Meanwhile  I  have  received,  by  way  of 
aroslavl,  from  the  governor  of  Moscow  the  melancholy  intelligence 
at  you  have  decided  with  the  army  to  abandon  Moscow.  You  can 
oagine  the  effect  this  news  has  had  upon  me,  and  your  silence  re- 
oubles  my  astonishment.  I  am  sending  herewith  Staff-General  Prince 
olkonsky,  to  ascertain  from  you  the  positior  of  the  army  and  of  the 
■  .uses  that  have  led  you  to  so  melancholy  a  decision.’ 


Ill 

ine  days  after  the  abandonment  of  Moscow,  a  courier  from  Kutuzov 
ached  Petersburg  with  the  official  news  of  the  surrender  of  Moscow, 
his  courier  was  a  Frenchman,  Michaud,  who  did  not  know  Russian,  yet 
as,  ‘though  a  foreigner,  Russian  in  heart  and  soul,’  as  he  used  to  say 
'  himself. 

The  Tsar  at  once  received  the  messenger  in  his  study  in  the  palace  of 
amenny  island.  Michaud,  who  had  never  seen  Moscow  before  the  cam- 
aign,  and  did  not  know  a  word  of  Russian,  yet  felt  deeply  moved  when 
fe  came  before  ‘notre  tres  gracieux  sonverain’  (as  he  wrote)  with  the 
Avs  of  the  burning  of  Moscow,  whose  flames  illumined  his  route. 
Though  the  source  of  M.  Michaud’s  sorrow  must  indeed  have  been  dif- 
rent  from  that  to  which  the  grief  of  Russian  people  was  due,  Michaud 
id  such  a  melancholy  face  when  he  was  shown  into  the  Tsar’s  study 
tat  the  Tsar  asked  him  at  once: 

‘Do  you  bring  me  sad  news,  colonel?’ 

‘Very  sad,  sire,  the  surrender  of  Moscow,’  answered  Michaud,  casting 
ts  eyes  down  with  a  sigh. 

‘Can  they  have  surrendered  my  ancient  capital  without  a  battle?’  the 
sar  asked  quickly,  suddenly  Hushing. 

Michaud  respectfully  gave  the  message  he  had  been  commanded  to 
ve  from  Kutuzov,  that  is,  that  there  was  no  possibility  of  fighting  be- 
ire  Moscow,  and  that  seeing  there  was  no  chance  but  either  to  lose  the 
my  and  Moscow  or  to  lose  Moscow  alone,  the  commander-in-chief  had 
;en  obliged  to  choose  the  latter. 

The  Tsar  listened  without  a  word,  not  looking  at  Michaud. 

‘Has  the  enemy  entered  the  city?’  he  asked. 

‘Yes,  sire,  and  by  now  the  city  is  in  ashes.  I  left  it  all  in  flames,’  said 
lichaud  resolutely;  but  glancing  at  the  Tsar,  Michaud  was  horrified  at 
hat  he  had  done.  The  Tsar  was  breathing  hard  and  rapidly,  his  lower 
)  was  twitching,  and  his  fine  blue  eyes  were  for  a  moment  wet  with 

ars. 

But  that  lasted  only  a  moment.  The  Tsar  suddenly  frowned,  as  though 
:xed  with  himself  for  his  own  weakness;  and  raising  his  head,  he  ad- 
•essed  Michaud  in  a  firm  voice: 

‘I  see,  colonel,  from  all  that  is  happening  to  us  that  Providence  re- 


884  WAR  AND  PEACE 

quires  great  sacrifices  of  us.  I  am  ready  to  submit  to  His  will  in  ever 
thing;  but  tell  me,  Michaud,  how  did  you  leave  the  army,  seeing  n 
ancient  capital  thus  abandoned  without  striking  a  blow?  Did  you  n 
perceive  discouragement?’ 

Seeing  that  his  most  gracious  sovereign  had  regained  his  composui 
Michaud  too  regained  his;  but  to  the  Tsar’s  direct  question  of  a  matt 
of  fact  which  called  for  a  direct  answer,  he  had  not  yet  an  answer  read 

‘Sire,  will  you  permit  me  to  speak  frankly,  as  a  loyal  soldier?’  A 
said,  to  gain  time. 

‘Colonel,  I  always  expect  it,’  said  the  Tsar.  ‘Hide  nothing  from  me; 
want  to  know  absolutely  how  it  is.’ 

‘Sire!’  said  Michaud,  with  a  delicate,  scarcely  perceptible  smile  < 
his  lips,  as  he  had  now  had  time  to  prepare  his  answer  in  the  form  of 
light  and  respectful  play  of  words.  ‘Sire!  I  left  the  whole  army,  fro 
the  commanders  to  the  lowest  soldier  without  exception,  in  extreme, 
desperate  terror.’ 

‘How  so?’  the  Tsar  interrupted,  frowning  sternly.  ‘My  Russians  1 
themselves  be  cast  down  by  misfortune?  .  .  .  Never  .  . 

This  was  just  what  Michaud  was  waiting  for  to  get  in  his  phrases,  i 

‘Sire,’  he  said,  with  a  respectful  playfulness  of  expression,  ‘they  fe, 
only  that  your  Majesty  through  goodness  of  heart  may  let  yourself  l1 
persuaded  to  make  peace.  They  burn  to  fight,’  said  the  plenipotentiai 
of  the  Russian  people,  ‘and  to  prove  to  your  Majesty  by  the  sacrifii 
of  their  lives  how  devoted  they  are  .  .  .’ 

‘Ah!’  said  the  Tsar,  reassured,  slapping  Michaud  on  the  shoulde1 
with  a  friendly  light  in  his  eyes.  ‘You  tranquillise  me,  colonel  .  .  .’  I 

The  Tsar  looked  down,  and  for  some  time  he  was  silent.  ‘Well, 
back  to  the  army,’  he  said,  drawing  himself  up  to  his  full  height  and  wil 
a  genial  and  majestic  gesture  addressing  Michaud,  ‘and  tell  our  bra) 
fellows,  tell  all  my  good  subjects  wherever  you  go,  that  when  I  have  ru 
a  soldier  left,  I  will  put  myself  at  the  head  of  my  dear  nobility,  of  ir 
good  peasants,  and  so  use  the  last  resources  of  my  empire.  It  offers  n 
still  more  than  my  enemies  suppose,’  said  the  Tsar,  more  and  moi 
stirred.  ‘But  if  it  should  be  written  in  the  decrees  of  divine  Providence 
he  said,  and  his  fine,  mild  eyes,  shining  with  emotion,  were  raised  towarc 
heaven,  ‘that  my  dynasty  should  cease  to  reign  on  the  throne  of  m 
ancestors,  then  after  exhausting  every  means  in  my  power,  I  would  k 
my  beard  grow  to  here’  (the  Tsar  put  his  hand  halfway  down  his  breast 
‘and  go  and  eat  potatoes  with  the  meanest  of  my  peasants  rather  tha 
sign  the  shame  of  my  country  and  my  dear  people,  whose  sacrifice 
know  how  to  appreciate.’  Uttering  these  words  in  a  voice  of  much  feelim 
the  Tsar  turned  quickly  away,  as  though  wishing  to  conceal  from  Michau 
the  tears  that  were  starting  into  his  eyes,  and  he  walked  to  the  further  en 
of  his  study.  After  standing  there  some  instants,  he  strode  back  t 
Michaud,  and  with  a  vigorous  action  squeezed  his  arm  below  the  elbov 
The  Tsar’s  fine,  mild  face  was  flushed,  and  his  eyes  gleamed  with  energ 
and  anger.  ‘Colonel  Michaud,  do  not  forget  what  I  say  to  you  here;  pel 


WAR  AND  PEACE  885 

hps  one  day  we  shall  recall  it  with  pleasure.  .  .  .  Napoleon  or  me,’ 
h  said,  touching  his  breast,  ‘we  can  no  longer  reign  together.  I  have 
li.rned  to  know  him.  He  will  not  deceive  me  again  .  .  .’  And  the  Tsar 
pused,  frowning.  Hearing  these  words,  seeing  the  look  of  firm  determina-' 
t  n  in  the  Tsar’s  eyes,  Michaud,  though  a  foreigner,  Russian  in  heart 
ad  soul,  felt  (as  he  used  to  recount  later)  at  that  solemn  moment  moved 
t  enthusiasm  by  what  he  had  just  heard;  and  in  the  following  phrase 
1  sought  to  give  expression  to  his  own  feelings  and  those  of  the  Russian 
fople,  whose  representative  he  considered  himself  to  be. 

‘Sire!’  he  said,  ‘your  majesty  is  signing  at  this  moment  the  glory  of 
te  nation  and  the  salvation  of  Europe!’ 

With  a  motion  of  his  head  the  Tsar  dismissed  Michaud. 


IV 

'hile  half  of  Russia  was  conquered,  and  the  inhabitants  of  Moscow 
ere  fleeing  to  remote  provinces,  and  one  levy  of  militia  after  another  was 
I  ing  raised  for  the  defence  of  the  country,  we,  not  living  at  the  time,  can- 
ut  help  imagining  that  all  the  people  in  Russia,  great  and  small  alike, 
ere  engaged  in  doing  nothing  else  but  making  sacrifices,  saving  their 
untry,  or  weeping  over  its  downfall.  The  tales  and  descriptions  of  that 
riod  without  exception  tell  us  of  nothing  but  the  self-sacrifice,  the 
triotism,  the  despair,  the  grief,  and  the  heroism  of  the  Russians.  In 
jality,  it  was  not  at  all  like  that.  It  seems  so  to  us,  because  we  see  out  of 
e  past  only  the  general  historical  interest  of  that  period,  and  we  do  not 
ie  all  the  personal  human  interests  of  the  men  of  that  time.  And  yet  in 
ality  these  personal  interests  of  the  immediate  present  are  of  so  much 
ieater  importance  than  public  interests,  that  they  prevent  the  public 
terest  from  ever  being  felt — -from  being  noticed  at  all,  indeed.  The  ma- 
rity  of  the  people  of  that  period  took  no  heed  of  the  general  progress  of 
iblic  affairs,  and  were  only  influenced  by  their  immediate  personal  in¬ 
rests.  And  those  very  people  played  the  most  useful  part  in  the  work 
the  time. 

Those  who  were  striving  to  grasp  the  general  course  of  events,  and  try- 
g  by  self-sacrifice  and  heroism  to  take  a  hand  in  it,  were  the  most  useless 
;mbers  of  society;  they  saw  everything  upside  down,  and  all  that  they 
d  with  the  best  intentions  turned  out  to  be  useless  folly,  like  Pierre's 
giment,  and  Mamonov’s,  that  spent  their  time  pillaging  the  Russian  vil- 
ges,  like  the  lint  scraped  by  the  ladies,  that  never  reached  the  wounded, 
id  so  on.  Even  those  who,  being  fond  of  talking  on  intellectual  subjects 
id  expressing  their  feelings,  discussed  the  position  of  Russia,  uncon- 
iously  imported  into  their  talk  a  shade  of  hypocrisy  or  falsity  or  else  of 
eless  fault-finding  and  bitterness  against  persons,  whom  they  blamed 
r  what  could  be  nobody’s  fault. 

In  historical  events  we  see  more  plainly  than  ever  the  law  that  forbids 
to  taste  of  the  fruit  of  the  Tree  of  Knowledge.  It  is  only  unself-conscious 


SS6 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

activity  that  bears  fruit,  and  the  man  who  plays  a  part  in  an  historic 
drama  never  understands  its  significance.  If  he  strives  to  comprehend 
he  is  stricken  with  barrenness. 

The  significance  of  the  drama  taking  place  in  Russia  at  that  time  w 
the  less  easy  to  grasp,  the  closer  the  share  a  man  was  taking  in  it.  In  Peter 
burg,  and  in  the  provinces  remote  from  Moscow,  ladies  and  gentlemen 
volunteer  uniforms  bewailed  the  fate  of  Russia  and  the  ancient  capit; 
and  talked  of  self-sacrifice,  and  so  on.  But  in  the  army,  which  had  r 
treated  behind  Moscow,  men  scarcely  talked  or  thought  at  all  about  Mo 
cow,  and,  gazing  at  the  burning  city,  no  one  swore  to  be  avenged  on  tl 
French,  but  every  one  was  thinking  of  the  next  quarter’s  pay  due  to  hir 
of  the  next  halting-place,  of  Matryoshka  the  canteen-woman,  and  so  o 

Nikolay  Rostov,  without  any  idea  of  self-sacrifice,  simply  because  tl 
war  had  happened  to  break  out  before  he  left  the  service,  took  an  ir 
mediate  and  continuous  part  in  the  defence  of  his  country,  and  cons 
quently  he  looked  upon  what  was  happening  in  Russia  without  despair  ( 
gloomy  prognostications.  If  he  had  been  asked  what  he  thought  of  tl 
present  position  of  Russia,  he  would  have  said  that  it  was  not  his  busine 
to  think  about  it,  that  that  was  what  Kutuzov  and  the  rest  of  them  we 
for,  but  that  he  had  heard  that  the  regiments  were  being  filled  up  to  the 
full  complements,  and  that  they  must  therefore  be  going  to  fight  for 
good  time  longer,  and  that  under  the  present  circumstances  he  migl 
pretty  easily  obtain  the  command  of  a  regiment  within  a  couple  of  year 

Since  this  was  his  point  of  view,  it  was  with  no  regret  at  taking  no  pa 
in  the  approaching  battle,  but  with  the  greatest  satisfaction — which  1 
did  not  conceal,  and  his  comrades  fully  understood — that  he  received  tl 
news  of  his  appointment  to  go  to  Voronezh  to  purchase  remounts  for  h 
division. 

A  few  days  before  the  battle  of  Borodino,  Nikolay  received  the  sums  < 
money  and  official  warrants  required,  and,  sending  some  hussars  on  b 
fore  him,  he’drove  with  posting-horses  to  Voronezh. 

Only  one  who  has  had  the  same  experience — that  is,  has  spent  sever, 
months  continuously  in  the  atmosphere  of  an  army  in  the  field — caj 
imagine  the  delight  Nikolay  felt  when  he  got  out  of  the  region  oversprea 
by  the  troops  with  their  foraging  parties,  trains  of  provisions,  and  ho: 
pitals;  when  he  saw  no  more  soldiers,  army  waggons,  and  filthy  traces  <j 
the  camp,  but  villages  of  peasants  and  peasant  women,  gentlemen 
country  houses,  fields  with  grazing  oxen,  and  station-houses  and  sleep 
overseers,  he  rejoiced  as  though  he  were  seeing  it  all  for  the  first  tim 
What  in  particular  remained  for  a  long  while  a  wonder  and  a  joy  to  hi) 
was  the  sight  of  women,  young  and  healthy,  without  dozens  of  office) 
hanging  about  every  one  of  them;  and  women,  too,  who  were  pleased  an 
flattered  at  an  officer’s  cracking  jokes  with  them. 

In  the  happiest  frame  of  mind,  Nikolay  reached  the  hotel  at  Vorone2 
at  night,  ordered  everything  of  which  he  had  so  long  been  deprived  in  tl 
army,  and  next  day,  after  shaving  with  special  care  and  putting  on  tl 


WARANDPEACE  887 

full-dress  uniform  he  had  not  worn  for  so  long  past,  he  drove  off  to  pre¬ 
sent  himself  to  the  authorities. 

The  commander  of  the  militia  of  the  district  was  a  civilian  general,  an 
bid  gentleman,  who  evidently  found  amusement  in  his  military  duties  and 
rank.  He  gave  Nikolay  a  brusque  reception  (supposing  that  this  was  the 
military  manner),  and  cross-examining  him  with  an  important  air,  as 
though  he  had  a  right  to  do  so,  he  expressed  his  approval  and  disapproval, 
as  though  called  upon  to  give  his  verdict  on  the  management  of  the  war. 
Nikolay  was  in  such  high  spirits  that  this  only  amused  him. 

;  From  the  commander  of  militia,  he  went  to  the  governor’s.  The  gover¬ 
nor  was  a  brisk  little  man,  very  affable  and  unpretentious.  He  mentioned 
-to  Nikolay  the  stud-farms,  where  he  might  obtain  horses,  recommended 
him  to  a  horse-dealer  in  the  town,  and  a  gentleman  living  twenty  versts 
from  the  town,  who  had  the  best  horses,  and  promised  him  every  as¬ 
sistance. 

‘You  are  Count  Ilya  Andreitch’s  son?  My  wife  was  a  great  friend  of 
lyour  mamma’s.  We  receive  on  Thursdays:  to-day  is  Thursday,  pray  come 
in,  quite  without  ceremony,’  said  the  governor,  as  he  took  leave  of  him. 
j  Nikolay  took  a  posting  carriage,  and  making  his  quartermaster  get  in 
beside  him,  galloped  straight  off  from  the  governor’s  to  the  gentleman 
with  the  stud  of  fine  horses  twenty  versts  away. 

During  the  early  days  of  his  stay  in  Voronezh,  everything  seemed  easy 
and  pleasant  to  Nikolay,  and,  as  is  always  the  case,  when  a  man  is  himself 
in  a  happy  frame  of  mind,  everything  went  well  and  prospered  with  him. 

The  country  gentleman  turned  out  to  be  an  old  cavalry  officer,  a  bache¬ 
lor,  a  great  horse-fancier,  a  sportsman,  and  the  owner  of  a  smoking-room, 
of  hundred-year-old  herb-brandy,  of  some  old  Hungarian  wine,  and  of 
superb  horses. 

In  a  couple  of  words,  Nikolay  had  bought  for  six  thousand  roubles 
•  seventeen  stallions,  all  perfect  examples  of  their  several  breeds  (as  he 
said),  as  show  specimens  of  his  remounts.  After  dining  and  drinking  a 
glass  or  so  too  much  of  the  Hungarian  wine,  Rostov,  exchanging  kisses 
with  the  country  gentleman,  with  whom  he  was  already  on  the  friendliest 
terms,  galloped  back  over  the  most  atrociously  bad  road  in  the  happiest 
frame  of  mind,  continually  urging  the  driver  on,  so  that  he  might  be  in 
time  for  the  soiree  at  the  governor’s. 

After  dressing,  scenting  himself,  and  douching  his  head  with  cold  water, 
Nikolay  made  his  appearance  at  the  governor’s,  a  little  late,  but  with  the 
phrase,  ‘Better  late  than  never,’  ready  on  the  tip  of  his  tongue. 

It  was  not  a  ball,  and  nothing  had  been  said  about  dancing;  but  every 
one  knew  that  Katerina  Petrovna  would  play  waltzes  and  ecossaises  on 
the  clavichord,  and  that  there  would  be  dancing,  and  every  one  reckoning 
on  it,  had  come  dressed  for  a  ball. 

Provincial  life  in  the  year  1812  went  on  exactly  the  same  as  always,  the 
only  difference  being  that  the  provincial  towns  were  livelier  owing  to  the 
presence  of  many  wealthy  families  from  Moscow,  that,  as  in  everything 
going  on  at  that  time  in  Russia,  there  was  perceptible  in  the  gaiety  a  cer- 


8SS 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

tain  devil-may-care,  desperate  recklessness,  and  also  that  the  small  talk 
indispensable  between  people  was  now  not  about  the  weather  and  com¬ 
mon  acquaintances,  but  about  Moscow  and  the  army  and  Napoleon. 

The  gathering  at  the  governor’s  consisted  of  the  best  society  in 
Voronezh. 

There  were  a  great  many  ladies,  among  them  several  Moscow  ac¬ 
quaintances  of  Nikolay’s;  but  among  the  men  there  was  no  one  who  could 
be  compared  with  the  cavalier  of  St.  George,  the  gallant  hussar,  and  good- 
natured,  well-bred  Count  Rostov.  Among  -the  men  there  was  an  Italian 
prisoner— an  officer  of  the  French  army;  and  Nikolay  felt  that  the  pres¬ 
ence  of  this  prisoner  gave  an  added  lustre  to  him — the  Russian  hero.  He 
was,  as  it  were,  a  trophy  of  victory.  Nikolay  felt  this,  and  it  seemed  to  him 
as  though  every  one  looked  at  the  Italian  in  the  same  light,  and  he  treated 
the  foreign  officer  with  gracious  dignity  and  reserve. 

As  soon  as  Nikolay  came  in  in  his  full-dress  uniform  of  an  officer  of 
hussars,  diffusing  a  fragrance  of  scent  and  wine  about  him,  and  said  him¬ 
self,  and  heard  several  times  said  to  him,  the  words,  ‘Better  late  than 
never,’  people  clustered  round  him.  All  eyes  were  turned  on  him,  and  he 
felt  at  once  that  he  had  stepped  into  a  position  that  just  suited  him  in  a 
provincial  town — a  position  always  agreeable,  but  now  after  his  long 
privation  of  such  gratifications,  intoxicatingly  delightful — that  of  a  uni¬ 
versal  favourite.  Not  only  at  the  posting-stations,  at  the  taverns,  and  in 
the  smoking-room  of  the  horse-breeding  gentleman,  had  he  found  servant- 
girls  flattered  by  his  attention,  but  here,  at  the  governor’s  assembly,  there 
were  (so  it  seemed  to  Nikolay)  an  inexhaustible  multitude  of  young  mar¬ 
ried  ladies  and  pretty  girls,  who  were  only  waiting  with  impatience  for 
him  to  notice  them.  The  ladies  and  the  young  girls  flirted  with  him,  and 
the  old  people  began  even  from  this  first  evening  bestirring  themselves  to 
try  and  get  this  gallant  young  rake  of  an  hussar  married  and  settled  down. 
Among  the  latter  was  the  governor’s  wife  herself,  who  received  Rostov 
as  though  he  were  a  near  kinsman,  and  called  him  ‘Nikolay.’ 

Katerina  Petrovna  did  in  fact  proceed  to  play  waltzes  and  ecossaises, 
and  dancing  began,  in  which  Nikolay  fascinated  the  company  more  than 
ever  by  his  elegance.  He  surprised  every  one  indeed  by  his  peculiarly  free 
and  easy  style  in  dancing.  Nikolay  was  a  little  surprised  himself  at  his 
own  style  of  dancing  at  that  soiree.  He  had  never  danced  in  that  manner 
at  Moscow,  and  would  indeed  have  regarded  such  an  extremely  free  and 
easy  manner  of  dancing  as  not  correct,  as  bad  style;  but  here  he  felt  it 
incumbent  on  him  to  astonish  them  all  by  something  extraordinary,  some¬ 
thing  that  they  would  be  sure  to  take  for  the  usual  thing  in  the  capital, 
though  new  to  them  in  the  provinces. 

All  the  evening  Nikolay  paid  the  most  marked  attention  to  a  blue-eyed, 
plump,  and  pleasing  little  blonde,  the  wife  of  one  of  the  provincial  officials. 
With  the  naive  conviction  of  young  men  who  are  enjoying  themselves, 
that  other  men’s  wives  are  created  for  their  special  benefit,  Rostov  never 
left  this  lady’s  side,  and  treated  her  husband  in  a  friendly  way,  almost 
as  though  there  were  a  private  understanding  between  them,  as  though 


WAR  AND  PEACE  889 

they  knew  without  speaking  of  it  how  capitally  they,  that  is,  how  Nikolay 
and  the  wife,  would  get  on.  The  husband  did  not,  however,  appear  to 
share  this  conviction,  and  tried  to  take  a  gloomy  tone  with  Rostov.  But 
Nikolay’s  good-humoured  naivete  was  so  limitless  that  at  times  the  hus¬ 
band  could  not  help  being  drawn  into  his  gay  humour.  Towards  the  end 
of  the  evening,  however,  as  the  wife’s  face  grew  more  flushed  and  ani¬ 
mated,  the  husband’s  grew  steadily  more  melancholy  and  stolid,  as  though 
they  had  a  given  allowance  of  liveliness  between  them,  and  as  the  wife’s 
increased,  the  husband’s  dwindled. 


V 

With  a  smile  that  never  left  his  lips,  Nikolay  sat  bent  a  little  forward  on 
a  low  chair,  and  stooping  close  over  his  blonde  beauty,  he  paid  her 
mythological  compliments. 

Jauntily  shifting  the  posture  of  his  legs  in  his  tight  riding-breeches, 
diffusing  a  scent  of  perfume,  and  admiring  his  fair  companion  and  himself 
and  the  fine  lines  of  his  legs  in  the  tight  breeches,  Nikolay  told  the  blonde 
lady  that  he  wanted  to  elope  with  a  lady  here,  in  Voronezh. 

‘What  is  she  like?’ 

‘Charming,  divine.  Her  eyes’  (Nikolay  gazed  at  his  companion)  ‘are 
blue,  her  lips  are  coral,  her  whiteness  .  .  .’ he  gazed  at  her  shoulders, ‘the 
shape  of  Diana  .  .  .’ 

The  husband  came  up  to  them  and  asked  his  wife  gloomily  what  she 
was  talking  of. 

‘Ah!  Nikita  Ivanitch,’  said  Nikolay,  rising  courteously.  And  as  though 
anxious  for  Nikita  Ivanitch  to  take  a  share  in  his  jests,  he  began  to  tell 
him  too  of  his  intention  of  running  away  with  a  blonde  lady. 

The  husband  smiled  grimly,  the  wife  gaily. 

The  good-natured  governor’s  wife  came  up  to  them  with  a  disapprov¬ 
ing  air. 

‘Anna  Ignatyevna  wants  to  see  you,  Nikolay,’  she  said,  pronouncing 
the  name  in  such  a  way  that  Rostov  was  at  once  aware  that  Anna  Ignat¬ 
yevna  was  a  very  great  lady.  ‘Come,  Nikolay.  You  let  me  call  you  so, 
don’t  you?’ 

‘Oh,  yes,  ma  tante.  Who  is  she?’ 

‘Anna  Ignatyevna  Malvintsev.  She  has  heard  about  you  from  her  niece, 
how  you  rescued  her  .  .  .  Do  you  guess?  .  .  .’ 

‘Oh,  I  rescued  so  many !  ’  cried  Nikolay. 

‘Her  niece,  Princess  Bolkonsky.  She  is  here  in  Voronezh  with  her  aunt. 
Oho!  how  he  blushes!  Eh?’ 

‘Not  a  bit  of  it,  nonsense,  ma  tante.’ 

‘Oh,  very  well,  very  well.  Oh!  oh!  what  a  boy  it  is!’ 

The  governor’s  wife  led  him  up  to  a  tall  and  very  stout  lady  in  a  blue 
toque,  who  had  just  finished  a  game  of  cards  with  the  personages  of 
greatest  consequence  in  the  town.  This  was  Madame  Malvintsev,  Princess 


S90  WAR  AND  PEACE 

Marya’s  aunt  on  her  mother’s  side,  a  wealthy,  childless  widow,  who  always 
lived  in  Voronezh.  She  was  standing  up,  reckoning  her  losses,  when  Rostov 
came  up  to  her. 

She  dropped  her  eyelids  with  a  severe  and  dignified  air,  glanced  at  him. 
and  went  on  upbraiding  the  general  who  had  been  winning  from  her. 

‘Delighted,  my  dear  boy,’  she  said,  holding  out  her  hand  to  him.  ‘Pray 
come  and  see  me.’ 

After  saying  a  few  words  about  Princess  Marya  and  her  late  father, 
whom  Madame  Malvintsev  had  evidently  disliked,  and  inquiring  what 
Nikolay  knew  about  Prince  Andrey,  who  was  apparently  also  not  in  her 
good  graces,  the  dignified  old  lady  dismissed  him,  repeating  her  invitation 
to  come  and  see  her. 

Nikolay  promised  to  do  so  and  blushed  again  as  he  took  leave  of 
Madame  Malvintsev.  At  the  mention  of  Princess  Marya’s  name,  Rostov 
experienced  a  sensation  of  shyness,  even  of  terror,  which  he  could  not  have 
explained  to  himself. 

On  leaving  Madame  Malvintsev,  Rostov  would  have  gone  back  to  the 
dance,  but  the  little  governor’s  wife  laid  her  plump  little  hand  on  his 
sleeve,  and  saying  that  she  wanted  to  have  a  few  words  with  him,  led  him 
into  the  divan-room;  the  persons  in  that  room  promptly  withdrew  that 
they  might  not  be  in  her  way. 

‘Do  you  know,  mon  cher,’  said  the  governor’s  wife  with  a  serious  ex¬ 
pression  on  her  good-natured,  little  face,  ‘this  is  really  the  match  for  you; 
if  you  like,  I  will  try  and  arrange  it.’ 

‘Whom  do  you  mean,  ma  tante?’  asked  Nikolay. 

‘I  will  make  a  match  for  you  with  the  princess.  Katerina  Petrovna  talks 
of  Lili,  but  I  say,  no — the  princess.  Do  you  wish  it?  I  am  sure  your 
mamma  will  be  grateful.  Really,  she  is  such  a  splendid  girl,  charming!  And 
she  is  by  no  means  so  very  plain.’ 

‘Not  at  all  so,’  said  Nikolay,  as  though  offended  at  the  idea.  ‘As  for  me, 
ma  tante,  as  a  soldier  should,  I  don’t  force  myself  on  any  one,  nor  refuse 
anything  that  turns  up,’  said  Rostov,  before  he  had  time  to  consider  what 
he  was  saying. 

‘So  remember  then;  this  is  no  jesting  matter.’ 

‘How  could  it  be!  ’ 

‘Yes,  yes,’  said  the  governor’s  wife,  as  though  talking  to  herself.  ‘And 
entre  autres,  mon  cher,  you  are  too  assiduous  with  the  other — the  blonde. 
One  feels  sorry  for  the  husband,  really  .  . 

‘Oh  no,  we  are  quite  friendly,’  said  Nikolay  in  the  simplicity  of  his 
heart:  it  had  never  occurred  to  him  that  such  an  agreeable  pastime  for 
him  could  be  other  than  agreeable  to  any  one  else. 

‘What  a  stupid  thing  I  said  to  the  governor’s  wife  though!’  suddenly 
came  into  Nikolay’s  mind  at  supper.  ‘She  really  will  begin  to  arrange  a 
match,  and  Sonya?  .  .  .’ 

And  on  taking  leave  of  the  governor’s  wife,  as  she  said  to  him  once  more 
with  a  smile,  ‘Well,  remember  then,’  he  drew  her  aside. 

‘But  there  is  something  ...  To  tell  you  the  truth,  ma  tante  .  . 


891 


WAR  AND  PEACE 
‘What  is  it,  what  is  it,  my  dear?  Come,  let  us  sit  down  here.’ 

Nikolay  had  a  sudden  desire,  an  irresistible  impulse  to  talk  of  all  his 
ost  secret  feelings  (such  as  he  would  never  have  spoken  of  to  his  mother, 

>  his  sister,  to  an  intimate  friend)  to  this  woman,  who  was  almost  a 
ranger.  Whenever  Nikolay  thought  afterwards  of  this  uncalled-for  out- 
urst  of  inexplicable  frankness — though  it  had  most  important  conse- 
aences  for  him — it  seemed  to  him  (as  it  always  seems  to  people  in  such 
ises)  that  it  had  happened  by  chance,  through  a  sudden  fit  of  folly.  But 
;  the  same  time  this  outburst  of  frankness,  together  with  other  insignifi- 
int  events,  had  consequences  of  immense  importance  to  him  and  to  all 
is  family. 

‘It’s  like  this,  ma  tante.  It  has  long  been  maman’s  wish  to  marry  me  to 
a  heiress;  but  the  mere  idea  of  it — marrying  for  money — is  revolting 

>  me.’ 

‘Oh  yes,  I  can  understand  that,’  said  the  governor’s  wife. 

‘But  Princess  Bolkonsky,  that’s  a  different  matter.  In  the  first  place, 
11  tell  you  the  truth,  I  like  her  very  much,  I  feel  drawn  to  her,  and  then, 
ver  since  I  came  across  her  in  such  a  position,  so  strangely,  it  has  often 
.ruck  me,  that  it  was  fate.  Only  think:  mamma  has  long  been  dreaming 
f  it,  but  I  had  never  happened  to  meet  her  before — it  always  so  happened 
lat  we  didn’t  meet.  And  then  when  my  sister,  Natasha,  was  engaged  to 
er  brother,  of  course  it  was  impossible  to  think  of  a  match  between  us 
len.  It  seems  it  was  to  happen  that  I  met  her  first  just  when  Natasha’s 
ngagement  had  been  broken  off;  and  well,  everything  afterwards  .  .  . 
0  you  see  how  it  is.  I  have  never  said  all  this  to  any  one,  and  I  never 
hall.  I  only  say  it  to  you.’ 

The  governor’s  wife  pressed  his  elbow  gratefully. 

‘Do  you  know  Sophie,  my  cousin?  I  love  her;  I  have  promised  to 
larry  her,  and  I  am  going  to  marry  her  ...  So  you  see  it’s  no  use 
liking  of  such  a  thing,’  Nikolay  concluded  lamely,  flushing  crimson. 

‘My  dearest  boy,  how  can  you  talk  so?  Why,  Sophie  hasn’t  a  farthing, 
nd  you  told  me  yourself  that  your  papa’s  affairs  are  terribly  straitened, 
.nd  your  maman ?  It  would  kill  her — for  one  thing.  Then  Sophie,  if  she 
;  a  girl  of  any  heart,  what  a  life  it  would  be  for  her!  Your  mother  in 
espair,  your  position  ruined  .  .  .  No,  my  dear,  Sophie  and  you  ought 
b  realise  that.’ 

Nikolay  did  not  speak.  It  was  comforting  to  him  to  hear  these  argu¬ 
ments. 

‘All  the  same,  ma  tante,  it  cannot  be,’  he  said,  with  a  sigh,  after  a  brief 
lence.  ‘And  besides  would  the  princess  accept  me?  And  again  she  is  in 
lourning;  can  such  a  thing  be  thought  of?’ 

‘Why,  do  you  suppose  I  am  going  to  marry  you  out  of  hand  on  the 
3ot?  There  are  ways  of  doing  everything,’  said  the  governor’s  wife. 
‘What  a  match-maker  you  are,  ma  tante  .  .  .’  said  Nikolay,  kissing 
er  plump  little  hand. 


892 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


VI 

On  reaching  Moscow,  after  her  meeting  with  Rostov  at  Bogutcharovc 
Princess  Marya  had  found  her  nephew  there  with  his  tutor,  and  a  lette 
from  Prince  Andrey,  directing  her  what  route  to  take  to  her  aunt 
Madame  Malvintsev’s  at  Voronezh.  The  arrangements  for  the  journey 
anxiety  about  her  brother,  the  organisation  of  her  life  in  a  new  house 
new  people,  the  education  of  her  nephew— all  of  this  smothered  in  Princes 
Marya ’s  heart  that  feeling  as  it  were  of  temptation,  which  had  tormentei 
her  during  her  father’s  illness  and  after  his  death,  especially  since  he 
meeting  with  Rostov. 

She  was  melancholy.  Now  after  a  month  had  passed  in  quiet,  undis 
turbed  conditions,  she  felt  more  and  more  deeply  the  loss  of  her  fathei 
which  was  connected  in  her  heart  with  the  downfall  of  Russia.  She  wa 
anxious:  the  thought  of  the  dangers  to  which  her  brother — the  on 
creature  near  to  her  now  left — was  being  exposed  was  a  continual  tortur 
to  her.  She  was  worried  too  by  the  education  of  her  nephew,  which  sh 
was  constantly  feeling  herself  unfitted  to  control.  But  at  the  bottom  c 
her  heart  there  was  an  inward  harmony,  that  arose  from  the  sense  tha 
she  had  conquered  in  herself  those  dreams  and  hopes  of  personal  happi 
ness,  that  had  sprung  up  in  connection  with  Rostov. 

When  the  governor’s  wife  called  on  Madame  Malvintsev  the  day  afte 
her  soiree,  and,  talking  over  her  plans  with  her,  explaining  that  thougi 
under  present  circumstances  a  formal  betrothal  was  of  course  not  t 
be  thought  of,  yet  they  might  bring  the  young  people  together,  and  le 
them  get  to  know  one  another,  and  having  received  the  aunt’s  approva 
began  to  speak  of  Rostov  in  Princess  Marya’s  presence,  singing  hi 
praises,  and  describing  how  he  had  blushed  on  hearing  the  princess1 
name,  her  emotion  was  not  one  of  joy,  but  of  pain.  Her  inner  harmon 
was  destroyed,  and  desires,  doubts,  self-reproach,  and  hope  sprang  u 
again. 

In  the  course  of  the  two  days  that  followed  before  Rostov  callec 
Princess  Marya  was  continually  considering  what  her  behaviour  ough 
to  be  in  regard  to  Rostov.  At  one  time,  she  made  up  her  mind  that  sh 
would  not  come  down  into  the  drawing-room  when  he  came  to  see  he 
aunt,  that  it  was  not  suitable  for  her  in  her  deep  mourning  to  receiv 
visitors.  Then  she  thought  this  would  be  rude  after  what  he  had  don 
for  her.  Then  the  idea  struck  her  that  her  aunt  and  the  governor’s  wif 
had  views  of  some  sort  upon  her  and  Rostov;  their  words  and  glance 
had  seemed  at  times  to  confirm  this  suspicion.  Then  she  told  herself  the 
it  was  only  her  own  depravity  that  could  make  her  think  this  of  them 
could  they  possibly  fail  to  realise  that  in  her  position,  still  wearing  th' 
heaviest  mourning,  such  match-making  would  be  an  insult  both  to  he 
and  to  her  father’s  memory?  On  the  supposition  that  she  would  go  dow 
to  see  him,  Princess  Marya  imagined  the  words  he  would  say  to  her,  art 
she  would  say  to  him;  and  at  one  moment,  those  words  seemed  to  h( 


WARANDPEACE  893 

ndeservedly  frigid,  at  the  next,  they  struck  her  as  carrying  too  much 
leaning.  Above  all  she  dreaded  the  embarrassment,  which  she  felt  would 
e  sure  to  overcome  her,  and  betray  her,  as  soon  as  she  saw  him. 

But  when,  on  Sunday  after  matins,  the  footman  came  into  the  drawing- 
xmi  to  announce  that  Count  Rostov  had  called,  the  princess  showed  no 
ign  of  embarrassment,  only  a  faint  Hush  came  into  her  cheeks,  and  her 
yes  shone  with  a  new,  radiant  light. 

‘You  have  seen  him,  aunt?’  said  Princess  Marya,  in  a  composed  voice, 
ot  knowing  herself  how  she  could  be  externally  so  calm  and  natural. 

When  Rostov  came  into  the  room,  the  princess  dropped  her  head  for 
n  instant,  as  though  to  give  time  for  their  visitor  to  greet  her  aunt; 
nd  then  at  the  very  moment  when  Nikolay  turned  to  her,  she  raised  her 
ead  and  met  his  gaze  with  shining  eyes.  With  a  movement  full  of 
ignity  and  grace,  she  rose  with  a  joyous  smile,  held  out  her  delicate, 
oft  hand  to  him,  and  spoke  in  a  voice  in  which  for  the  first  time  there 
as  the  thrill  of  deep,  womanly  chest  notes.  Mademoiselle  Bourienne, 
ho  was  in  the  drawing-room,  gazed  at  Princess  Marya  with  bewildered 
jrprise.  The  most  accomplished  coquette  herself,  she  could  not  have 
mnoeuvred  better  on  meeting  a  man  whom  she  wanted  to  attract. 

‘Either  black  suits  her  wonderfully,  or  she  really  has  grown  better  look- 
lg  without  my  noticing  it.  And  above  all,  such  tact  and  grace!  ’  thought 
fademoiselle  Bourienne. 

Had  Princess  Marya  been  capable  of  reflection  at  that  moment,  she 
’ould  have  been  even  more  astonished  than  Mademoiselle  Bourienne 
t  the  change  that  had  taken  place  in  her.  From  the  moment  she  set  eyes 
n  that  sweet,  loved  face,  some  new  force  of  life  seemed  to  take  possession 
f  her,  and  to  drive  her  to  speak  and  act  apart  from  her  own  will.  From 
le  time  Rostov  entered  the  room,  her  face  was  transformed.  Just  as 
hen  a  light  is  kindled  within  a  carved  and  painted  lantern,  the  delicate, 
itricate,  artistic  tracery  comes  out  in  unexpected  and  impressive  beauty, 
'here  all  seemed  coarse,  dark,  and  meaningless  before;  so  was  Princess 
larya’s  face  transformed.  For  the  first  time  all  the  pure,  spiritual,  inner 
•avail  in  which  she  had  lived  till  then  came  out  in  her  face.  All  her 
mer  searchings  of  spirit,  her  self-reproach,  her  sufferings,  her  striving 
)r  goodness,  her  resignation,  her  love,  her  self-sacrifice — all  this  was 
idiant  now  in  those  luminous  eyes,  in  the  delicate  smile,  in  every  feature 
f  her  tender  face. 

Rostov  saw  all  this  as  clearly  as  though  he  had  known  her  whole  life, 
le  felt  that  he  was  in  the  presence  of  a  creature  utterly  different  from 
nd  better  than  all  those  he  had  met  up  to  that  moment,  and,  above  all, 
ir  better  than  he  was  himself. 

The  conversation  was  of  the  simplest  and  most  insignificant  kind, 
hey  talked  of  the  war,  unconsciously,  like  every  one  else,  exaggerating 
leir  sadness  on  that  subject;  they  talked  of  their  last  meeting — and 
jfikolay  then  tried  to  turn  the  subject;  they  talked  of  the  kind-hearted 
wernor’s  wife,  of  Nikolay’s  relations,  and  of  Princess  Marya’s. 

Princess  Marya  did  not  talk  of  her  brother,  but  turned  the  conversa- 


894  WARANDPEACE 

tion,  as  soon  as  her  aunt  mentioned  Prince  Andrey.  It  was  evident  tha 
of  the  troubles  of  Russia  she  could  speak  artificially,  but  her  brothe 
was  a  subject  too  near  her  heart,  and  she  neither  would  nor  could  speal 
lightly  of  him.  Nikolay  noticed  this,  as  indeed  with  a  keenness  of  ob 
servation  not  usual  with  him,  he  noticed  every  shade  of  Princess  Marya’ 
character,  and  everything  confirmed  him  in  the  conviction  that  she  wa 
an  altogether  rare  and  original  being. 

Nikolay,  like  Princess  Marya,  had  blushed  and  been  embarrassed 
when  he  heard  the  princess  spoken  of,  and  even  when  he  thought  of  her 
but  in  her  presence  he  felt  perfectly  at  ease,  and  he  said  to  her  not  at  al 
what  he  had  prepared  beforehand  to  say  to  her,  but  what  came  into  hi 
mind  at  the  moment,  and  always  quite  appropriately. 

As  visitors  always  do  where  there  are  children,  Nikolay,  in  a  mo 
mentary  silence  during  his  brief  visit,  had  recourse  to  Prince  Andrey’; 
little  son,  caressing  him,  and  asking  him  if  he  would  like  to  be  ai 
hussar.  He  took  the  little  boy  in  his  arms,  began  gaily  whirling  hin 
round,  and  glanced  at  Princess  Marya.  With  softened,  happy,  sh; 
eyes,  she  was  watching  the  child  she  loved  in  the  arms  of  the  man  sht 
loved.  Nikolay  caught  that  look  too,  and  as  though  he  divined  its  sig 
nificance,  flushed  with  delight,  and  fell  to  kissing  the  child  with  simple 
hearted  gaiety. 

Princess  Marya  was  not  going  into  society  at  all  on  account  of  hei 
mourning,  and  Nikolay  did  not  think  it  the  proper  thing  to  call  on  then 
again.  But  the  governor’s  wife  still  persisted  in  her  match-making,  anc 
repeating  to  Nikolay  something  flattering  Princess  Marya  had  said  o: 
him,  and  vice  versa,  kept  urging  that  Rostov  should  declare  himself  tc 
Princess  Marya.  With  this  object,  she  arranged  that  the  young  peopk 
should  meet  at  the  reverend  father’s  before  Mass. 

Though  Rostov  did  tell  the  governor’s  wife  that  he  should  make  nc 
sort  of  declaration  to  Princess  Marya,  he  promised  to  be  there. 

Just  as  at  Tilsit  Rostov  had  not  allowed  himself  to  doubt  whethei 
what  was  accepted  by  every  one  as  right  were  really  right,  so  now  after 
a  brief  but  sincere  struggle  between  the  effort  to  order  his  life  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  his  own  sense  of  right,  and  humble  submission  to  circum¬ 
stances,  he  chose  the  latter,  and  yielded  himself  to  the  power,  which 
he  felt,  was  irresistibly  carrying  him  away.  He  knew  that  to  declare 
his  feelings  to  Princess  Marya  after  his  promise  to  Sonya  would  be 
what  he  called  base.  And  he  knew  that  he  would  never  do  a  base  thing. 
But  he  knew  too  (it  was  not  what  he  knew,  but  what  he  felt  at  the 
bottom  of  his  heart),  that  in  giving  way  now  to  the  force  of  circum¬ 
stances  and  of  the  people  guiding  him,  he  was  not  only  doing  nothing 
wrong,  but  was  doing  something  very,  very  grave,  something  of  more 
gravity  than  anything  he  had  done  in  his  life. 

After  seeing  Princess  Marya,  though  his  manner  of  life  remained 
externally  the  same,  all  his  former  pleasures  lost  their  charm  for  him. 
and  he  often  thought  of  her.  But  he  never  thought  of  her,  as  he  had 
thought  of  all  the  young  girls  he  had  met  in  society,  nor  as  he  had  long. 


WARANDPEACE  8gs 

nd  sometimes  with  enthusiasm,  thought  of  Sonya.  Like  almost  every 
tonest-hearted  young  man,  he  had  thought  of  every  young  girl  as  of 
,  possible  future  wife,  had  adapted  to  them  in  his  imagination  all  the 
lictures  of  domestic  felicity:  the  white  morning  wrapper,  the  wife 
jehind  the  samovar,  the  wife’s  carriage,  the  little  ones,  mamma  and 
,iapa,  their  attitude  to  one  another,  and  so  on,  and  so  on.  And  these 
>ictures  of  the  future  afforded  him  gratification.  But  when  he  thought 
f  Princess  Marya,  to  whom  the  match-makers  were  trying  to  betroth 
lim,  he  could  never  form  any  picture  of  his  future  married  life  with  her. 
Even  if  he  tried  to  do  so,  it  all  seemed  incoherent  and  false.  And  it  only 
died  him  with  dread. 


VII 

Phe  terrible  news  of  the  battle  of  Borodino,  of  our  losses  in  killed  and 
vounded,  and  the  even  more  terrible  news  of  the  loss  of  Moscow  reached 
/oronezh  in  the  middle  of  September.  Princess  Marya,  learning  of  her 
>rother’s  wound  only  from  the  newspapers,  and  having  no  definite  in- 
ormation  about  him,  was  preparing  (so  Nikolay  heard,  though  he  had 
lot  seen  her)  to  set  off  to  try  and  reach  Prince  Andrey. 

On  hearing  the  news  of  the  battle  of  Borodino  and  of  the  abandon- 
nent  of  Moscow,  Rostov  felt,  not  despair,  rage,  revenge,  nor  any  such 
eeling,  but  a  sudden  weariness  and  vexation  with  everything  at  Voronezh, 
ind  a  sense  of  awkwardness  and  uneasy  conscience.  All  the  conversations 
lie  listened  to  seemed  to  him  insincere ;  he  did  not  know  what  to  think 
if  it  all,  and  felt  that  only  in  the  regiment  would  all  become  clear  to  him 
igain.  He  made  haste  to  conclude  the  purchase  of  horses,  and  was  often 
without  good  cause  ill-tempered  with  his  servant  and  quartermaster. 

Several  days  before  Rostov’s  departure  there  was  a  thanksgiving  service 
n  the  cathedral  for  the  victory  gained  by  the  Russian  troops,  and 
'fikolay  went  to  the  service.  He  was  a  little  behind  the  governor,  and 
vas  standing  through  the  service  meditating  with  befitting  sedateness  on 
he  most  various  subjects.  When  the  service  was  concluding,  the  gov- 
rnor’s  wife  beckoned  him  to  her. 

‘Did  you  see  the  princess?’  she  said,  with  a  motion  of  her  hand  towards 
.  lady  in  black  standing  behind  the  choir. 

Nikolay  recognised  Princess  Marya  at  once,  not  so  much  from  the 
irofile  he  saw  under  her  hat  as  from  the  feeling  of  watchful  solicitude, 
we,  and  pity  which  came  over  him  at  once.  Princess  Marya,  obviously 
jiuried  in  her  own  thoughts,  was  making  the  last  signs  of  the  cross 
iefore  leaving  the  church. 

Nikolay  gazed  in  wonder  at  her  face.  It  was  the  same  face  he  had 
,een  before;  there  was  the  same  general  look  of  refined,  inner,  spiritual 
ravail;  but  now  there  was  an  utterly  different  light  in  it.  There  was  a 
ouching  expression  of  sadness,  of  prayer  and  of  hope  in  it.  With  the 
ame  absence  of  hesitation  as  he  had  felt  before  in  her  presence,  without 


806  WARANDPEACE 

waiting  for  the  governor’s  wife  to  urge  him,  without  asking  himsel 
whether  it  were  right,  whether  it  were  proper  for  him  to  address  he 
here  in  church,  Nikolay  went  up  to  her,  and  said  he  had  heard  of  he 
trouble  and  grieved  with  his  whole  heart  to  hear  of  it.  As  soon  as  she  heari 
his  voice,  a  vivid  colour  glowed  in  her  face,  lighting  up  at  once  her  jo; 
and  her  sorrow. 

‘One  thing  I  wanted  to  tell  you,  princess,’  said  Rostov,  ‘that  is,  tha 
if  Prince  Andrey  Nikolaevitch  were  not  living,  since  he  is  a  colonel,  i 
would  be  announced  immediately  in  the  gazettes.’ 

The  princess  looked  at  him,  not  comprehending  his  words,  but  com 
forted  by  the  expression  of  sympathetic  suffering  in  his  face. 

‘And  I  know  from  so  many  instances  that  a  wound  from  a  splinter 
(the  papers  said  it  was  from  a  grenade)  ‘is  either  immediately  fatal  oi 
else  very  slight,’  Nikolay  went  on.  ‘We  must  hope  for  the  best,  and  ]  i 
am  certain  .  .  .’ 

Princess  Marya  interrupted  him. 

‘Oh,  it  would  be  so  aw  .  .  .’  she  began,  and  her  emotion  choking  hei 
utterance,  she  bent  her  head  with  a  graceful  gesture,  like  everything 
she  did  in  his  presence,  and  glancing  gratefully  at  him  followed  her  aunt 

That  evening  Nikolay  did  not  go  out  anywhere,  but  stayed  at  home 
to  finish  some  accounts  with  the  horse-vendors.  By  the  time  he  had 
finished  his  work  it  was  rather  late  to  go  out  anywhere,  but  still  early  tc 
go  to  bed,  and  Nikolay  spent  a  long  while  walking  up  and  down  the 
room,  thinking  over  his  life,  a  thing  that  he  rarely  did. 

Princess  Marya  had  made  an  agreeable  impression  on  him  at  Bogut- 
charovo.  The  fact  of  his  meeting  her  then  in  such  striking  circumstances, 
and  of  his  mother  having  at  one  time  pitched  precisely  on  her  as  the 
wealthy  heiress  suitable  for  him,  had  led  him  to  look  at  her  with  special 
attention.  During  his  stay  at  Voronezh,  that  impression  had  become,  not 
merely  a  pleasing,  but  a  very  strong  one.  Nikolay  was  impressed  by  the 
peculiar,  moral  beauty  which  he  discerned  in  her  at  this  time.  He  had, 
however,  been  preparing  to  go  away,  and  it  had  not  entered  his  head  to 
regret  that  in  leaving  Voronezh  he  was  losing  all  chance  of  seeing  her. 
But  his  meeting  with  Princess  Marya  that  morning  in  church  had,  Niko¬ 
lay  felt,  gone  more  deeply  to  his  heart  than  he  had  anticipated  and  more 
deeply  than  he  desired  for  his  peace  of  mind.  That  pale,  delicate,  melan¬ 
choly  face,  those  luminous  eyes,  those  soft,  gracious  gestures,  and, 
above  all,  the  deep  and  tender  melancholy  expressed  in  all  her  features, 
agitated  him  and  drew  his  sympathy.  In  men  Rostov  could  not  bear  an 
appearance  of  higher,  spiritual  life  (it  was  why  he  did  not  like  Prince 
Andrey),  he  spoke  of  it  contemptuously  as  philosophy,  idealism;  but  in 
Princess  Marya  it  was  just  in  that  melancholy,  showing  all  the  depth 
of  a  spiritual  world,  strange  and  remote  to  Nikolay,  that  he  found  an 
irresistible  attraction. 

‘She  must  be  a  marvellous  girl!  An  angel,  really!’  he  said  to  himself. 
‘Why  am  I  not  free?  Why  was  I  in  such  a  hurry  with  Sonya?’  And  in¬ 
voluntarily  he  compared  the  two:  the  poverty  of  the  one  and  the  wealth 


WARANDPEACE  897 

if  the  other  in  those  spiritual  gifts,  which  Nikolay  was  himself  without 
.nd  therefore  prized  so  highly.  He  tried  to  picture  what  would  have 
Happened  if  he  had  been  free,  and  in  what  way  he  would  have  made 
ier  an  offer  and  she  would  have  become  his  wife.  No,  he  could  not  imagine 
hat.  A  feeling  of  dread  came  over  him  and  that  picture  would  take  no 
lefinite  shape.  With  Sonya  he  had  long  ago  made  his  picture  of  the 
uture,  and  it  was  all  so  simple  and  clear,  just  because  it  was  all  made 
ip  and  he  knew  all  there  was  in  Sonya.  But  with  Princess  Marya  he 
:ould  not  picture  his  future  life,  because  he  did  not  understand  her — 
ie  simply  loved  her. 

There  was  something  light-hearted,  something  of  child’s  play  in  his 
Ireams  of  Sonya.  But  to  dream  of  Princess  Marya  was  difficult  and  a 
ittle  terrible. 

‘How  she  was  praying!  ’  he  thought.  ‘One  could  see  that  her  whole  soul 
vas  in  her  prayer.  Yes,  it  was  that  prayer  that  moves  mountains,  and  I 
im  convinced  that  her  prayer  will  be  answered.  Why  don’t  I  pray  for 
vhat  I  want?’  he  bethought  himself.  ‘What  do  I  want?  Freedom,  release 
rom  Sonya.  She  was  right,’  he  thought  of  what  the  governor’s  wife  had 
aid,  ‘nothing  but  misery  can  come  of  my  marrying  her.  Muddle,  mam- 
na’s  grief  .  .  .  our  position  ...  a  muddle,  a  fearful  muddle!  Besides, 

don’t  even  love  her.  No,  I  don’t  love  her  in  the  right  way.  My  God! 
ake  me  out  of  this  awful,  hopeless  position!’  he  began  praying  all  at 
ince.  ‘Yes,  prayer  will  move  mountains,  but  one  must  believe,  and  not 
>ray,  as  Natasha  and  I  prayed  as  children  for  the  snow  to  turn  into 
ugar,  and  then  ran  out  into  the  yard  to  try  whether  it  had  become  sugar. 
vTo;  but  I  am  not  praying  for  trifles  now,’  he  said,  putting  his  pipe  down 
n  the  corner  and  standing  with  clasped  hands  before  the  holy  picture. 
\nd  softened  by  the  thought  of  Princess  Marya,  he  began  to  pray  as  he 
lad  not  prayed  for  a  long  while.  Pie  had  tears  in  his  eyes  and  a  lump 
n  his  throat  when  Lavrushka  came  in  at  the  door  with  papers. 

‘Blockhead!  bursting  in  when  you’re  not  wanted!’  said  Nikolay, 
[uickly  changing  his  attitude. 

‘A  courier  has  come,’  said  Lavrushka  in  a  sleepy  voice,  ‘from  the  gov- 
rnor,  a  letter  for  you.’ 

‘Oh,  very  well,  thanks,  you  can  go!  ’ 

Nikolay  took  the  two  letters.  One  was  from  his  mother,  the  other  from 
ionya.  He  knew  them  from  the  handwriting,  and  broke  open  Sonya’s 
etter  first.  He  had  hardly  read  a  few  lines  when  his  face  turned  white 
nd  his  eyes  opened  wide  in  dismay  and  joy.  ‘No,  it’s  not  possible!’  he 
aid  aloud.  Unable  to  sit  still,  he  began  walking  to  and  fro  in  the  room, 
Holding  the  letter  in  both  hands  as  he  read  it.  He  skimmed  through  the 
etter,  then  read  it  through  once  and  again,  and  shrugging  his  shoulders 
nd  flinging  up  his  hands,  he  stood  still  in  the  middle  of  the  room  with 
vide-open  mouth  and  staring  eyes.  What  he  had  just  been  praying  for 
vith  the  assurance  that  God  would  answer  his  prayer  had  come  to  pass; 
;>ut  Nikolay  was  astounded  at  it  as  though  it  were  something  extraordi- 
lary,  and  as  though  he  had  not  expected  it,  and  as  though  the  very 


SqS  war  and  peace 

fact  of  its  coming  to  pass  so  quickly  proved  that  it  had  not  come  fron 
God,  to  whom  he  had  been  praying,  but  was  some  ordinary  coincidence 

The  knot  fastening  his  freedom,  that  had  seemed  so  impossible  to  dis 
entangle,  had  been  undone  by  this  unexpected  and,  as  it  seemed  to  Niko 
lay,  uncalled-for  letter  from  Sonya.  She  wrote  that  their  late  misfor 
tunes,  the  loss  of  almost  the  whole  of  the  Rostovs’  property  in  Moscow 
and  the  countess’s  frequently  expressed  desire  that  Nikolay  should  marrj 
Princess  Bolkonsky,  and  his  silence  and  coldness  of  late,  all  taken  to¬ 
gether  led  her  to  decide  to  set  him  free  from  his  promise,  and  to  give 
him  back  complete  liberty. 

‘It  would  be  too  painful  to  me  to  think  that  I  could  be  a  cause  of 
sorrow  and  discord  in  the  family  which  has  overwhelmed  me  with  bene¬ 
fits,’  she  wrote;  ‘and  the  one  aim  of  my  love  is  the  happiness  of  those  ]-, 
love,  and  therefore  I  beseech  you,  Nicolas,  to  consider  yourself  free,  anc 
to  know  that  in  spite  of  everything,  no  one  can  love  you  more  truly  thar 
your — Sonya.’ 

Both  letters  were  from  Troitsa.  The  other  letter  was  from  the  countess. 
It  described  the  last  days  in  Moscow,  the  departure,  the  fire  and  the  loss 
of  the  whole  of  their  property.  The  countess  wrote  too  that  Prince 
Andrey  had  been  among  the  train  of  wounded  soldiers  who  had  travelled 
with  them.  He  was  still  in  a  very  critical  condition,  but  that  the  doctor1 
said  now  that  there  was  more  hope.  Sonya  and  Natasha  were  nursing; 
him. 

With  this  letter  Nikolay  went  next  day  to  call  on  Princess  Marya., 
Neither  Nikolay  nor  Princess  Marya  said  a  word  as  to  all  that  was  im¬ 
plied  by  the  words:  ‘Natasha  is  nursing  him’;  but  thanks  to  this  letter,: 
Nikolay  was  brought  suddenly  into  intimate  relations,  almost  those  of 
a  kinsman,  with  the  princess. 

Next  day  Rostov  escorted  Princess  Marya  as  far  as  Yaroslavl,  and  a 
few  days  later  he  set  off  himself  to  join  his  regiment. 


VIII 

Sonya’s  letter  to  Nikolay,  that  had  come  as  an  answer  to  his  prayer, 
was  written  at  Troitsa.  It  had  been  called  forth  in  the  following  way. 
The  idea  of  marrying  Nikolay  to  a  wealthy  heiress  had  taken  more  and 
more  complete  possession  of  the  old  countess’s  mind.  She  knew  that, 
Sonya  was  the  great  obstacle  in  the  way  of  this.  And  Sonya’s  life  had  of 
late,  and  especially  after  the  letter  in  which  Nikolay  described  his  meet¬ 
ing  with  Princess  Marya  at  Bogutcharovo,  become  more  and  more  difficult 
in  the  countess’s  house.  The  countess  never  let  slip  an  opportunity  for 
making  some  cruel  or  humiliating  allusion  to  Sonya.  But  a  few  days 
before  they  set  out  from  Moscow  the  countess,  distressed  and  over¬ 
wrought  by  all  that  was  happening,  sent  for  Sonya,  and  instead  of  in¬ 
sistence  and  upbraiding,  besought  her  with  tears  and  entreaties  to  repay 
all  that  had  been  done  for  her  by  sacrificing  herself,  and  breaking  off 


WAR  AND  PEACE  899 

er  engagement  to  Nikolay.  ‘I  shall  have  no  peace  of  mind  till  you  make 
ne  this  promise,’  she  said. 

Sonya  sobbed  hysterically,  answered  through  her  sobs  that  she  would 
0  anything,  that  she  was  ready  for  anything;  but  she  did  not  give  a 
irect  promise,  and  in  her  heart  she  could  not  bring  herself  to  what  was 
emanded  of  her.  She  had  to  sacrifice  herself  for  the  happiness  of  the 
amily  that  had  brought  her  up  and  provided  for  her.  To  sacrifice  herself 
Dr  others  was  Sonya’s  habit.  Her  position  in  the  house  was  such  that 
nly  by  way  of  sacrifice  could  she  show  her  virtues,  and  she  was  used 
b  sacrificing  herself  and  liked  it.  But  in  every  self-sacrificing  action 
itherto  she  had  been  happily  conscious  that  by  her  very  self-sacrifice 
he  was  heightening  her  value  in  the  eyes  of  herself  and  others,  and 
ecoming  worthier  of  Nikolay,  whom  she  loved  beyond  everything  in  life, 
iut  now  her  sacrifice  would  consist  in  the  renunciation  of  what  con- 
tituted  for  her  the  whole  reward  of  sacrifice,  and  the  whole  meaning  of 
fe.  And  for  the  first  time  in  her  life  she  felt  bitterness  against  the  people 
/ho  had  befriended  her  only  to  torment  her  more  poignantly:  she  felt 
nvy  of  Natasha,  who  had  never  had  any  experience  of  the  kind,  who 
ad  never  been  required  to  make  sacrifices,  and  made  other  people  sacri- 
ce  themselves  for  her,  and  was  yet  loved  by  every  one.  And  for  the  first 
ime  Sonya  felt  that  there  was  beginning  to  grow  up  out  of  her  quiet, 
ure  love  for  Nikolay  a  passionate  feeling,  which  stood  above  all  prin- 
iples,  and  virtue,  and  religion.  And  under  the  influence  of  that  passion, 
onya,  whose  life  of  dependence  had  unconsciously  trained  her  to  reserve, 
ave  the  countess  vague,  indefinite  answers,  avoided  talking  with  her, 
nd  resolved  to  wait  for  a  personal  interview  with  Nikolay,  not  to  set 
im  free,  but,  on  the  contrary,  to  bind  him  to  her  for  ever. 

The  fuss  and  the  horror  of  the  Rostovs’  last  days  in  Moscow  had 
mothered  the  gloomy  thoughts  that  were  weighing  on  Sonya.  She  was 
lad  to  find  an  escape  from  them  in  practical  work.  But  when  she  heard 
f  Prince  Andrey’s  presence  in  their  house,  in  spite  of  all  the  genuine 
ompassion  she  felt  for  him,  and  for  Natasha,  a  joyful  and  superstitious 
eeling  that  it  was  God’s  will  that  she  should  not  be  parted  from  Nikolay 
,00k  possession  of  her.  She  knew  Natasha  loved  no  one  but  Prince 
mdrey,  and  had  never  ceased  to  love  him.  She  knew  that  brought  to- 
ether  now,  under  such  terrible  circumstances,  they  would  love  one  an¬ 
ther  again;  and  that  then,  owing  to  the  relationship  that  would  (in 
ccordance  with  the  laws  of  the  Orthodox  Church)  exist  between  them, 
Nikolay  could  not  be  married  to  Princess  Marya.  In  spite  of  all  the 
wfulness  of  what  was  happening  during  the  last  day  or  two  in  Moscow 
nd  the  first  days  of  the  journey,  that  feeling,  that  consciousness  of  the 
Intervention  of  Providence  in  her  personal  affairs,  was  a  source  of  joy 
0  Sonya.  At  the  Troitsa  monastery  the  Rostovs  made  the  first  break 
p  their  journey. 

In  the  hostel  of  the  monastery  three  big  rooms  were  assigned  to  the 
Rostovs,  one  of  which  was  occupied  by  Prince  Andrey.  The  wounded 
nan  was  by  this  time  a  great  deal  better.  Natasha  was  sitting  with  him. 


poo 


WAR  AND  PEACE 
In  the  next  room  were  the  count  and  the  countess  reverently  conversin 
with  the  superior,  who  was  paying  a  visit  to  his  old  acquaintances  anil 
patrons.  Sonya  was  sitting  with  them,  fretted  by  curiosity  as  to  wha 
Prince  Andrey  and  Natasha  were  saying.  She  heard  the  sounds  of  thei 
voices  through  the  door.  The  door  of  Prince  Andrey’s  room  opened 
Natasha  came  out  with  an  excited  face,  and  not  noticing  the  monk,  wb  ( 
rose  to  meet  her,  and  pulled  back  his  wide  sleeve  off  his  right  hand,  sh 
went  up  to  Sonya  and  took  her  by  the  arm. 

‘Natasha,  what  are  you  about?  Come  here,’  said  the  countess. 

Natasha  went  up  to  receive  the  blessing,  and  the  superior  counsellei 
her  to  turn  for  aid  to  God  and  to  His  saint. 

Immediately  after  the  superior  had  gone  out,  Natasha  took  her  friem 
by  the  arm,  and  went  with  her  into  the  empty  third  room. 

‘Sonya,  yes,  he  will  live,’  she  said.  ‘Sonya,  how  happy  I  am,  and  ho\ 
wretched!  Sonya,  darling,  everything  is  just  as  it  used  to  be.  If  onh 
he  were  going  to  live.  Pie  cannot,  .  .  .  because  .  .  .  be  .  .  .  caus< 

.  .  .’  and  Natasha  burst  into  tears. 

‘Yes!  I  knew  it  would  be!  Thank  God,’  said  Sonya.  ‘He  will  live.’ 

Sonya  was  no  less  excited  than  her  friend,  both  by  the  latter’s  grie 
and  fears,  and  by  her  own  personal  reflections,  of  which  she  had  spoke;; 
to  no  one.  Sobbing,  she  kissed  and  comforted  Natasha.  ‘If  only  he  wer 
to  live!’  she  thought.  After  weeping,  talking  a  little,  and  wiping  thei 
tears,  the  two  friends  went  towards  Prince  Andrey’s  door.  Natasha,  cau| 
tiously  opening  the  door,  glanced  into  the  room,  Sonya  stood  besidt 
her  at  the  half-open  door. 

Prince  Andrey  was  lying  raised  high  on  three  pillows.  His  pale  fao 
looked  peaceful,  his  eyes  were  closed,  and  they  could  see  his  quiet,  regu 
lar  breathing. 

‘Ah,  Natasha!  ’  Sonya  almost  shrieked  all  of  a  sudden,  clutching  at  he 
cousin’s  arm,  and  moving  back  away  from  the  door. 

‘What!  what  is  it?’  asked  Natasha. 

‘It’s  the  same,  the  same,  you  know  .  .  .’  said  Sonya,  with  a  whiti 
face  and  quivering  lips. 

Natasha  softly  closed  the  door  and  walked  away  with  Sonya  to  tb 
window,  not  yet  understanding  what  she  was  talking  of. 

‘Do  you  remember,’  said  Sonya,  with  a  scared  and  solemn  face,  ‘d< 
you  remember  when  I  looked  into  the  mirror  for  you  ...  at  Otradnoi 
at  Christmas  time  ...  Do  you  remember  what  I  saw?’  .  .  . 

‘Yes,  yes,’  said  Natasha,  opening  her  eyes  wide,  and  vaguely  recallini 
that  Sonya  had  said  something  then  about  seeing  Prince  Andrey  lyin' 
down. 

‘Do  you  remember?’  Sonya  went  on.  ‘I  saw  him  then,  and  told  yoi 
all  so  at  the  time,  you  and  Dunyasha.  I  saw  him  lying  on  a  bed,’  sb 
said,  at  each  detail  making  a  gesture  with  her  lifted  finger,  ‘and  that  hi 
had  his  eyes  shut,  and  that  he  was  covered  with  a  pink  quilt,  and  tha 
he  had  his  hands  folded,’  said  Sonya,  convinced  as  she  described  tb 
details  she  had  just  seen  that  they  were  the  very  details  she  had  sea 


WARANDPEACE  901 

;hen.  At  the  time  she  had  seen  nothing,  but  had  said  she  was  seeing  the 
first  thing  that  came  into  her  head.  But  what  she  had  invented  then 
seemed  to  her  now  as  real  a  memory  as  any  other.  She  not  only  remem- 
oered  that  she  had  said  at  the  time  that  he  looked  round  at  her  and 
smiled,  and  was  covered  with  something  red,  but  was  firmly  convinced 
that  she  had  seen  and  said  at  the  time,  that  he  was  covered  with  a  pink 
quilt — yes,  pink — and  that  his  eyes  had  been  closed. 

‘Yes,  yes,  pink  it  was,’  said  Natasha,  who  began  now  to  fancy  too 
that  she  remembered  her  saying  it  was  a  pink  quilt,  and  saw  in  that 
detail  the  most  striking  and  mysterious  point  in  the  prediction. 

‘But  what  does  it  mean?’  said  Natasha  dreamily. 

‘Ah,  I  don’t  know,  how  extraordinary  it  all  is!’  said  Sonya,  clutching 
at  her  head. 

A  few  minutes  later,  Prince  Andrey  rang  his  bell,  and  Natasha  went 
in  to  him;  while  Sonya,  in  a  state  of  excitement  and  emotion  such  as 
she  had  rarely  experienced,  remained  in  the  window,  pondering  over 
all  the  strangeness  of  what  was  happening. 

That  day  there  was  an  opportunity  of  sending  letters  to  the  army, 
and  the  countess  wrote  a  letter  to  her  son. 

‘Sonya,’  said  the  countess,  raising  her  head  from  her  letter,  as  her 
niece  passed  by  her.  ‘Sonya,  won’t  you  write  to  Nikolenka?’  said  the 
countess,  in  a  soft  and  trembling  voice;  and  in  the  tired  eyes,  that  looked 
at  her  over  the  spectacles,  Sonya  read  all  that  the  countess  meant  by 
those  words.  Those  eyes  expressed  entreaty  and  dread  of  a  refusal  and 
jshame  at  having  to  beg,  and  readiness  for  unforgiving  hatred  in  case  of 
refusal. 

Sonya  went  up  to  the  countess,  and  kneeling  down,  kissed  her  hand. 

‘I  will  write,  mamma,’  she  said. 

Sonya  was  softened,  excited,  and  moved  by  all  that  had  passed  that 
day,  especially  by  the  mysterious  fulfilment  of  her  divination,  which 
she  had  just  seen.  Now,  when  she  knew  that  in  case  of  the  renewal  of 
Natasha’s  engagement  to  Prince  Andrey,  Nikolay  could  not  be  married 
to  Princess  Marya,  she  felt  with  delight  a  return  of  that  self-sacrificing 
spirit  in  which  she  was  accustomed  and  liked  to  live.  And  with  tears 
in  her  eyes,  and  with  a  glad  sense  of  performing  a  magnanimous  action, 
she  sat  down,  and  several  times  interrupted  by  the  tears  that  dimmed 
her  velvety  black  eyes,  she  wrote  the  touching  letter  the  reception  of 
which  had  so  impressed  Nikolay. 

IX 

In  the  guard-room  to  which  Pierre  had  been  taken,  the  officer  and  soldiers 
in  charge  treated  him  with  hostility,  but  at  the  same  time  with  respect. 
Their  attitude  to  him  betrayed  both  doubt  who  he  might  be — perhaps 


902  WARANDPEACE 

a  person  of  great  importance — and  hostility,  in  consequence  of  the  per¬ 
sonal  conflict  they  had  so  recently  had  with  him. 

But  when  on  the  morning  of  the  next  day  the  guard  was  relieved, 
Tierre  felt  that  for  his  new  guard — both  officers  and  soldiers — he  was 
no  longer  an  object  of  the  same  interest  as  he  had  been  to  those  who 
had  taken  him  prisoner.  And,  indeed,  in  the  big,  stout  man  in  a  peasant’s 
coat,  the  sentinels  in  charge  next  day  saw  nothing  of  the  vigorous  person 
who  had  fought  so  desperately  with  the  pillaging  soldier  and  the  convoy, 
and  had  uttered  that  solemn  phrase  about  saving  a  child;  they  saw  in 
him  only  number  seventeen  of  the  Russian  prisoners  who  were  to  be 
detained  for  some  reason  by  order  of  the  higher  authorities.  If  there  were 
anything  peculiar  about  Pierre,  it  lay  only  in  his  undaunted  air  of  con¬ 
centrated  thought,  and  in  the  excellent  French  in  which,  to  the  surprise 
of  the  French,  he  expressed  himself.  In  spite  of  that,  Pierre  was  put  that 
day  with  the  other  suspicious  characters  who  had  been  apprehended,  since 
the  room  he  had  occupied  was  wanted  for  an  officer. 

All  the  Russians  detained  with  Pierre  were  persons  of  the  lowest  class. 
And  all  of  them,  recognising  Pierre  as  a  gentleman,  held  aloof  from  him 
all  the  more  for  his  speaking  French.  Pierre  mournfully  heard  their  jeers 
at  his  expense. 

On  the  following  evening,  Pierre  learned  that  all  the  prisoners  (and 
himself  probably  in  the  number)  were  to  be  tried  for  incendiarism.  The 
day  after,  Pierre  was  taken  with  the  rest  to  a  house  where  were  sitting  a 
French  general  with  white  moustaches,  two  colonels,  and  other  French¬ 
men  with  scarfs  on  their  shoulders.  With  that  peculiar  exactitude  and  def¬ 
initeness,  which  is  always  employed  in  the  examination  of  prisoners  and 
is  supposed  to  preclude  all  human  weaknesses,  they  put  questions  to 
Pierre  and  the  others,  asking  who  he  was,  where  he  had  been,  with  what 
object,  and  so  on. 

These  questions,  leaving  on  one  side  the  essence  of  the  living  fact,  and 
excluding  all  possibility  of  that  essence  being  discovered,  like  all  ques¬ 
tions,  indeed,  in  legal  examinations,  aimed  only  at  directing  the  channel 
along  which  the  examining  officials  desired  the  prisoner’s  answers  to  flow, 
so  as  to  lead  him  to  the  goal  of  the  inquiry— that  is,  to  conviction.  So  soon 
as  he  began  to  say  anything  that  was  not  conducive  to  this  aim,  then  they 
pulled  up  the  channel,  and  the  water  might  flow  where  it  would.  Moreover, 
Pierre  felt,  as  the  accused  always  do  feel  at  all  trials,  a  puzzled  wonder 
why  all  these  questions  were  asked  him.  He  had  a  feeling  that  it  was 
only  out  of  condescension,  out  of  a  sort  of  civility,  that  this  trick  of  di¬ 
recting  the  channel  of  their  replies  was  made  use  of.  He  knew  he  was  in 
the  power  of  these  men,  that  it  was  only  by  superior  force  that  he  had 
been  brought  here,  that  it  was  only  superior  force  that  gave  them  the 
right  to.  exact  answers  to  their  questions,  that  the  whole  aim  of  the  pro¬ 
ceeding  Avas  to  convict  him.  And,  therefore,  since  they  had  superior  force, 
and  they  had  the  desire  to  convict  him,  there  seemed  no  need  of  the  net¬ 
work  of  questions  and  the  trial.  It  was  obvious  that  all  the  questions  were 
bound  to  lead  up  to  his  conviction.  To  the  inquiry  what  he  was  doing  when 


WARANDPEACE  g°3 

e  was  apprehended,  Pierre  replied  with  a  certain  tragic  dignity  that  he  was 
arrying  back  to  its  parents  a  child  he  had  ‘rescued  from  the  flames.’  Why 
yas  he  fighting  with  the  soldieis?  Pierre  replied  that  he  was  defending  ■* 
roman,  that  the  defence  of  an  insulted  woman  was  the  duty  of  every  man, 
nd  so  on  ...  He  was  pulled  up;  this  was  irrelevant.  With  what  object 
lad  he  been  in  the  courtyard  of  a  burning  house  where  he  had  been  seen 
>y  several  witnesses?  He  answered  that  he  was  going  out  to  see  what 
vas  going  on  in  Moscow.  He  was  pulled  up  again.  He  had  not  been  asked, 
le  was  told,  where  he  was  going,  but  with  what  object  he  was  near  the 
ire.  Who  was  he?  The  first  question  was  repeated,  to  which  he  had  said 
ie  did  not  want  to  answer.  Again  he  replied  that  he  could  not  answer  that. 

‘Write  that  down,  that’s  bad.  Very  bad,’  the  general  with  the  white 
vhiskers  and  the  red,  flushed  face  said  to  him  sternly. 

On  the  fourth  day,  fire  broke  out  on  the  Zubovsky  rampart. 

Pierre  was  moved  with  thirteen  of  the  others  to  a  coach-house  belong- 
ng  to  a  merchant’s  house  on  the  Crimean  Ford.  As  he  passed  through 
he  street,  Pierre  could  hardly  breathe  for  the  smoke,  which  seemed 
ranging  over  the  whole  city.  Fires  could  be  seen  in  various  directions. 
Pierre  did  not  at  that  time  grasp  what  was  implied  by  the  burning  of 
Moscow,  and  he  gazed  with  horror  at  the  fires. 

In  a  coach-house  behind  a  house  in  the  Crimean  Ford,  Pierre  spent 
another  four  days,  and  in  the  course  of  those  four  days  he  learned,  from 
the  conversation  of  the  French  soldiers,  that  all  the  prisoners  in  detention 
here  were  every  day  awaiting  the  decision  of  their  fate  by  a  marshal. 
Of  what  marshal,  Pierre  could  not  ascertain  from  the  soldiers.  For  the 
soldiers,  this  marshal  was  evidently  the  highest  and  somewhat  mysteri¬ 
ous  symbol  of  power. 

These  first  days,  up  to  the  8th  of  September,  when  the  prisoners  were 
brought  up  for  a  second  examination,  were  the  most  painful  for  Pierre. 


X 

On  the  8th  of  September,  there  came  into  the  prisoners’  coach-house  an 
officer  of  very  great  consequence,  judging- by  the  respectfulness  with  which 
he  was  addressed  by  the  soldiers  on  guard.  This  officer,  probably  some  one 
on  the  staff,  held  a  memorandum  in  his  hand,  and  called  over  all  the 
Russians’  names,  giving  Pierre  the  title  of  ‘the  one  who  will  not  give  his 
name.’  And  with  an  indolent  and  indifferent  glance  at  all  the  prisoners, 
he  gave  the  officer  on  guard  orders  to  have  them  decently  dressed  and  in 
good  order  before  bringing  them  before  the  marshal.  In  an  hour  a  com¬ 
pany  of  soldiers  arrived,  and  Pierre  with  the  thirteen  others  was  taken  to 
the  Virgin’s  Meadow.  It  was  a  fine  day,  sunny  after  rain,  and  the  air  was 
exceptionally  clear.  The  smoke  did  not  hang  low  over  the  town  as  on  the 
day  when  Pierre  had  been  taken  from  the  guard-room  of  the  Zubovsky 
rampart;  the  smoke  rose  up  in  columns  into  the  pure  air.  Flames  were 
nowhere  to  be  seen;  but  columns  of  smoke  were  rising  up  on  all  sides, 


904  WAR  AND  PEACE 

and  all  Moscow,  all  that  Pierre  could  see,  was  one  conflagration.  On  a; 
sides  he  saw  places  laid  waste,  with  stoves  and  pipes  left  standing  i; 
them,  and  now  and  then  the  charred  walls  of  a  stone  house. 

Pierre  stared  at  the  fires,  and  did  not  recognise  parts  of  the  towi 
that  he  knew  well.  Here  and  there  could  be  seen  churches  that  had  no 
been  touched  by  the  fire.  The  Kremlin  uninjured,  rose  white  in  the  dis 
tance,  with  towers  and  Ivan  the  Great.  Close  at  hand,  the  cupola  of  tb 
Monastery  of  the  New  Virgin  shone  brightly,  and  the  bells  for  servic 
rang  out  gaily  from  it.  Those  bells  reminded  Pierre  that  it  was  Sunda; 
and  the  festival  of  the  birth  of  the  Virgin  Mother.  But  there  seemed  t< 
be  no  one  to  keep  this  holiday;  on  all  sides  they  saw  the  ruin  wrough 
by  the  fires,  and  the  only  Russians  they  met  were  a  few  tattered  anc 
frightened-looking  people,  who  hid  themselves  on  seeing  the  French. 

It  was  evident  that  the  Russian  nest  was  in  ruins  and  destroyed;  bir 
with  this  annihilation  of  the  old  Russian  order  of  life,  Pierre  was  uncon 
sciously  aware  that  the  French  had  raised  up  over  this  ruined  nest  ar 
utterly  different  but  strong  order  of  their  own.  He  felt  this  at  the  sighi 
of  the  regular  ranks  of  the  boldly  and  gaily  marching  soldiers  who  wen 
escorting  him  and  the  other  prisoners;  he  felt  it  at  the  sight  of  some  im 
portant  French  official  in  a  carriage  and  pair,  driven  by  a  soldier,  whorr 
they  met  on  their  way.  He  felt  it  at  the  gay  sounds  of  regimental  music, 
which  floated  across  from  the  left  of  the  meadow;  and  he  had  felt  it  anc 
realised  it  particularly  strongly  from  the  memorandum  the  French  officer 
had  read  in  the  morning  when  he  called  over  the  prisoners’  names.  Pierre 
was  taken  by  one  set  of  soldiers,  led  off  to  one  place,  and  thence  to  another, 
with  dozens  of  different  people.  It  seemed  to  him  that  they  might  have 
forgotten  him,  have  mixed  him  up  with  other  people.  But  no;  his  answers 
given  at  the  examination  came  back  to  him  in  the  form  of  the  designation, 
‘the  one  who  will  not  give  his  name.’  And  under  this  designation,  which 
filled  Pierre  with  dread,  they  led  him  away  somewhere,  with  unhesitating 
conviction  written  on  their  faces  that  he  and  the  other  prisoners  with  him 
were  the  right  ones,  and  that  they  were  being  taken  to  the  proper  place. 
Pierre  felt  himself  an  insignificant  chip  that  had  fallen  under  the  wheel 
of  a  machine  that  worked  without  a  hitch,  though  he  did  not  understand  it. 

Pierre  was  led  with  the  other  prisoners  to  the  right  side  of  the  Virgin’s 
Meadow,  not  far  from  the  monastery,  and  taken  up  to  a  big,  white  house 
with  an  immense  garden.  It  was  the  house  of  Prince  Shtcherbatov,  and 
Pierre  had  often  been  inside  it  in  former  days  to  see  its  owner.  Now, 
as  he  learnt  from  the  talk  of  the  soldiers,  it  was  occupied  by  the  marshal, 
the  Duke  of  Eckmiihl. 

They  were  led  up  to  the  entrance,  and  taken  into  the  house,  one  at  a 
time.  Pierre  was  the  sixth  to  be  led  in.  Through  a  glass-roofed  gallery,  a 
vestibule,  and  a  hall,  all  familiar  to  Pierre,  he  was  led  to  the  long,  low- 
pitched  study,  at  the  door  of  which  stood  an  adjutant. 

Davoust  was  sitting  at  a  table  at  the  end  of  the  room,  his  spectacles 
on  his  nose.  Pierre  came  close  up  to  him.  Davoust,  without  raising  his 
eyes,  was  apparently  engaged  in  looking  up  something  in  a  document  that 


WAR  AND  PEACE  905 

ay  before  him.  Without  raising  his  eyes,  he  asked  softly:  ‘Who  are  you?’ 

Pierre  was  mute  because  he  was  incapable  of  articulating  a  word. 
Davoust  was  not  to  Pierre  simply  a  French  general;  to  Pierre,  Davoust 
vas  a  man  notorious  for  his  cruelty.  Looking  at  the  cold  face  of  Davoust, 
vhich,  like  a  stern  teacher,  seemed  to  consent  for  a  time  to  have  patience 
ind  await  a  reply,  Pierre  felt  that  every  second  of  delay  might  cost  him  his 
ife.  But  he  did  not  know  what  to  say.  To  say  the  same  as  he  had  said  at  the 
irst  examination  he  did  not  dare;  to  disclose  his  name  and  his  position 
vould  be  both  dangerous  and  shameful.  Pierre  stood  mute.  But  before 
ae  had  time  to  come  to  any  decision,  Davoust  raised  his  head,  thrust 
lis  spectacles  up  on  his  forehead,  screwed  up  his  eyes,  and  looked  intently 
it  Pierre. 

‘I  know  this  man,’  he  said,  in  a  frigid,  measured  tone,  obviously  reckon- 
ng  on  frightening  Pierre.  The  chill  that  had  been  running  down  Pierre’s 
jack  seemed  to  clutch  his  head  in  a  vice. 

‘General,  you  cannot  know  me,  I  have  never  seen  you.’ 

‘It  is  a  Russian  spy,’  Davoust  interrupted,  addressing  another  general 
n  the  room,  whom  Pierre  had  not  noticed.  And  Devoust  turned  away. 
With  an  unexpected  thrill  in  his  voice,  Pierre  began  speaking  with  sud¬ 
den  rapidity. 

‘Non,  monseigneur,’  he  said,  suddenly  recalling  that  Davoust  was  a 
duke,  ‘you  could  not  know  me.  I  am  a  militia  officer,  and  I  have  not  quitted 
Moscow.’ 

‘Your  name?’  repeated  Davoust. 

‘Bezuhov.’ 

‘What  proof  is  there  that  you  are  not  lying?” 

‘Monseigneur !’  cried  Pierre  in  a  voice  not  of  offence  but  of  supplication. 

Davoust  lifted  his  eyes  and  looked  intently  at  Pierre.  For  several  sec¬ 
onds  they  looked  at  one  another,  and  that  look  saved  Pierre.  In  that 
glance,  apart  from  all  circumstances  of  warfare  and  of  judgment,  human 
relations  arose  between  these  two  men.  Both  of  them  in  that  one  instant 
were  vaguely  aware  of  an  immense  number  of  different  things,  and  knew 
that  they  were  both  children  of  humanity,  that  they  were  brothers. 

At  the  first  glance  when  Davoust  raised  his  head  from  his  memoran¬ 
dum,  where  men’s  lives  and  doings  were  marked  off  by  numbers,  Pierre 
was  only  a  circumstance,  and  Davoust  could  have  shot  him  with  no 
sense  of  an  evil  deed  on  his  conscience;  but  now  he  saw  in  him  a  man. 
He  pondered  an  instant. 

‘Plow  will  you  prove  to  me  the  truth  of  what  you  say?’  said  Davoust 
coldly. 

Pierre  thought  of  Ramballe,  and  mentioned  his  name  and  regiment  and 
the  street  and  house  where  he  could  be  found. 

‘You  are  not  what  you  say,’  Davoust  said  again. 

In  a  trembling,  breaking  voice,  Pierre  began  to  bring  forward  proofs 
of  the  truth  of  his  testimony. 

But  at  that  moment  an  adjutant  came  in  and  said  something  to  Davoust. 

Davoust  beamed  at  the  news  the  adjutant  brought  him,  and  began 


go6  WARANDPEACE 

buttoning  up  his  uniform.  Apparently  he  had  completely  forgotten  aboui 
Pierre.  When  an  adjutant  reminded  him  of  the  prisoner,  he  nodded  ir 
Pierre’s  direction  with  a  frown,  and  told  them  to  take  him  away.  Bui 
where  were  they  to  take  him — Pierre  did  not  know:  whether  back  to  the 
shed  or  the  place  prepared  for  their  execution  which  his  companions  had 
pointed  out  to  him  as  they  passed  through  the  Virgin’s  Meadow. 

He  turned  his  head  and  saw  that  the  adjutant  was  repeating  some 
question. 

‘Yes,  of  course!  ’  said  Davoust.  But  what  that  ‘yes’  meant,  Pierre  could 
not  tell. 

Pierre  did  not  remember  how  or  where  he  went,  and  how  long  he  was 
going.  In  a  condition  of  complete  stupefaction  and  bewilderment,  seeing 
nothing  around  him,  he  moved  his  legs  in  company  with  the  others  till 
they  all  stopped,  and  he  stopped. 

There  was  one  idea  all  this  time  in  Pierre’s  head.  It  was  the  question: 
Who,  who  was  it  really  that  was  condemning  him  to  death?  It  was  not 
the  men  who  had  questioned  him  at  the  first  examination;  of  them  not 
one  would  or  obviously  could  do  so.  It  was  not  Davoust,  who  had  looked 
at  him  in  such  a  human  fashion.  In  another  minute  Davoust  would  have 
understood  that  they  were  doing  wrong,  but  the  adjutant  who  had  come 
in  at  that  moment  had  prevented  it.  And  that  adjutant  had  obviously 
had  no  evil  intent,  but  he  might  have  stayed  away.  Who  was  it,  after 
all,  who  was  punishing  him,  killing  him,  taking  his  life — his,  Pierre’s, 
with  all  his  memories,  his  strivings,  his  hopes,  and  his  ideas?  Who  was 
doing  it?  And  Pierre  felt  that  it  was  no  one’s  doing.  It  was  discipline,  and! 
the  concatenation  of  circumstances.  Some  sort  of  discipline  was  killing 
him,  Pierre,  robbing  him  of  life,  of  all,  annihilating  him. 


XI 

From  Prince  Shtcherbatov’s  house  the  prisoners  were  taken  straight  down¬ 
hill  across  the  Virgin’s  Meadow  to  the  left  of  the  monastery  of  the  Virgin, 
and  led  to  a  kitchen  garden,  in  which  there  stood  a  post.  A  big  pit  had 
been  dug  out  near  the  post,  and  the  freshly  turned-up  earth  was  heaped 
up  by  it.  A  great  crowd  of  people  formed  a  semicircle  about  the  pit  and 
the  post.  The  crowd  consisted  of  a  small  number  of  Russians  and  a  great 
number  of  Napoleon’s  soldiers  not  on  duty:  there  were  Germans,  Italians, 
and  Frenchmen  in  various  uniforms.  To  the  right  and  left  of  the  post 
stood  rows  of  French  soldiers,  in  blue  uniforms,  with  red  epaulettes,  in 
Hessians  and  shako.  The  prisoners  were  stood  in  a  certain  order,  in 
accordance  with  a  written  list  (Pierre  was  sixth)  and  led  up  to  the  post. 
Several  drums  suddenly  began  beating  on  both  sides  of  them,  and  Pierre 
felt  as  though  a  part  of  his  soul  was  being  torn  away  from  him  by  that 
sound.  He  lost  all  power  of  thought  and  reflection.  He  could  only  see 
and  hear.  And  there  was  only  one  desire  left  in  him,  the  desire  that  the 


WARANDPEACE  907 

errible  thing  that  was  to  be  done  should  be  done  more  quickly.  Pierre 
Doked  round  at  his  companions  and  scrutinised  them. 

The  two  men  at  the  end  were  shaven  convicts;  one  tall  and  thin,  the 
ther  a  swarthy,  hirsute,  muscular  fellow  with  a  flattened  nose.  The 
hird  was  a  house-serf,  a  man  of  five-and-forty,  with  grey  hair  and  a 
lump,  well-fed  figure.  The  fourth  was  a  peasant,  a  very  handsome 
fellow  with  a  full,  flaxen  beard  and  black  eyes.  The  fifth  was  a  factory 
and,  a  thin,  sallow  lad  of  eighteen,  in  a  dressing-gown. 

Pierre  heard  the  Frenchmen  deliberating  how  they  were  to  be  shot, 
ingly,  or  two  at  a  time.  ‘Two  at  a  time,’  a  senior  officer  answered  coldly, 
'here  was  a  stir  in  the  ranks  of  the  soldiers,  and  it  was  evident  that  every 
he  was  in  haste  and  not  making  haste,  not  as  people  do  when  they  are 
etting  through  some  job  every  one  can  understand,  but  as  men  hasten  to 
et  something  done  that  is  inevitable,  but  is  disagreeable  and  incompre- 
ensible. 

A  French  official  wearing  a  scarf  came  up  to  the  right  side  of  the  file 
f  prisoners,  and  read  aloud  the  sentence  in  Russian  and  in  French. 

Then  two  couples  of  French  soldiers  came  up  to  the  prisoners  by  the 
istruction  of  an  officer,  and  took  the  two  convicts  who  stood  at  the  head, 
'he  convicts  went  up  to  the  post,  stopped  there,  and  while  the  sacks 
'ere  being  brought,  they  looked  dumbly  about  them,  as  a  wild  beast 
t  bay  looks  at  the  approaching  hunter.  One  of  them  kept  on  crossing 
imself,  the  other  scratched  his  back  and  worked  his  lips  into  the  sem- 
lance  of  a  smile.  The  soldiers  with  hurrying  fingers  bandaged  their  eyes, 
ut  the  sacks  over  their  heads  and  bound  them  to  the  post. 

A  dozen  sharpshooters,  with  muskets,  stepped  out  of  the  ranks  with  a 
ne,  regular  tread,  and  halted  eight  paces  from  the  post.  Pierre  turned 
way  not  to  see  what  was  coming.  There  was  a  sudden  bang  and  rattle 
hat  seemed  to  Pierre  louder  than  the  most  terrific  clap  of  thunder,  and 
e  looked  round.  There  was  a  cloud  of  smoke,  and  the  French  soldiers, 
|ith  trembling  hands  and  pale  faces,  were  doing  something  in  it  by  the 
it.  The  next  two  were  led  up.  Those  two,  too,  looked  at  every  one  in  the 
ime  way,  with  the  same  eyes,  dumbly,  and  in  vain,  with  their  eyes  only 
legging  for  protection,  and  plainly  unable  to  understand  or  believe  in 
rhat  was  coming.  They  could  not  believe  in  it,  because  they  only  knew 
hat  their  life  was  to  them,  and  so  could  not  understand,  and  could  not 
elieve,  that  it  could  be  taken  from  them. 

Pierre  tried  not  to  look,  and  again  turned  away;  but  again  a  sort  of 
wful  crash  smote  his  hearing,  and  with  the  sound  he  saw  smoke,  blood, 
nd  the  pale  and  frightened  faces  of  the  Frenchmen,  again  doing  some- 
ling  at  the  post,  and  balking  each  other  with  their  trembling  hands, 
ierre,  breathing  hard,  looked  about  him  as  though  asking.  ‘What  does 
mean?’  The  same  question  was  written  in  all  the  eyes  that  met  Pierre’s 
yes.  On  all  the  faces  of  the  Russians,  on  the  faces  of  the  French  soldiers 
nd  officers,  all  without  exception,  he  read  the  same  dismay,  horror,  and 
pnflict  as  he  felt  in  his  own  heart.  ‘But  who  is  it  doing  it  there  really? 
hey  are  all  suffering  as  I  am!  Who  is  it?  who?’  flashed  for  one  second 


90S  WAR  AND  PEACE 

through  Pierre’s  mind.  ‘Sharpshooters  of  the  eighty-sixth,  forward! 
some  one  shouted.  The  fifth  prisoner  standing  beside  Pierre  was  le 
forward — alone.  Pierre  did  not  understand  that  he  was  saved;  that  h 
and  all  the  rest  had  been  brought  here  simply  to  be  present  at  the  execu 
tion.  With  growing  horror,  with  no  sense  of  joy  or  relief,  he  gazed  a 
what  was  being  done.  The  fifth  was  the  factory  lad  in  the  loose  gown.  A 
soon  as  they  touched  him,  he  darted  away  in  terror  and  clutched  at  Pierr 
(Pierre  shuddered  and  tore  himself  away  from  him).  The  factory  la< 
could  not  walk.  He  was  held  up  under  the  arms  and  dragged  along,  am 
he  screamed  something  all  the  while.  When  they  had  brought  him  to  th 
post  he  was  suddenly  quiet.  He  seemed  suddenly  to  have  grasped  some 
thing.  Whether  he  grasped  that  it  was  no  use  to  scream,  or  that  it  wa 
impossible  for  men  to  kill  him,  he  stood  at  the  post,  waiting  to  be  bourn 
like  the  others,  and  like  a  wild  beast  under  fire  looked  about  him  wit' 
glittering  eyes. 

Pierre  could  not  make  himself  turn  away  and  close  his  eyes.  The  curi 
osity  and  emotion  he  felt,  and  all  the  crowd  with  him,  at  this  fifth  murde 
reached  its  highest  pitch.  Like  the  rest,  this  fifth  man  seemed  calm.  H 
wrapped  his  dressing-gown  round  him,  and  scratched  one  bare  foot  wit! 
the  other. 

When  they  bound  up  his  eyes,  of  himself  he  straightened  the  knot 
which  hurt  the  back  of  his  head;  then,  when  they  propped  him  agains 
the  blood-stained  post,  he  staggered  back,  and  as  he  was  uncomfortabl- 
in  that  position,  he  shifted  his  attitude,  and  leaned  back  quietly,  with  hi 
feet  put  down  symmetrically.  Pierre  never  took  his  eyes  off  him,  am 
did  not  miss  the  slightest  movement  he  made. 

The  word  of  command  must  have  sounded,  and  after  it  the  shots  o 
the  eight  muskets.  But  Pierre,  however  earnestly  he  tried  to  recollect  i 
afterwards,  had  not  heard  the  slightest  sound  from  the  shots.  He  onl; 
saw  the  factory  lad  suddenly  fall  back  on  the  cords,  saw  blood  oozing  ii 
two  places,  and  saw  the  cords  themselves  work  loose  from  the  weight  o 
the  hanging  body,  and  the  factory  lad  sit  down,  his  head  falling  unnatu 
rally,  and  one  leg  bent  under  him.  Pierre  ran  up  to  the  post.  No  om 
hindered  him.  Men  with  pale  and  frightened  faces  were  doing  something 
round  the  factory  lad.  There  was  one  old  whiskered  Frenchman,  whose 
lower  jaw  twitched  all  the  while  as  he  untied  the  cords.  The  body  sanl 
down.  The  soldiers,  with  clumsy  haste,  dragged  it  from  the  post  anc 
shoved  it  into  the  pit. 

All  of  them  clearly  knew,  beyond  all  doubt,  that  they  were  criminals 
who  must  make  haste  to  hide  the  traces  of  their  crime. 

Pierre  glanced  into  the  pit  and  saw  that  the  factory  lad  was  lyin§ 
there  with  his  knees  up  close  to  his  head,  and  one  shoulder  higher  thar 
the  other.  And  that  shoulder  was  convulsively,  rhythmically  rising  anc 
falling.  But  spadefuls  of  earth  were  already  falling  all  over  the  body 
One  of  the  soldiers,  in  a  voice  of  rage,  exasperation,  and  pain,  shouted 
to  Pierre  to  stand  aside.  But  Pierre  did  not  understand  him,  and  stil 
stood  at  the  post,  and  no  one  drove  him  away. 


WARANDPEACE  gog 

When  the  pit  was  quite  filled  up,  the  word  of  command  was  heard, 
ierre  was  taken  back  to  his  place,  and  the  French  troops,  standing  in 
inks  on  both  sides  of  the  post,  faced  about,  and  began  marching  with  a 
leasured  step  past  the  post.  The  twenty-four  sharpshooters,  standing 
i  the  middle  of  the  circle,  with  uncharged  muskets,  ran  back  to  their 
laces  as  their  companies  marched  by  them. 

Pierre  stared  now  with  dazed  eyes  at  these  sharpshooters,  who  were 
jnning  two  together  out  of  the  circle.  All  of  them  had  joined  their 
impanies  except  one.  A  young  soldier,  with  a  face  of  deathly  pallor, 
ill  stood  facing  the  pit  on  the  spot  upon  which  he  had  shot,  his  shako 
tiling  backwards  off  his  head,  and  his  fuse  dropping  on  to  the  ground, 
le  staggered  like  a  drunken  man,  taking  a  few  steps  forward,  and  then 
few  back,  to  keep  himself  from  falling.  An  old  under-officer  ran  out  of 
le  ranks,  and,  seizing  the  young  soldier  by  the  shoulder,  dragged  him 
)  his  company.  The  crowd  of  Frenchmen  and  Russians  began  to  disperse. 
11  walked  in  silence,  with  downcast  eyes. 

‘That  will  teach  them  to  set  fire  to  the  places,’  said  some  one  among 
le  French.  Pierre  looked  round  at  the  speaker,  and  saw  that  it  was  a 
jldier  who  was  trying  to  console  himself  somehow  for  what  had  been 
one,  but  could  not.  Without  finishing  his  sentence,  he  waved  his  hand 
tid  went  on. 


XII 

fter  the  execution  Pierre  was  separated  from  the  other  prisoners  and 
■ft  alone  in  a  small,  despoiled,  and  filthy  church. 

Towards  evening  a  patrol  sergeant,  with  two  soldiers,  came  into  the 
hurch  and  informed  Pierre  that  he  was  pardoned,  and  was  now  going 
o  the  barracks  of  the  prisoners  of  war.  Without  understanding  a  word 
f  what  was  said  to  him,  Pierre  got  up  and  went  with  the  soldiers.  He 
as  conducted  to  some  sheds  that  had  been  rigged  up  in  the  upper  part 
f  the  meadow  out  of  charred  boards,  beams,  and  battens,  and  was  taken 
ito  one  of  them.  Some  twenty  persons  of  various  kinds  thronged  round 
ierre.  He  stared  at  them,  with  no  idea  of  what  these  men  were,  why 
ley  were  here,  and  what  they  wanted  of  him.  He  heard  the  words  they 
lid  to  him,  but  his  mind  made  no  kind  of  deduction  or  interpretation  of 
lem;  he  had  no  idea  of  their  meaning.  He  made  some  answer,  too,  to  the 
uestions  asked  him,  but  without  any  notion  who  was  hearing  him,  or 
ow  they  would  understand  his  replies.  He  gazed  at  faces  and  figures, 
ad  all  seemed  to  him  equally  meaningless. 

From  the  moment  when  Pierre  saw  that  fearful  murder  committed  by 
len  who  did  not  want  to  do  it,  it  seemed  as  though  the  spring  in  his 
>ul,  by  which  everything  was  held  together  and  given  the  semblance  of 
fe,  had  been  wrenched  out,  and  all  seemed  to  have  collapsed  into  a 
eap  of  meaningless  refuse.  Though  he  had  no  clear  apprehension  of  it, 
had  annihilated  in  his  soul  all  faith  in  the  beneficent  ordering  of  the 
niverse,  and  in  the  soul  of  men,  and  in  his  own  soul,  and  in  God.  This 


gio  WARANDPEACE 

state  of  mind  Pierre  had  experienced  before,  but  never  with  such  intensi 
as  now.  When  such  doubts  had  come  upon  him  in  the  past  they  had  arise 
from  his  own  fault.  And  at  the  very  bottom  of  his  heart  Pierre  had  bet 
aware  then  that  salvation  from  that  despair  and  from  these  doubts  k 
in  his  own  hands.  But  now  he  felt  that  it  was  not  his  fault  that  the  wor] 
was  collapsing  before  his  eyes,  and  that  nothing  was  left  but  meaninglei 
ruins.  He  felt  that  to  get  back  to  faith  in  life  was  not  in  his  power. 

Around  him  in  the  darkness  stood  men.  Probably  they  found  sorm 
thing  very  entertaining  in  him.  They  were  telling  him  something,  askin 
him  something,  then  leading  him  somewhere,  and  at  last  he  found  himse! 
in  a  corner  of  the  shed  beside  men  of  some  sort,  who  were  talking  o 
all  sides,  and  laughing. 

‘And  so,  mates  .  .  .  that  same  prince  who’  (with  a  special  emphas 
on  the  last  word)  .  .  .  some  voice  was  saying  in  the  opposite  corner  c 
the  shed. 

Sitting  in  the  straw  against  the  wall,  mute  and  motionless,  Pierr! 
opened,  and  then  closed,  his  eyes.  As  soon  as  he  shut  his  eyes  he  saw  th 
fearful  face  of  the  factory  lad,  fearful  especially  from  its  simplicity,  an 
the  faces  of  the  involuntary  murderers,  still  more  fearful  in  their  uneas' 
ness.  And  he  opened  his  eyes  again  and  stared  blankly  about  him  in  th 
darkness. 

Close  by  him  a  little  man  was  sitting  bent  up,  of  whose  presence  Pierr 
was  first  aware  from  the  strong  smell  of  sweat  that  rose  at  every  move! 
ment  he  made.  This  man  was  doing  something  with  his  feet  in  the  dark 
ness,  and  although  Pierre  did  not  see  his  face,  he  was  aware  that  he  wa 
continually  glancing  at  him.  Peering  intently  at  him  in  the  dark,  Pierr 
made  out  that  the  man  was  undoing  his  foot-gear.  And  the  way  he  wa 
doing  it  began  to  interest  Pierre. 

Undoing  the  strings  in  which  one  foot  was  tied  up,  he  wound  ther 
neatly  off,  and  at  once  set  to  work  on  the  other  leg,  glancing  at  Pierre! 
While  one  hand  hung  up  the  first  leg-binder,  the  other  was  already  be 
ginning  to  untie  the  other  leg.  In  this  way,  deftly,  with  rounded,  effectiv 
movements  following  one  another  without  delay,  the  man  unrolled  hi 
leg-wrappers  and  hung  them  up  on  pegs  driven  in  over-head,  took  out ; 
knife,  cut  off  something,  shut  the  knife  up,  put  it  under  his  bolster,  am 
settling  himself  more  at  his  ease,  clasped  his  arms  round  his  knees,  am 
stared  straight  at  Pierre.  Pierre  was  conscious  of  something  pleasant; 
soothing,  and  rounded  off  in  those  deft  movements,  in  his  comfortabl 
establishment  of  his  belongings  in  the  corner,  and  even  in  the  very  smel 
of  the  man,  and  he  did  not  take  his  eyes  off  him. 

‘And  have  you  seen  a  lot  of  trouble,  sir?  Eh?’  said  the  little  man  sud 
denly.  And  there  was  a  tone  of  such  friendliness  and  simplicity  in  th 
sing-song  voice  that  Pierre  wanted  to  answer,  but  his  jaw  quivered,  ant! 
he  felt  the  tears  rising.  At  the  same  second,  leaving  no  time  for  Pierre’ 
embarrassment  to  appear,  the  little  man  said,  in  the  same  pleasant  voice 

‘Ay,  darling,  don’t  grieve,’  he  said,  in  that  tender,  caressing  sing-sonj 
in  which  old  Russian  peasant  women  talk.  ‘Don’t  grieve,  dearie;  troubL 


WARANDPEACE  91 1 

ists  an  hour,  but  life  lasts  for  ever!  Ay,  ay,  my  dear.  And  we  get  on 
ere  finely,  thank  God;  nothing  to  vex  us.  They’re  men,  too,  and  bad 
nd  good  among  them,’  he  said;  and,  while  still  speaking,  got  with  a 
jpple  movement  on  his  knees  to  his  feet,  and  clearing  his  throat  walked 
way. 

‘Hey,  the  hussy,  here  she  is!  ’  Pierre  heard  at  the  end  of  the  shed  the 
ime  caressing  voice.  ‘Here  she  is,  the  hussy;  she  remembers  me!  There, 
rere,  lie  down!’  And  the  soldier,  pushing  down  a  dog  that  was  jumping 
p  on  him,  came  back  to  his  place  and  sat  down.  In  his  hands  he  had 
jmething  wrapped  up  in  a  cloth. 

‘Here,  you  taste  this,  sir,’  he  said,  returning  to  the  respectful  tone  he 
ad  used  at  first,  and  untying  and  handing  to  Pierre  several  baked  po- 
itoes.  ‘At  dinner  we  had  soup.  But  the  potatoes  are  first  rate!’ 

Pierre  had  eaten  nothing  the  whole  day,  and  the  smell  of  the  potatoes 
;ruck  him  as  extraordinarily  pleasant.  He  thanked  the  soldier  and 
egan  eating. 

‘But  why  so,  eh?’  said  the  soldier  smiling,  and  he  took  one  of  the  po- 
jtoes.  ‘You  try  them  like  this.’  He  took  out  his  clasp-knife  again,  cut 
le  potato  in  his  hand  into  two  even  halves,  and  sprinkled  them  with  salt 
;om  the  cloth,  ar.d  offered  them  to  Pierre. 

‘The  potatoes  are  first-rate,'  he  repeated.  ‘You  taste  them  like  that.’ 

It  seemed  to  Pierre  that  he  had  never  eaten  anything  so  good. 

‘No,  I  am  all  right,’  said  Pierre;  ‘but  why  did  they  shoot  those  poor 
allows?  .  .  .  The  last  was  a  lad  of  twenty.’ 

‘Tss  .  .  .  tss  .  .  .’  said  the  little  man.  ‘Sin,  indeed,  .  .  .  sin  .  .  .’  he 
dded  quickly,  just  as  though  the  words  were  already  in  his  mouth  and 
ew  out  of  it  by  accident;  he  went  on:  ‘How  was  it,  sir,  you  came  to  stay 
1  Moscow  like  this?’ 

‘I  didn’t  think  they  would  come  so  soon.  I  stayed  by  accident,’  said 
’ierre. 

‘But  how  did  they  take  you,  darling;  from  your  home?’ 

‘No,  I  went  out  to  see  the  fire,  and  then  they  took  me  up  and  brought 
le  to  judgment  as  an  incendiary.’ 

‘Where  there’s  judgment,  there  there’s  falsehood,’  put  in  the  little  man. 

‘And  have  you  been  here  long?’  asked  Pierre,  as  he  munched  the  last 
iotato. 

‘I?  On  Sunday  they  took  me  out  of  the  hospital  in  Moscow.’ 

‘Who  are  you,  a  soldier?’ 

‘We  are  soldiers  of  the  Apsheron  regiment.  I  was  dying  of  fever.  We 
'ere  never  told  anything.  There  were  twenty  of  us  lying  sick.  And  we 
ad  never  a  thought,  never  a  guess  of  how  it  was.’ 

‘Well,  and  are  you  miserable  here?’  asked  Pierre. 

‘Miserable,  to  be  sure,  darling.  My  name’s  Platon,  surname  Karataev,’ 
e  added,  evidently  to  make  it  easier  for  Pierre  to  address  him.  ‘In  the 
.agiment  they  called  me  “the  little  hawk.”  How  can  one  help  being  sad, 
iy  dear?  Moscow — she’s  the  mother  of  cities.  One  must  be  sad  to  see 


912  WARANDPEACE 

it.  Yes,  the  maggot  gnaws  the  cabbage,  but  it  dies  before  it’s  done;  s 
the  old  folks  used  to  say,’  he  added  quickly. 

‘What,  what  was  that  you  said?’  asked  Pierre. 

‘I?’  said  Karataev.  ‘I  say  it’s  not  by  our  wit,  but  as  God  thinks  fit 
said  he,  supposing  that  he  was  repeating  what  he  had  said.  And  at  one 
he  went  on:  ‘Tell  me,  sir,  and  have  you  an  estate  from  your  fathers 
And  a  house  of  your  own?  To  be  sure,  your  cup  was  overflowing!  And  , 
wife,  too?  And  are  your  old  parents  living?’  he  asked,  and  though  Pierr 
could  not  see  him  in  the  dark,  he  felt  that  the  soldier’s  lips  were  puckerei 
in  a  restrained  smile  of  kindliness  while  he  asked  these  questions.  H 
was  evidently  disappointed  that  Pierre  had  no  parents,  especially  tha 
he  had  not  a  mother. 

‘Wife  for  good  counsel,  mother-in-law  for  kind  welcome,  but  none  dea 
as  your  own  mother!’  said  he.  ‘And  have  you  children?’  he  went  on  t 
ask.  Pierre’s  negative  reply  seemed  to  disappoint  him  again,  and  he  addei 
himself:  ‘Oh  well,  you  are  young  folks;  please  God,  there  will  be.  Onl; 
live  in  peace  and  concord.’ 

‘But  it  makes  no  difference  now,’  Pierre  could  not  help  saying. 

‘Ah,  my  dear  man,’  rejoined  Platon,  ‘the  beggar’s  bag  and  the  priso: 
walls  none  can  be  sure  of  escaping.’  He  settled  himself  more  comfortably 
and  cleared  his  throat,  evidently  preparing  himself  for  a  long  story.  ‘Si 
it  was  like  this,  dear  friend,  when  I  used  to  be  living  at  home,’  he  began 
‘we  have  a  rich  heritage,  a  great  deal  of  land,  the  peasants  were  wel 
off,  and  our  house — something  to  thank  God  for,  indeed.  Father  used  til 
go  out  to  reap  with  six  of  us.  We  got  along  finely.  Something  like  peasant 
we  were.  It  came  to  pass  .  .  .’  and  Platon  Karataev  told  a  long  stor; 
of  how  he  had  gone  into  another  man’s  copse  for  wood,  and  had  beei 
caught  by  the  keeper,  how  he  had  been  flogged,  tried,  and  sent  for  ; 
soldier.  ‘And  do  you  know,  darling,’  said  he,  his  voice  changing  fron 
the  smile  on  his  face,  ‘we  thought  it  was  a  misfortune,  while  it  was  al; 
for  our  happiness.  My  brother  would  have  had  to  go  if  it  hadn’t  been  fo 
my  fault.  And  my  younger  brother  had  five  little  ones;  while  I,  lool 
you,  I  left  no  one  behind  but  my  wife.  I  had  a  little  girl,  but  God  ha< 
taken  her  before  I  went  for  a  soldier.  I  went  home  on  leave,  I  must  tel 
you.  I  find  them  all  better  off  than  ever.  The  yard  full  of  beasts,  tb 
women  folk  at  home,  two  brothers  out  earning  wages.  Only  Mihailo 
the  youngest,  at  home.  Father  says  all  his  children  are  alike;  whicheve 
finger’s  pricked,  it  hurts  the  same.  And  if  they  hadn’t  shaved  Platon  fo 
a  soldier,  then  Mihailo  would  have  had  to  go.  He  called  us  all  togethe 
— would  you  believe  it — made  us  stand  before  the  holy  picture.  Mihailo 
says  he,  come  here,  bend  down  to  his  feet;  and  you,  women,  bow  down 
and  you,  grandchildren.  Do  you  understand?  says  he.  Yes,  so  you  see 
my  dear.  Fate  acts  with  reason.  And  we  are  always  passing  judgment 
that’s  not  right,  and  this  doesn’t  suit  us.  Our  happiness,  my  dear,  is  liki 
water  in  a  drag-net;  you  drag,  and  it  is  all  puffed  up,  but  pull  it  out  anc 
there’s  nothing.  Yes,  that’s  it.’  And  Platon  moved  to  a  fresh  seat  in  tb 
straw. 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


9i3 


After  a  short  pause,  Platon  got  up. 

‘Well,  I  dare  say,  you  are  sleepy?’  he  said,  and  he  began  rapidly  cross- 
lg  himself,  murmuring: 

‘Lord  Jesus  Christ,  holy  Saint  Nikola,  Frola  and  Lavra;  Lord  Jesus 
'hrist,  holy  Saint  Nikola,  Frola  and  Lavra;  Lord  Jesus  Christ — have 
lercy  and  save  us!’  he  concluded,  bowed  down  to  the  ground,  got  up, 
ighed,  and  sat  down  on  his  straw.  ‘That’s  right.  Let  me  lie  down  like  a 
tone,  O  God,  and  rise  up  like  new  bread!’  he  murmured,  and  lay  down, 
lulling  his  military  coat  over  him. 

‘What  prayer  was  that  you  recited?’  asked  Pierre. 

.  ‘Eh?’  said  Platon  (he  was  already  half  asleep).  ‘Recited?  I  prayed  to 
Jod.  Don’t  you  pray,  too?’ 

‘Yes,  I  do,’  said  Pierre.  ‘But  what  was  it  you  said — Frola  and  Lavra?’ 

‘Eh,  to  be  sure,’  Platon  answered  quickly.  ‘They’re  the  horses’  saints. 
)ne  must  think  of  the  poor  beasts,  too,’  he  said.  ‘Why,  the  little  hussy, 
he’s  curled  up.  You’re  warm,  child  of  a  bitch!’  he  said,  feeling  the  dog 
t  his  feet;  and,  turning  over  again,  he  fell  asleep  at  once. 

Outside  shouting  and  wailing  could  be  heard  somewhere  far  away, 
nd  through  the  cracks  in  the  walls  could  be  seen  the  glow  of  fire;  but 
vithin  the  shed  all  was  dark  and  hushed.  For  a  long  while  Pierre  did 
tot  sleep,  and  lay  with  open  eyes  in  the  darkness,  listening  to  Platon 
noring  rhythmically  as  he  lay  beside  him,  and  he  felt  that  the  world 
hat  had  been  shattered  was  rising  up  now  in  his  soul,  in  new  beauty, 
nd  on  new  foundations  that  could  not  be  shaken. 


XIII 

n  this  shed,  where  Pierre  spent  four  weeks,  there  were  twenty-three 
oldiers,  three  officers,  and  two  civilian  functionaries,  all  prisoners. 

They  were  all  misty  figures  to  Pierre  afterwards,  but  Platon  Karataev 
emained  for  ever  in  his  mind  the  strongest  and  most  precious  memory, 
nd  the  personification  of  everything  Russian,  kindly,  and  round.  When 
text  day  at  dawn  Pierre  saw  his  neighbour,  his  first  impression  of  some- 
hing  round  was  fully  confirmed;  Platon’s  whole  figure  in  his  French 
nilitary  coat,  girt  round  the  waist  with  cord,  in  his  forage-cap  and  bast 
hoes,  was  roundish,  his  head  was  perfectly  round,  his  back,  his  chest, 
lis  shoulders,  even  his  arms,  which  he  always  held  as  though  he  were 
bout  to  embrace  something,  were  round  in  their  lines;  his  friendly  smile 
nd  big,  soft,  brown  eyes,  too,  were  round. 

Platon  Karataev  must  have  been  over  fifty  to  judge  by  his  stories  of 
he  campaigns  in  which  he  had  taken  part.  He  did  not  himself  know  and 
ould  not  determine  how  old  he  was.  But  his  strong,  dazzlingly  white 
eeth  showed  in  two  unbroken  semicircles  whenever  he  laughed,  as  he 
•ften  did,  and  all  were  good  and  sound:  there  was  not  a  grey  hair  in  his 
ieard  or  on  his  head,  and  his  whole  frame  had  a  look  of  suppleness  and 
tf  unusual  hardiness  and  endurance. 


9i4  WAR  A,  ND  PEACE 

Ilis  face  had  an  expression  of  innocence  and  youth  in  spite  of  the  cur\ 
ing  wrinkles  on  it;  his  voice  had  a  pleasant  sing-song  note.  But  the  grea 
peculiarity  of  his  talk  was  its  spontaneity  and  readiness.  It  was  eviden 
that  he  never  thought  of  what  he  was  saying,  or  of  what  he  was  goin 
to  say;  and  that  gave  a  peculiar,  irresistible  persuasiveness  to  his  rapii 
and  genuine  intonations. 

His  physical  powers  and  activity  were  such,  during  the  first  period  o 
his  imprisonment,  that  he  seemed  not  to  know  what  fatigue  or  sicknes 
meant.  Every  evening  as  he  lay  down  to  sleep,  he  said:  ‘Let  me  lie  down 
Lord,  like  a  stone;  let  me  rise  up  like  new  bread’;  and  every  mornin: 
on  getting  up,  he  would  shake  his  shoulder  in  the  same  way,  saying 
‘Lie  down  and  curl  up,  get  up  and  shake  yourself.’  And  he  had,  in  fact 
only  to  lie  down  in  order  to  sleep  at  once  like  a  stone,  and  he  had  bu 
to  shake  himself  to  be  ready  at  once,  on' waking,  without  a  second’s  delay 
to  set  to  work  of  some  sort;  just  as  children,  on  waking,  begin  at  one 
playing  with  their  toys.  Lie  knew  how  to  do  everything,  not  particularly 
well,  but  not  badly  either.  He  baked,  and  cooked,  and  sewed,  and  planed 
and  cobbled  boots.  He  was  always  busy,  and  only  in  the  evenings  allowee 
himself  to  indulge  in  conversation,  which  he  loved,  and  singing.  He  san: 
songs,  not  as  singers  do,  who  know  they  are  listened  to,  but  sang,  as  tb 
birds  sing,  obviously,  because  it  was  necessary  to  him  to  utter  those 
sounds,  as  it  sometimes  is  to  stretch  or  to  walk  about;  and  those  sound: 
were  always  thin,  tender,  almost  feminine,  melancholy  notes,  and  hi: 
face  as  he  uttered  them  was  very  serious. 

Being  in  prison,  and  having  let  his  beard  grow,  he  had  apparently  cas 
off  all  the  soldier’s  ways  that  had  been  forced  upon  him  and  were  no 
natural  to  him,  and  had  unconsciously  relapsed  into  his  old  peasan 
habits. 

‘A  soldier  discharged  is  the  shirt  outside  the  breeches  again,’  he  usee 
to  say.  He  did  not  care  to  talk  of  his  life  as  a  soldier,  though  he  neve- 
complained,  and  often  repeated  that  he  had  never  once  been  beaten  since 
he  had  been  in  the  service.  When  he  told  stories,  it  was  always  by  prefer 
ence  of  his  old  and  evidently  precious  memories  of  his  life  as  a  ‘Christian, 
as  he  pronounced  the  word  ‘krestyan,’  or  peasant.  The  proverbial  sayings 
of  which  his  talk  was  full,  were  not  the  bold,  and  mostly  indecent,  saying: 
common  among  soldiers,  but  those  peasant  saws,  which  seem  of  so  little 
meaning  looked  at  separately,  and  gain  all  at  once  a  significance  of  pro¬ 
found  wisdom  when  uttered  appropriately. 

Often  he  would  say  something  directly  contrary  to  what  he  had  saic 
before,  but  both  sayings  were  equally  true.  He  liked  talking,  and  talkec 
well,  adorning  his  speech  with  caressing  epithets  and  proverbial  sayings 
which  Pierre  fancied  he  often  invented  himself.  But  the  great  charm  of  hi: 
talk  was  that  the  simplest  incidents — sometimes  the  same  that  Pierre  hac 
himself  seen  without  noticing  them — in  his  account  of  them  gained  a 
character  of  seemliness  and  solemn  significance.  He  liked  to  listen  to  the 
fairy  tales  which  one  soldier  used  to  tell — always  the  same  ones  over  ane: 
over  again — in  the  evenings,  but  most  of  all  he  liked  to  listen  to  storie: 


WARANDPEACE  915 

of  real  life.  He  smiled  gleefully  as  he  listened  to  such  stories,  putting  in 
words  and  asking  questions,  all  aiming  at  bringing  out  clearly  the  moral 
beauty  of  the  action  of  which  he  was  told.  Attachments,  friendships, 
love,  as  Pierre  understood  them,  Karataev  had  none;  but  he  loved  and 
lived  on  affectionate  terms  with  every  creature  with  whom  he  was  thrown 
in  life,  and  especially  so  with  man — not  with  any  particular  man,  but 
with  the  men  who  happened  to  be  before  his  eyes.  He  loved  his  dog,  loved 
his  comrades,  loved  the  French,  loved  Pierre,  who  was  his  neighbour.  But 
Pierre  felt  that  in  spite  of  Karataev’s  affectionate  tenderness  to  him  (in 
which  he  involuntarily  paid  tribute  to  Pierre’s  spiritual  life),  he  would 
not  suffer  a  moment’s  grief  at  parting  from  him.  And  Pierre  began  'to 
have  the  same  feeling  towards  Karataev. 

To  all  the  other  soldiers  Platon  Karataev  was  the  most  ordinary  soldier ; 
they  called  him  ‘little  hawk,’  or  Platosha;  made  good-humoured  jibes  at 
his  expense,  sent  him  to  fetch  things.  But  to  Pierre,  such  as  he  appeared 
an  that  first  night — an  unfathomable,  rounded-off,  and  everlasting  per¬ 
sonification  of  the  spirit  of  simplicity  and  truth — so  he  remained  to  him 
for  ever. 

Platon  Karataev  knew  nothing  by  heart  except  his  prayers.  When  he 
talked,  he  did  not  know  on  beginning  a  sentence  how  he  was  going  to 
fend  it. 

When  Pierre,  struck  sometimes  by  the  force  of  his  remarks,  asked  him 
to  repeat  what  he  had  said,  Platon  could  never  recall  what  he  had  said 
the  minute  before,  just  as  he  could  never  repeat  to  Pierre  the  words  of 
his  favourite  song.  There  came  in,  ‘My  own  little  birch-tree,’  and  ‘My 
heart  is  sick,’  but  there  was  no  meaning  in  the  words.  He  did  not  under¬ 
stand,  and  could  not  grasp  the  significance  of  words  taken  apart  from 
the  sentence.  Every  word  and  every  action  of  his  was  the  expression  of  a 
force  uncomprehended  by  him,  which  was  his  life.  But  his  life,  as  he  looked 
at  it,  had  no  meaning  as  a  separate  life.  It  had  meaning  only  as  a  part  of 
a  whole,  of  which  he  was  at  all  times  conscious.  His  words  and  actions 
flowed  from  him  as  smoothly,  as  inevitably,  and  as  spontaneously,  as 
the  perfume  rises  from  the  flower.  He  could  not  understand  any  value 
or  significance  in  an  act  or  a  word  taken  separately. 


XIV 

3n  hearing  from  Nikolay  that  her  brother  was  at  Yaroslavl  with  the 
Rostovs,  Princess  Marya,  in  spite  of  her  aunt’s  efforts  to  dissuade  her, 
.prepared  at  once  to  go  to  him  and  to  go  not  alone,  but  with  her  nephew; 
whether  this  were  difficult  or  not,  whether  it  were  possible  or  not,  she  did 
not  inquire,  and  did  not  care  to  know:  it  was  her  duty  not  only  to  be 
herself  at  the  side  of  her — perhaps,  dying — brother,  but  to  do  everything 
possible  to  take  his  son  to  him,  and  she  prepared  to  set  off.  If  Prince 
^ndrey  had  not  himself  communicated  with  her,  Princess  Marya  put 


916  WARANDPEACE 

that  down  either  to  his  being  too  weak  to  write,  or  to  his  considering  the 
long  journey  too  difficult  and  dangerous  for  her  and  his  son. 

Within  a  few  days  Princess  Marya  was  ready  for  the  journey.  Hei 
equipage  consisted  of  her  immense  travelling  coach  in  which  she  hac 
come  to  Voronezh,  and  a  covered  trap  and  a  waggon.  She  was  ac¬ 
companied  by  Mademoiselle  Bourienne,  Nikolushka,  with  his  tutor 
the  old  nurse,  three  maids,  Tihon,  a  young  valet,  and  a  courier 
whom  her  aunt  was  sending  with  her. 

To  travel  by  the  usual  route  to  Moscow  was  not  to  be  thought  of,  anc 
the  circuitous  route  which  Princess  Marya  was  obliged  to  take  by  Lipetsk 
Ryazan,  Vladimir,  and  Shuya  was  very  long;  from  lack  of  posting  horse; 
difficult;  and  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Ryazan,  where  they  were  told  the 
French  had  begun  to  appear,  positively  dangerous. 

During  this  difficult  journey,  Mademoiselle  Bourienne,  Dessalle,  anc 
Princess  Marya’s  servants  were  astonished  at  the  tenacity  of  her  will 
and  her  energy.  She  was  the  last  to  go  to  rest,  the  first  to  rise,  and  nc 
difficulty  could  daunt  her.  Thanks  to  her  activity  and  energy,  whicl 
infected  her  companions,  she  was  towards  the  end  of  the  second  week 
close  upon  Yaroslavl. 

The  latter  part  of  her  stay  in  Voronezh  had  been  the  happiest  period 
in  Princess  Marya’s  life.  Her  love  for  Rostov  was  not  then  a  source  of 
torment  or  agitation  to  her.  That  love  had  by  then  filled  her  whole  soulj 
and  become  an  inseparable  part  of  herself,  and  she  no  longer  struggled 
against  it.  Of  late  Princess  Marya  was  convinced — though  she  nevei 
clearly  in  so  many  words  admitted  it  to  herself — that  she  loved  and  was 
beloved.  She  had  been  convinced  of  this  by  her  last  interview  with  Niko¬ 
lay  when  he  came  to  tell  her  that  her  brother  was  with  the  Rostovs 
Nikolay  did  not  by  one  word  hint  at  the  possibility  now  (in  case  of 
Prince  Andrey’s  recovery)  of  his  engagement  to  Natasha  being  renewed 
but  Princess  Marya  saw  by  his  face  that  he  knew  and  thought  of  it.  And 
in  spite  of  that,  his  attitude  to  her — solicitous,  tender,  and  loving — was 
so  far  from  being  changed,  that  he  seemed  overjoyed  indeed  that  now  a 
sort  of  kinship  between  him  and  Princess  Marya  allowed  him  to  give 
freer  expression  to  his  loving  friendship,  as  Princess  Marya  sometime; 
thought  it.  Princess  Marya  knew  that  she  loved  for  the  first  and  Iasi 
time  in  her  life,  and  felt  that  she  was  loved,  and  she  was  happy  and  at 
peace  in  that  relation. 

But  this  happiness  on  one  side  of  her  spiritual  nature  was  far  froir 
hindering  her  from  feeling  intense  grief  on  her  brother’s  account.  Or 
the  contrary,  her  spiritual  peace  on  that  side  enabled  her  to  give  herself 
more  completely  to  her  feeling  for  her  brother.  This  feeling  was  so  strong 
at  the  moment  of  setting  out  from  Voronezh  that  all  her  retinue  were 
persuaded,  looking  at  her  careworn,  despairing  face,  that  she  would 
certainly  fall  ill  on  the  journey.  But  the  very  difficulties  and  anxieties 
of  the  journey,  which  Princess  Marya  tackled  with  such  energy,  saved 
her  for  the  time  from  her  sorrow  and  gave  her  strength. 

As  is  always  the  case  on  a  journey,  Princess  Marya  thought  of  nothing 


WARANDPEACE  917 

lit  the  journey  itself,  forgetting  what  was  its  object.  But  on  approaching 
aroslavl,  when  what  might  await  her — and  not  now  at  the  end  of  many 
ays,  but  that  very  evening — became  clear  to  her  mind  again,  her  agita- 
on  reached  its  utmost  limits. 

When  the  courier,  whom  she  had  sent  on  ahead  to  find  out  in  Yaro- 
:ivl  where  the  Rostovs  were  staying,  and  in  what  condition  Prince 
ndrey  was,  met  the  great  travelling  coach  at  the  city  gate  he  was  fright- 
led  at  the  terribly  pale  face  that  looked  out  at  him  from  the  window. 

‘I  have  found  out  everything,  your  excellency:  the  Rostovs  are  stay- 
g  in  the  square,  in  the  house  of  a  merchant,  Bronnikov.  Not  far  off,  right 
oove  the  Volga,’  said  the  courier. 

Princess  Marya  looked  into  his  face  with  frightened  inquiry,  not  un- 
jrstanding  why  he  did  not  answer  her  chief  question.  How  was  her 
tother?  Mademoiselle  Bourienne  put  this  question  for  the  princess. 

‘How  is  the  prince?’  she  asked. 

‘His  excellency  is  staying  in  the  same  house  with  them.’ 

‘He  is  living,  then,’  thought  the  princess;  and  she  softly  asked,  ‘How 
he?’ 

‘The  servants  say,  “No  change.”  ’ 

What  was  meant  by  ‘no  change’  the  princess  did  not  inquire,  and  with 
passing,  hardly  perceptible,  glance  at  little  seven-year-old  Nikolushka, 
tting  before  her,  delighted  at  the  sight  of  the  town,  she  bowed  her  head, 
id  did  not  raise  it  again  till  the  heavy  carriage — rumbling,  jolting, 
nd  swaying  from  side  to  side — came  to  a  standstill.  The  carriage-steps 
ere  let  down  with  a  crash. 

The  carriage-door  was  opened.  On  the  left  was  water — a  broad  river; 
n  the  right,  entrance  steps.  At  the  entrance  were  people,  servants,  and 
rosy-faced  girl  with  a  thick  coil  of  black  hair,  who  smiled  at  her  in  an 
npleasantly  affected  way,  as  it  seemed  to  Princess  Marya  ( it  was  Sonya), 
he  princess  ran  up  the  steps;  the  girl,  smiling  afiectedly,  said,  ‘This 
'ay!  this  way!’  and  the  princess  found  herself  in  the  vestibule,  facing 
n  elderly  woman  of  an  Oriental  type  of  face,  who  came  rapidly  to  meet 
er,  looking  moved.  It  was  the  countess.  She  embraced  Princess  Marya, 
nd  proceeded  to  kiss  her. 

‘My  child,’  she  said,  ‘I  love  you,  and  have  known  you  a  long  while.’ 

In  spite  of  her  emotion,  Princess  Marya  knew  it  was  the  countess, 
nd  that  she  must  say  something  to  her.  Not  knowing  how  she  did  it, 
he  uttered  some  polite  French  phrases  in  the  tone  in  which  she  had 
een  addressed,  and  asked,  ‘How  is  he?’ 

‘The  doctor  says  there  is  no  danger,’  said  the  countess;  but  as  she 
aid  it  she  sighed,  and  turned  her  eyes  upwards,  and  this  gesture  contra¬ 
dicted  her  words. 

‘Where  is  he?  Can  I  see  him;  can  I?’  asked  the  princess. 

‘In  a  minute;  in  a  minute,  my  dear.  Is  this  his  son?’  she  said,  turning 
0  Nikolushka,  who  came  in  with  Dessalle.  ‘We  shall  find  room  for 
very  one;  the  house  is  large.  Oh,  what  a  charming  boy!’ 

The  countess  led  the  princess  into  the  drawing-room.  Sonya  began  to 


9i8  WARANDPEACE 

converse  with  Mademoiselle  Bourienne.  The  countess  caressed  the  chili 
The  old  count  came  into  the  room  to  welcome  the  princess.  He  was  e: 
traordinarily  changed  since  Princess  Marya  had  seen  him  last.  The 
he  had  been  a  jaunty,  gay,  self-confident  old  gentleman,  now  he  seeme 
a  pitiful,  bewildered  creature.  As  he  talked  to  the  princess,  he  was  coi 
tinually  looking  about  him,  as  though  asking  every  one  if  he  were  doin 
the  right  thing.  After  the  destruction  of  Moscow  and  the  loss  of  hi 
property,  driven  out  of  his  accustomed  rut,  he  had  visibly  lost  th 
sense  of  his  own  importance,  and  felt  that  there  was  no  place  for  hir 
in  life. 

In  spite  of  her  one  desire  to  see  her  brother  without  loss  of  time,  an 
her  vexation  that  at  that  moment,  when  all  she  wanted  was  to  see  hirr 
they  should  entertain  her  conventionally  with  praises  of  her  nephew 
the  princess  observed  all  that  was  passing  around  her,  and  felt  it  inevi 
table  for  the  time  to  fall  in  with  the  new  order  of  things  into  which  sh 
had  entered.  She  knew  that  all  this  was  inevitable,  and  it  was  hard  fo 
her,  but  she  felt  no  grudge  against  them  for  it. 

‘This  is  my  niece,’  said  the  countess,  presenting  Sonya;  ‘you  do  no 
know  her,  princess?’ 

Princess  Marya  turned  to  her,  and  trying  to  smother  the  feeling  c- 
hostility  that  rose  up  within  her  at  the  sight  of  this  girl,  she  kissed  her 
But  she  felt  painfully  how  out  of  keeping  was  the  mood  of  every  on 
around  her  with  what  was  filling  her  own  breast. 

‘Where  is  he?’  she  asked  once  more,  addressing  them  all. 

‘He  is  downstairs;  Natasha  is  with  him,’  answered  Sonya,  flushing: 
‘We  have  sent  to  ask.  You  are  tired,  I  expect,  princess?’ 

Tears  of  vexation  came  into  Princess  Marya’s  eyes.  She  turned  awaj; 
and  was  about  to  ask  the  countess  again  where  she  could  see  him,  wher 
she  heard  at  the  door  light,  eager  steps  that  sounded  to  her  full  of  gaiety 
She  looked  round  and  saw,  almost  running  in,  Natasha — that  Natashs 
whom  she  had  so  disliked  when  they  met  long  before  in  Moscow. 

But  Princess  Marya  had  hardly  glanced  at  Natasha’s  face  before  sht 
understood  that  here  was  one  who  sincerely  shared  her  grief,  and  wa: 
therefore  her  friend.  She  flew  to  meet  her,  and  embracing  her,  bursf 
into  tears  on  her  shoulder. 

As  soon  as  Natasha,  sitting  by  Prince  Audrey’s  bedside,  heard  oi 
Princess  Marya’s  arrival,  she  went  softly  out  of  the  room  with  those 
swift  steps  that  to  Princess  Marya  sounded  so  light-hearted,  and  ran 
to  see  her. 

As  she  ran  into  the  room,  her  agitated  face  wore  one  expression — an 
expression  of  love,  of  boundless  love  for  him,  for  her,  for  all  that  was 
near  to  the  man  she  loved — an  expression  of  pity,  of  suffering  for  others: 
and  of  passionate  desire  to  give  herself  up  entirely  to  helping  them.  It 
was  clear  that  at  that  moment  there  was  not  one  thought  of  self,  of  hefi 
own  relation  to  him,  in  Natasha’s  heart. 

Princess  Marya  with  her  delicate  intuition  saw  all  that  in  the  first 
glance  at  Natasha’s  face,  and  with  mournful  relief  wept  on  her  shoulder. 


WARANDPEACE  919 

!  ‘Come,  let  us  go  to  him,  Marie,’  said  Natasha,  drawing  her  away  into 
ie  next  room. 

Princess  Marya  lifted  up  her  head,  dried  her  eyes,  and  turned  to 
atasha.  She  felt  that  from  her  she  would  learn  all,  would  understand 
1.  ‘How  .  .  she  was  beginning,  but  stopped  short.  She  felt  that  no 
jestion  nor  answer  could  be  put  into  words.  Natasha’s  face  and  eyes 
:ould  be  sure  to  tell  her  all  more  clearly  and  more  profoundly. 

Natasha  looked  at  her,  but  seemed  to  be  in  dread  and  in  doubt  whether 
)  say  or  not  to  say  all  she  knew;  she  seemed  to  feel  that  before  those 
iminous  eyes,  piercing  to  the  very  bottom  of  her  heart,  it  was  impossible 
Ot  to  tell  the  whole,  whole  truth  as  she  saw  it.  Natasha’s  lip  suddenly 
vitched,  ugly  creases  came  round  her  mouth,  and  she  broke  into  sobs, 
iding  her  face  in  her  hands. 

Princess  Marya  knew  everything. 

But  still  she  could  not  give  up  hope,  and  asked  in  words,  though  she 
ut  no  faith  in  them: 

‘But  how  is  his  wound?  What  is  his  condition  altogether?’ 

‘You  .  .  .  you  will  see  that,’  was  all  Natasha  could  say. 

They  sat  a  little  while  below,  near  his  room,  to  control  their  tears 
nd  go  in  to  him  with  calm  faces. 

‘How  has  the  whole  illness  gone?  Has  he  been  worse  for  long?  When 
id  this  happen?’  Princess  Marya  asked. 

Natasha  told  her  that  at  first  there  had  been  danger  from  inOamma- 
on  and  the  great  pain,  but  that  that  had  passed  away  at  Troitsa,  and 
re  doctor  had  only  been  afraid  of  one  thing — gangrene.  But  the  risk 
f  that,  too,  was  almost  over.  When  they  reached  Yaroslavl,  the  wound 
ad  begun  to  suppurate  (Natasha  knew  all  about  suppuration  and  all 
he  rest  of  it),  and  the  doctor  had  said  that  the  suppuration  might 
allow  the  regular  course.  Fever  had  set  in.  The  doctor  had  said  this 
ever  was  not  so  serious.  ‘But  two  days  ago,’  Natasha  began,  ‘all  of  a  sud- 
en  this  change  came  .  .  .’  She  struggled  with  her  sobs.  ‘I  don't  know 
7hy,  but  you  will  see  the  change  in  him.’ 

‘He  is  weaker?  thinner?  .  .  .’  queried  the  princess. 

‘No,  not  that,  but  worse.  You  will  see.  O  Marie,  he  is  too  good,  he 
annot,  he  cannot  live,  because  .  .  .’ 


XV 

Then  Natasha  opened  the  door  with  her  practised  hands,  letting  her 
ass  in  before  her,  Princess  Marya  felt  the  sobs  rising  in  her  throat, 
lowever  much  she  prepared  herself,  however  much  she  tried  to  com- 
ose  herself,  she  knew  that  she  would  not  be  able  to  see  him  without 
;sars. 

She  understood  what  Natasha  had  meant  by  the  words:  two  days  ago 
his  change  came.  She  interpreted  it  as  meaning  that  he  had  suddenly 
rown  softer,  and  that  that  softening,  that  tenderness,  was  the  sign  of 


920  WARANDPEACE 

death.  As  she  approached  the  door,  she  saw  already  in  her  irnaginatio: 
that  face  of  the  little  Andryusha,  as  she  had  known  it  in  childhood 
tender,  gentle,  softened,  as  it  was  so  rarely,  and  as  it  affected  her  so 
strongly.  She  felt  sure  he  would  say  soft,  tender  words  to  her  like  thos 
her  father  had  uttered  on  his  deathbed,  and  that  she  would  not  be  abl 
to  bear  it,  and  would  break  into  sobs  at  them.  But  sooner  or  later,  i 
must  be,  and  she  went  into  the  room.  Her  sobs  seemed  rising  higher  am 
higher  in  her  throat  as  with  her  short-sighted  eyes  she  distinguished  hi 
figure  more  and  more  clearly,  and  now  she  saw  his  face  and  met  his  eyes 

He  was  lying  on  a  couch,  propped  up  with  cushions,  in  a  squirrel 
lined  dressing-gown.  He  was  thin  and  pale.  One  thin,  transparently  whit 
hand  held  a  handkerchief,  with  the  other  he  was  softly  fingering  thi 
delicate  moustache  that  had  grown  long.  His  eyes  gazed  at  them  a 
they  came  in. 

On  seeing  his  face  and  meeting  his  eyes,  Princess  Marya  at  onci 
slackened  the  rapidity  of  her  step  and  felt  the  tears  dried  up  and  th< 
sobs  checked.  As  she  caught  the  expression  of  his  face  and  eyes,  she  fel 
suddenly  shy  and  guilty. 

‘But  how  am  I  in  fault?’  she  asked  herself.  ‘In  being  alive  and  thinkin; 
of  the  living  while  I!  .  .  .’  his  cold,  stern  eyes  seemed  to  answer 

In  the  profound,  not  outward-  but  inward-looking  gaze  there  wai 
something  almost  like  hostility  as  he  deliberately  scanned  his  sister  anc 
Natasha.  Pie  kissed  his  sister’s  hand,  while  she  kissed  his,  as  theii 
habit  was. 

‘How  are  you,  Marie;  how  did  you  manage  to  get  here?’  he  said,  in  & 
voice  as  even  and  as  aloof  as  the  look  in  his  eyes.  If  he  had  uttered  aj 
shriek  of  despair,  that  shriek  would  have  been  to  Princess  Marya  less 
awful  than  the  sound  of  his  voice. 

‘And  you  have  brought  Nikolushka?’  he  said,  as  evenly  and  deliber 
ately,  with  an  evident  effort  to  recollect  things. 

‘How  are  you  now?’  said  Princess  Marya,  wondering  herself  at  whal 
she  was  saying. 

‘That,  my  dear,  you  must  ask  the  doctor,’  he  said,  and  evidently  making 
another  effort  to  be  affectionate,  he  said  with  his  lips  only  (it  was  obvious 
he  was  not  thinking  of  what  he  was  saying) : 

‘Thank  you,  my  dear,  for  coming.’ 

Princess  Marya  pressed  his  hand.  He  gave  a  hardly  perceptible  frowr 
at  the  pressure  of  her  hand.  She  was  silent,  and  she  did  not  know  what 
to  say.  She  understood  the  change  that  had  come  over  him  two  days  ago 
In  his  words,  in  his  tone,  above  all  in  his  eyes — those  cold,  almost  an¬ 
tagonistic  eyes — could  be  felt  that  aloofness  from  all  things  earthly  that 
is  so  fearful  to  a  living  man.  It  was  evidently  with  difficulty  that  he  under¬ 
stood  anything  living;  but  yet  it  seemed  that  he  did  not  understand  whal 
was  living,  not  because  he  had  lost  the  power  of  understanding,  but  be¬ 
cause  he  understood  something  else  that  the  living  did  not  and  could 
not  understand,  and  that  entirely  absorbed  him. 

‘Yes,  see  how  strangely  fate  has  brought  us  together  again,’  he  said. 


WARANDPEACE  921 

reaking  the  silence,  and  pointing  to  Natasha.  ‘She  is  nursing  me.’ 

Princess  Marya  heard  him,  and  could  not  understand  what  he  was 
lying.  He,  Prince  Andrey,  with  his  delicate,  tender  intuition,  how  could 
e  say  that  before  the  girl  whom  he  loved,  and  who  loved  him!  If  he 
ad  any  thought  of  living,  he  could  not  have  said  that  in  that  slightingly 
old  tone.  If  he  had  not  known  he  was  going  to  die,  how  could  he  have 
ailed  to  feel  for  her,  how  could  he  speak  like  that  before  her!  There 
ould  be  but  one  explanation  of  it — that  was,  that  it  was  all  of  no  mo- 
lent  to  him  now,  and  of  no  moment  because  something  else,  more  im- 
ortant,  had  been  revealed  to  him. 

The  conversation  was  frigid  and  disconnected,  and  broke  off  at  every 
poment. 

1  ‘Marie  came  by  Ryazan,’  said  Natasha. 

Prince  Andrey  did  not  notice  that  she  called  his  sister  Marie.  And 
■latasha,  calling  her  by  that  name  before  him,  for  the  first  time  became 
ware  of  it  herself. 

‘Well?’  said  he. 

‘She  was  told  that  Moscow  had  been  burnt  to  the  ground,  all  of  it, 
ntirely.  That  it  looks  as  though  .  .  .’ 

Natasha  stopped.  It  was  impossible  to  talk.  He  was  obviously  making 
n  effort  to  listen,  and  yet  he  could  not. 

‘Yes;  it’s  burnt,  they  say,’  he  said.  ‘That’s  a  great  pity,’  and  he  gazed 
traight  before  him,  his  fingers  straying  heedlessly  about  his  moustache. 

‘And  so  you  met  Count  Nikolay,  Marie?’  said  Prince  Andrey,  suddenly, 
vidently  trying  to  say  something  to  please  them.  ‘He  wrote  here  what 
1  great  liking  he  took  to  you,’  he  went  on,  simply  and  calmly,  plainly 
inable  to  grasp  all  the  complex  significance  his  words  had  for  living 
•eople.  ‘If  you  liked  him,  too,  it  would  be  a  very  good  thing  ...  for 
'ou  to  get  married,’  he  added,  rather  more  quickly,  apparently  pleased 
it  finding  at  last  the  words  he  had  been  seeking.  Princess  Marya  heard 
lis  words,  but  they  had  no  significance  for  her  except  as  showing  how 
erribly  far  away  he  was  now  from  everything  living. 

‘Why  talk  of  me?’  she  said  calmly,  and  glanced  at  Natasha.  Natasha, 
eeling  her  eyes  on  her,  did  not  look  at  her.  Again  all  of  them  were  silent. 

‘Andrey,  would  you  .  .  .’  Princess  Marya  said  suddenly  in  a  shaky 
'oice,  ‘would  you  like  to  see  Nikolushka?  He  is  always  talking  of  you.’ 

For  the  first  time  Prince  Andrey  smiled  a  faintly  perceptible  smile, 
>ut  Princess  Marya,  who  knew  his  face  so  well,  saw  with  horror  that  it 
vas  a  smile  not  of  joy,  not  of  tenderness  for  his  son,  but  of  quiet,  gentle 
rony  at  his  sister’s  trying  what  she  believed  to  be  the  last  resource  for 
ousing  him  to  feeling. 

‘Yes,  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  see  Nikolushka.  Is  he  quite  well?’ 

When  they  brought  in  little  Nikolushka,  who  gazed  in  dismay  at  his 
ather,  but  did  not  cry,  because  nobody  else  was  crying,  Prince  Andrey 
dssed  him,  and  obviously  did  not  know  what  to  say  to  him. 

When  they  had  taken  the  child  away,  Princess  Marya  went  up  to  her 


922  WAR  AND  PEACE 

brother  once  more,  kissed  him,  and  unable  to  control  herself  any  longer 
began  to  weep. 

He  looked  at  her  intently. 

‘You  weep  for  Nikolushka?’  he  asked. 

Princess  Marya  nodded  through  her  tears. 

‘Marie,  you  know  the  Gos  .  .  .’  he  began,  but  suddenly  paused. 

‘What  do  you  say?’ 

‘Nothing.  You  mustn’t  weep  here,’  he  said,  looking  at  her  with  th 
same  cold  eyes. 

When  Princess  Marya  wept  he  knew  that  she  was  weeping  that  Niko 
lushka  would  be  left  without  a  father.  With  a  great  effort  he  tried  t< 
come  back  again  to  life,  and  to  put  himself  at  their  point  of  view. 

‘Yes,  it  must  seem  sad  to  them,’  he  thought.  ‘But  how  simple  it  is! 

‘  “They  sow  not,  neither  do  they  reap,  but  your  Father  feedeth  them,” 
he  said  to  himself,  and  he  wanted  to  say  it  to  his  sister.  But  no,  the] 
would  understand  it  in  their  own  way;  they  would  not  understand!  Wha 
they  cannot  understand  is  that  these  feelings  that  they  set  store  by — al 
our  feelings,  all  these  thoughts,  which  seem  of  so  much  importance  to  u: 
— that  they  are  all  not  wanted!  We  cannot  understand  each  other!’  am 
he  was  silent. 

Prince  Andrey’s  little  son  was  seven  years  old.  He  could  hardly  read— 
he  knew  nothing.  He  passed  through  much  after  that  day,  gaining  know! 
edge,  observation,  experience.  But  if  he  had  possessed  at  that  time  al 
the  mental  faculties  he  acquired  afterwards,  he  could  not  have  had  £| 
truer,  a  deeper  comprehension  of  all  the  significance  of  the  scene  he  saw 
passing  between  his  father,  Princess  Marya,  and  Natasha  than  he  hac 
now.  He  understood  it  all,  and  without  weeping,  went  out  of  the  room 
in  silence  went  up  to  Natasha,  who  had  followed  him  out;  glanced  shyly 
at  her  with  his  beautiful,  dreamy  eyes:  his  uplifted,  rosy  upper  lip 
quivered ;  he  leaned  his  head  against  her,  and  burst  into  tears. 

From  that  day  he  avoided  Dessalle,  avoided  the  countess,  who  woulc 
have  petted  him,  and  either  sat  alone,  or  shyly  joined  Princess  Marys 
and  Natasha,  whom  he  seemed  to  love  even  more  than  his  aunt,  and  be¬ 
stowed  shy  and  gentle  caresses  upon  them. 

When  Princess  Marya  left  her  brother’s  side,  she  fully  understood  all 
that  Natasha’s  face  had  told  her.  She  spoke  no  more  to  Natasha  of  hope 
of  saving  his  life.  She  took  turns  with  her  by  his  bedside,  and  she  shed  nc 
more  tears,  but  prayed  without  ceasing,  turning  in  spirit  to  the  Eternal 
and  Unfathomable  whose  presence  was  palpable  now,  hovering  over  the 
dying  man. 

XVI 

Prince  Andrey  did  not  only  know  that  he  would  die,  but  felt  indeed 
that  he  was  dying;  that  he  was  already  half-dead.  He  experienced  a  sense 
of  aloofness  from  everything  earthly,  and  a  strange  and  joyous  lightness 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


923 

i mis  being.  Neither  impatient,  nor  troubled,  he  lay  awaiting  what  was 
bibre  him.  .  .  .  The  menacing,  the  eternal,  the  unknown,  and  remote, 
tf  presence  of  which  he  had  never  ceased  to  feel  during  the  whole  course 
of  his  life,  was  now  close  to  him,  and — from  that  strange  lightness  of 
brig,  that  he  experienced — almost  comprehensible  and  palpable. 


n  the  past  he  had  dreaded  the  end.  Twice  he  had  experienced  that 
teribly  agonising  feeling  of  the  dread  of  death,  of  the  end,  and  now  he 
h.l  ceased  to  understand  it. 

The  first  time  he  had  experienced  that  feeling  when  the  grenade  was 
rating  before  him,  and  he  looked  at  the  stubble,  at  the  bushes,  at  the 
sh,  and  knew  that  death  was  facing  him.  When  he  had  come  to  himself 
aer  his  wound,  and  instantly,  as  though  set  free  from  the  cramping 
bidage  of  life,  there  had  sprung  up  in  his  soul  that  tlower  of  love,  eternal, 
fie,  not  dependent  on  this  life,  he  had  no  more  fear,  and  no  more  thought, 
0  death. 

In  those  hours  of  solitary  suffering  and  half-delirium  that  he  spent 
aerwards,  the  more  he  passed  in  thought  into  that  new  element  of 
ernal  love,  revealed  to  him,  the  further  he  unconsciously  travelled  from 
e  thly  life.  To  love  everything,  every  one,  to  sacrifice  self  always  for  love, 
nant  to  love  no  one,  meant  not  to  live  this  earthly  life.  And  the  further 
h  penetrated  into  that  element  of  love,  the  more  he  renounced  life,  and 
t1  more  completely  he  annihilated  that  fearful  barrier  that  love  sets  up 
biween  life  and  death.  Whenever,  during  that  first  period,  he  remembered 
t  it  he  had  to  die,  he  said  to  himself :  ‘Well,  so  much  the  better.’ 

But  after  that  night  at  Mytishtchy,  when  in  his  half-delirium  she, 
vom  he  had  longed  for,  appeared  before  him,  and  when  pressing  her 
bnd  to  his  lips,  he  wept  soft,  happy  tears,  love  for  one  woman  stole  unseen 
i  0  his  heart,  and  bound  him  again  to  life.  And  glad  and  disturbing 
tmghts  began  to  come  back  to  him.  Recalling  that  moment  at  the 
aibulance  station,  when  he  had  seen  Kuragin,  he  could  not  now  go  back 
this  feeling  then.  He  was  fretted  by  the  question  whether  he  were  alive, 
/id  he  dared  not  ask. 

His  illness  went  through  its  regular  physical  course;  but  what  Natasha 
Id  called  ‘this  change’  had  come  upon  him  two  days  before  Princess 
larya’s  arrival.  It  was  the  last  moral  struggle  between  life  and  death, 
i  which  death  gained  the  victory.  It  was  the  sudden  consciousness  that 
le,  in  the  shape  of  his  love  for  Natasha,  was  still  precious  to  him,  and 
te  last  and  vanquished  onslaught  of  terror  before  the  unknown. 

Tt  happened  in  the  evening.  He  was,  as  usually  after  dinner,  in  a  slightly 
i/erish  condition,  and  his  thoughts  were  particularly  clear.  Sonya  was 
i  ting  at  the  table.  He  fell  into  a  doze.  He  felt  a  sudden  sense  of  happi- 
sss. 

‘Ah,  she  has  come  in !  ’  he  thought. 

Natasha  had,  in  fact,  just  come  in  with  noiseless  steps,  and  was  sitting 
i  Sonya’s  place. 


924  WARANDPEACE 

Ever  since  she  had  been  looking  after  him  he  had  always  felt  t; 
physical  sense  of  her  presence.  She  was  in  a  low  chair  beside  him,  knitt  > 
a  stocking,  and  sitting  so  as  to  screen  the  light  of  the  candle  from  h , 
She  had  learned  to  knit  since  Prince  Andrey  had  once  said  to  her  that  i 
one  made  such  a  good  sick-nurse  as  an  old  nurse  who  knitted  stockin i 
and  that  there  was  something  soothing  about  knitting.  Her  slender  fing; 
moved  the  needles  rapidly  with  a  slight  click,  and  the  dreamy  profile! 
her  drooping  head  could  be  clearly  seen  by  him.  She  made  a  slight  mo  • 
ment;  the  ball  rolled  off  her  knee.  She  started,  glanced  round  at  him,  a;, 
screening  the  light  with  her  hand,  bent  over  with  a  cautious,  supple,  a  I 
precise  movement,  picked  up  the  ball,  and  sat  back  in  the  same  attitude; 
before. 

He  gazed  at  her  without  stirring,  and  saw  that  after  her  movements  si; 
wanted  to  draw  a  deep  breath,  but  did  not  dare  to,  and  breathed  wi 
careful  self-restraint. 

At  the  Troitsa  monastery  they  had  spoken  of  the  past,  and  he  M 
told  her  that  if  he  were  to  live  he  should  thank  God  for  ever  for  his  woui , 
which  had  brought  them  together  again;  but  since  then  they  had  nev 
spoken  of  the  future. 

‘Could  it  be,  or  could  it  not?’  he  was  wondering  now  as  he  watched  b 
and  listened  to  the  slight  steel  click  of  the  needles.  ‘Can  fate  have  broug 
us  together  so  strangely  only  for  me  to  die?  .  .  .  Can  the  truth  of  h 
have  been  revealed  to  me  only  for  me  to  have  spent  my  life  in  falsity 
love  her  more  than  anything  in  the  world!  But  what  am  I  to  do  if  I  lei; 
her?’  he  said,  and  suddenly  he  unconsciously  moaned  from  the  habit  ; 
had  fallen  into  in  the  course  of  his  sufferings. 

Hearing  the  sound,  Natasha  laid  down  her  stocking,  and  bent  do\ 
closer  to  him,  and  suddenly  noticing  his  shining  eyes,  went  up  to  hi 
with  a  light  step  and  stooped  down. 

‘You  are  not  asleep?’ 

‘No;  I  have  been  looking  at  you  for  a  long  while.  I  felt  when  you  can 
in.  No  one  but  you  gives  me  the  same  soft  peace  .  .  .  the  same  ligi, 
I  want  to  weep  with  gladness !  ’ 

Natasha  moved  closer  to  him.  Her  face  beamed  with  rapturous  deligl, 

‘Natasha,  I  love  you  too  much!  More  than  everything  in  the  world!’ 

‘And  I?’  She  turned  away  for  a  second.  ‘Why  too  much?’  she  said. 

‘Why  too  much?  .  .  .  Well,  what  do  you  think,  what  do  you  feel  i 
your  heart,  your  whole  heart,  am  I  going  to  live?  What  do  you  think?’ 

‘I  am  sure  of  it;  sure  of  it!’  Natasha  almost  cried  out,  taking  both  1, 
hands  with  a  passionate  gesture. 

He  was  silent  for  a  while. 

‘How  good  it  would  be!  ’  And  taking  her  hand,  he  kissed  it. 

Natasha  was  happy  and  deeply  stirred ;  and  she  recollected  at  once  tl: 
this  must  not  be,  and  that  he  must  have  quiet. 

‘But  you  are  not  asleep,’  she  said,  subduing  her  joy.  ‘Try  and  sle) 
.  .  .  please  do.’ 

He  pressed  her  hand  and  let  it  go,  and  she  moved  back  to  the  cand, 


WAR  AND  PEACE  925 

ad  sat  down  in  the  same  position  as  before.  Twice  she  glanced  round  at 
Im;  his  eyes  were  bright  as  she  met  them.  She  set  herself  a  task  on  her 
Peking,  and  told  herself  she  would  not  look  round  till  she  had  finished  it. 
He  did,  in  fact,  soon  after  shut  his  eyes  and  fall  asleep.  He  did  not 
;;ep  long,  and  woke  up  suddenly  in  a  cold  sweat  of  alarm. 

As  he  fell  asleep  he  was  still  thinking  of  what  he  had  been  thinking 
aout  all  the  time — of  life  and  of  death.  And  most  of  death.  He  felt  he 
ns  closer  to  it. 

‘Love?  What  is  love?’  he  thought. 

‘Love  hinders  death.  Love  is  life.  All,  all  that  I  understand,  I  under¬ 
sand  only  because  I  love.  All  is,  all  exists  only  because  I  love.  All  is 
bund  up  in  love  alone.  Love  is  God,  and  dying  means  for  me  a  particle  of 
Ire,  to  go  back  to  the  universal  and  eternal  source  of  love.’  These  thoughts 
semed  to  him  comforting.  But  they  were  only  thoughts.  Something  was 
Anting  in  them;  there  was  something  one-sided  and  personal,  some- 
ting  intellectual;  they  were  not  self-evident.  And  there  was  uneasiness, 
lo,  and  obscurity.  He  fell  asleep. 

He  dreamed  that  he  was  lying  in  the  very  room  in  which  he  was  lying 
i  reality,  but  that  he  was  not  ill,  but  quite  well.  Many  people  of  various 
srts,  indifferent  people  of  no  importance,  were  present.  He  was  talking 
;  d  disputing  with  them  about  some  trivial  matter.  They  seemed  to  be 
j.eparing  to  set  off  somewhere.  Prince  Andrey  had  a  dim  feeling  that 
a  this  was  of  no  consequence,  and  that  he  had  other  matters  of  graver 
lament  to  think  of,  but  still  he  went  on  uttering  empty  witticisms  of  some 
art  that  surprised  them.  By  degrees  all  these  people  began  to  disappear, 

;  d  the  one  thing  left  was  the  question  of  closing  the  door.  He  got  up  and 
|nt  towards  the  door  to  close  it  and  bolt  it.  Everything  depended  on 
nether  he  were  in  time  to  shut  it  or  not.  He  was  going,  he  was  hurrying, 
It  his  legs  would  not  move,  and  he  knew  that  he  would  not  have  time 
( shut  the  door,  but  still  he  was  painfully  straining  every  effort  to  do  so. 
Ad  an  agonising  terror  came -upon  him.  And  that  terror  was  the  fear  of 
cath;  behind  the  door  stood  It.  But  while  he  is  helplessly  and  clumsily 
s  uggling  towards  the  door,  that  something  awful  is  already  pressing 
lainst  the  other  side  of  it,  and  forcing  the  door  open.  Something  not 
lman — death — is  forcing  the  door  open,  and  he  must  hold  it  to. 
b  clutches  at  the  door  with  a  last  straining  effort — to  shut  it  is 
i possible,  at  least  to  hold  it — but  his  efforts  are  feeble  and  awkward; 
<d,  under  the  pressure  of  that  awful  thing,  the  door  opens  and  shuts 
tain. 

Once  more  It  was  pressing  on  the  door  from  without.  His  last,  super- 
l  tural  efforts  are  vain,  and  both  leaves  of  the  door  are  noiselessly 
(ened.  It  comes  in,  and  it  is  death.  And  Prince  Andrey  died. 

But  at  the  instant  whea  in  his  dream  he  died,  Prince  Andrey  recol- 
l:ted  that  he  was  asleep;  and  at  the  instant  when  he  was  dying,  he  made 
;  effort  and  waked  up. 

‘Yes,  that  was  death.  I  died  and  I  waked  up.  Yes,  death  is  an  awaken- 
ig/  flashed  with  sudden  light  into  his  soul,  and  the  veil  that  had  till 


926  WARANDPEACE 

then  hidden  the  unknown  was  lifted  before  his  spiritual  vision.  He  felt,  a; 
it  were,  set  free  from  some  force  that  held  him  in  bondage,  and  was  awan 
of  that  strange  lightness  of  being  that  had  not  left  him  since. 

When  he  waked  up  in  a  cold  sweat  and  moved  on  the  couch,  Natashf 
went  up  and  asked  him  what  was  the  matter.  He  did  not  answer,  anc 
looked  at  her  with  strange  eyes,  not  understanding  her. 

That  was  the  change  that  had  come  over  him  two  days  before  Princes; 
Marya’s  arrival.  The  doctor  said  that  from  that  day  the  wasting  fevet 
had  assumed  a  more  serious  aspect,  but  Natasha  paid  little  heed  to  wha 
the  doctor  said;  she  saw  the  terrible  moral  symptoms,  that  for  her  wen 
far  more  convincing. 

With  his  awakening  from  sleep  that  day  there  began  for  Prince  Andre; 
an  awakening  from  life.  And  in  relation  to  the  duration  of  life  it  seemet 
to  him  not  more  prolonged  than  the  awakening  from  sleep  in  relation  ti 
the  duration  of  a  dream.  There  was  nothing  violent  or  terrible  in  thi; 
relatively  slow  awakening. 

His  last  days  and  hours  passed  in  a  simple  and  commonplace  way 
Princess  Marya  and  Natasha,  who  never  left  his  side,  both  felt  that.  The; 
did  not  weep  nor  shudder,  and  towards  the  last  they  both  felt  they  wer 
waiting  not  on  him  (he  was  no  more;  he  had  gone  far  away  from  them) 
but  on  the  nearest  memory  of  him— his  body.  The  feelings  of  both  o 
them  were  so  strong  that  the  external,  horrible  side  of  death  did  no 
affect  them,  and  they  did  not  find  it  needful  to  work  up  their  grief.  The; 
did  not  weep  either  in  his  presence  nor  away  from  him,  and  they  neve 
even  talked  of  him  together.  They  felt  that  they  could  not  express  ii 
words  what  they  understood. 

They  both  saw  that  he  was  slowly  and  quietly  slipping  further  am 
further  away  from  them,  and  both  knew  that  this  must  be  so,  and  that  i 
was  well.  He  received  absolution  and  extreme  unction;  every  one  came  t 
bid  him  good-bye.  When  his  son  was  brought  in  to  him,  he  pressed  hi 
lips  to  him  and  turned  away,  not  because'  it  was  painful  or  sad  to  hir 
(Princess  Marya  and  Natasha  saw  that),  but  simply  because  he  suppose 
he  had  done  all  that  was  required  of  him.  But  he  was  told  to  give  him  hi 
blessing,  he  did  what  was  required,  and  looked  round  as  though  to  as! 
whether  there  was  anything  else  he  must  do.  When  the  body,  deserted  b 
the  spirit,  passed  through  its  last  struggles,  Princess  Marya  and  Natash 
were  there. 

‘It  is  over!’  said  Princess  Marya,  after  the  body  had  lain  for  som 
moments  motionless,  and  growing  cold  before  them.  Natasha  went  closf 
glanced  at  the  dead  eyes,  and  made  haste  to  shut  them.  She  closed  then 
and  did  not  kiss  them,  but  hung  over  what  was  the  nearest  memory  c 
him.  ‘Where  has  he  gone?  Where  is  he  now?.  .  .  .’ 

When  the  body  lay,  dressed  and  washed,  in  the  coffin  on  the  table,  ever 
one  came  to  take  leave  of  him,  and  every  one  cried.  Nikolushka  crie 
from  the  agonising  bewilderment  that  was  rending  his  heart.  The  counte: 
and  Sonya  cried  from  pity  for  Natasha,  and  from  grief  that  he  was  gon 


WARANDPEACE  927 

jhe  old  count  cried  because  he  felt  that  he  too  must  soon  take  the  same 
terrible  step. 

Natasha  and  Princess  Marya  wept  too  now.  But  they  did  not  weep 
for  their  personal  sorrow;  they  wept  from  the  emotion  and  awe  that  filled 
their  souls  before  the  simple  and  solemn  mystery  of  death  that  had  been 
accomplished  before  their  eyes. 


! 


PART  XIII 


I 

The  combination  of  causes  of  phenomena  is  beyond  the  grasp  of  the 
human  intellect.  But  the  impulse  to  seek  causes  is  innate  in  the  soul  of 
man.  And  the  human  intellect,  with  no  inkling  of  the  immense  variety 
and  complexity  of  circumstances  conditioning  a  phenomenon,  any  one  of 
which  may  be  separately  conceived  of  as  the  cause  of  it,  snatches  at  the 
first  and  most  easily  understood  approximation,  and  says  here  is  the 
cause.  In  historical  events,  where  the  actions  of  men  form  the  subject  of 
observation,  the  most  primitive  conception  of  a  cause  was  the  will  of  the 
gods,  succeeded  later  on  by  the  will  of  those  men  who  stand  in  the  his¬ 
torical  foreground — the  heroes  of  history.  But  one  had  but  to  look  below 
the  surface  of  any  historical  event,  to  look,  that  is,  into  the  movement  of 
the  whole  mass  of  men  taking  part  in  that  event,  to  be  convinced  that 
the  will  of  the  hero  of  history,  so  far  from  controlling  the  actions  of  the 
multitude,  is  continually  controlled  by  them.  It  may  be  thought  that 
it  is  a  matter  of  no  importance  whether  historical  events  are  interpreted 
in  one  way  or  in  another.  But  between  the  man  who  says  that  the  peoples 
of  the  West  marched  into  the  East,  because  Napoleon  willed  they  should 
do  so,  and  the  man  who  says  that  that  movement  came  to  pass  because 
it  was  bound  to  come  to  pass,  there  exists  the  same  difference  as  between 
the  men  who  maintained  that  the  earth  was  stationary  and  the  planets  re¬ 
volved  about  it,  and  the  men  who  said  that  they  did  not  know  what  holds 
the  earth  in  its  place,  but  they  did  know  that  there  were  laws  controlling 
its  motions  and  the  motions  of  the  other  planets.  Causes  of  historical 
events — there  are  not  and  cannot  be,  save  the  one  cause  of  all  causes. 
But  there  are  laws  controlling  these  events;  laws  partly  unknown,  partly 
accessible  to  us.  The  discovery  of  these  laws  is  only  possible  when  we 
entirely  give  up  looking  for  a  cause  in  the  will  of  one  man,  just  as  the 
discovery  of  the  laws  of  the  motions  of  the  planets  has  only  become  pos¬ 
sible  since  men  have  given  up  the  conception  of  the  earth  being  stationary. 

After  the  battle  of  Borodino,  and  the  taking  and  burning  of  Moscow, 
historians  consider  the  most  important  episode  of  the  war  of  1812  to  be  the 
movement  of  the  Russian  army  from  the  Ryazan  to  the  Kaluga  road  and  to 
the  Tarutino  camp,  the  so-called  oblique  march  behind  Krasnaya  Pahra. 
Historians  ascribe  the  credit  of  this  stroke  of  genius  to  various  persons, 
and  dispute  to  whom  it  is  rightfully  due.  Even  foreign,  even  French  histo¬ 
rians,  admit  the  genius  of  the  Russian  generals  when  they  mention  this 
flank  march.  But  why  military  writers,  and  others  following  their  lead,  as- 

928 


WAR  AND  PEACE  929 

sume  this  oblique  movement  to  be  a  project  profoundly  planned  by  some 
one  person  for  the  deliverance  of  Russia  and  the  overthrow  of  Napoleon 
it  is  very  difficult  to  see.  It  is  difficult  in  the  first  place  to  see  wherein  the 
profound  wisdom  and  genius  of  this  march  lies;  for  no  great  intellectual 
effort  is  needed  to  guess  that  the  best  position  for  an  army,  when  not 
being  attacked,  is  where  supplies  are  most  plentiful.  And  every  one,  even 
a  stupid  boy  of  thirteen,  could  have  guessed  that  the  most  advantageous 
position  for  the  army  in  1812,  after  the  retreat  from  Moscow,  would  be 
on  the  Kaluga  road.  And  so  one  cannot  understand,  in  the  first  place, 
what  conclusions  led  the  historians  to  see  some  deep  wisdom  in  this 
manoeuvre.  Secondly,  it  is  even  more  difficult  to  understand  why  the 
historians  ascribe  to  this  manoeuvre  the  deliverance  of  Russia  and  the 
overthrow  of  the  French;  for,  had  other  circumstances  preceded,  ac¬ 
companied,  or  followed  it,  this  flank  movement  might  as  well  have  led  to 
the  destruction  of  the  Russian  army  and  the  deliverance  of  the  French. 
If  the  position  of  the  Russian  army  did,  in  fact,  begin  to  improve  from 
the  time  of  that  march,  it  does  not  at  all  follow  that  the  improvement  was 
caused  by  it. 

That  oblique  march  might  have  been  not  simply  of  no  use;  it  might 
have  led  to  the  destruction  of  the  Russian  army,  but  for  the  conjunction 
of  other  circumstances.  What  would  have  happened  if  Moscow  had  not 
been  burnt?  Of  Murat  had  not  lost  sight  of  the  Russians?  If  Napoleon 
had  not  remained  inactive?  If,  as  Bennigsen  and  Barclay  advised,  the 
Russians  had  given  battle  near  Krasnaya  Pahra?  What  would  have 
happened  if  the  French  had  attacked  the  Russians  when  they  were  march¬ 
ing  behind  Pahra?  What  would  have  happened  if  later  on  Napoleon,  on 
reaching  Tarutino,  had  attacked  the  Russians  with  one-tenth  of  the 
energy  with  which  he  had  attacked  them  at  Smolensk?  What  would  have 
happened  if  the  French  had  marched  to  Petersburg?  ...  On  any  of 
these  hypotheses,  the  oblique  march  might  have  led  to  ruin  instead  of  to 
safety. 

The  third  point,  most  difficult  of  all  to  understand,  is  that  students  of 
history  seem  intentionally  to  refuse  to  see  that  this  march  cannot  be 
ascribed  to  any  one  man,  that  no  one  foresaw  it  at  any  time,  that,  like  the 
retreat  to  Fili,  the  manoeuvre  was,  in  reality,  never  conceived  of  by  any 
one  in  its  entirety,  but  arose  step  by  step,  incident  by  incident,  moment 
by  moment  from  a  countless  multitude  of  the  most  diverse  circumstances, 
and  is  only  conceived  of  in  its  entirety,  when  it  is  an  accomplished  fact, 
and  has  become  the  past. 

At  the  council  at  Fili  the  accepted  idea  among  the  Russians — the  course 
taken  for  granted  in  fact — was  retreat  in  a  direct  line  back,  that  is,  along 
the  Nizhni  road.  Evidence  of  this  is  that  the  majority  of  votes  at  the 
council  were  for  adopting  this  course,  and  the  commander-in-chief’s 
famous  conversation  after  the  council  with  Lansky,  the  head  of  the  com¬ 
missariat  department,  is  an  even  more  striking  proof  of  it.  Lansky  sub¬ 
mitted  to  the  commander-in-chief  that  the  chief  supplies  for  the  army 
were  stored  along  the  Oka,  in  the  Tula  and  Kazan  provinces,  and  that  if 


930  WAR  AND  PEACE 

they  retreated  along  the  Nizhni  road,  the  army  would  be  cut  off  from  its 
supplies  by  the  broad  river  Oka,  across  which  transport  in  the  early 
winter  was  impossible.  This  was  the  first  proof  of  the  necessity  of  depart¬ 
ing  from  the  course  that  had  at  first  seemed  the  most  natural  one,  the 
retreat  along  the  Nizhni  road.  The  army  kept  more  to  the  south  along  the 
Ryazan  road,  closer  to  its  supplies.  Later  on  the  inactivity  of  the  French, 
who  positively  lost  sight  of  the  Russian  army,  anxiety  for  the  defence  of 
the  Tula  arsenal,  and  above  all,  the  advantage  of  being  near  their  supplies 
led  the  army  to  turn  even  more  to  the  south,  to  the  Tula  road.  After  cross¬ 
ing  by  a  forced  march  behind  Pahra  to  the  Tula  road,  the  generals  of  the 
Russian  army  intended  to  remain  at  Podolsk,  and  had  no  idea  of  the 
Tarutino  position.  But  an  infinite  number  of  circumstances,  among  them 
the  reappearance  of  French  troops  on  the  scene,  and  plans  for  giving 
battle,  and  most  of  all,  the  abundance  of  supplies  in  Kaluga,  led  our  army 
to  turn  even  more  to  the  south,  and  to  pass  from  the  Tuia  to  the  Kaluga 
road  to  Tarutino,  a  central  position  between  their  lines  of  communica¬ 
tion  with  their  supplies.  Just  as  it  is  impossible  to  answer  the  question 
at  what  date  Moscow  was  abandoned,  it  is  impossible  too  to  say  precisely 
when  and  by  whom  it  was  decided  to  move  the  army  to  Tarutino.  It  was 
only  after  the  army,  through  the  action  of  innumerable  infinitesimally 
small  forces,  had  been  brought  to  Tarutino,  that  people  began  to  protest 
to  themselves  that  that  was  the  course  they  had  desired,  and  had  long 
foreseen  as  the  right  one. 


II 

The  famous  oblique  movement  consisted  simply  in  this.  The  Russian 
troops,  which  had  been  retreating  directly  back  from  the  French,  as  soon 
as  the  French  attack  ceased,  turned  off  from  that  direction,  and  seeing 
they  were  not  pursued,  moved  naturally  in  the  direction  where  they  were 
drawn  by  the  abundance  of  supplies. 

If  we  imagine,  instead  of  generals  of  genius  at  the  head  of  the  Russian 
army,  an  army  acting  alone,  without  leadership  of  any  kind,  such  an 
army  could  have  done  nothing  else  but  move  back  again  towards  Moscow, 
describing  a  semicircle  through  the  country  that  was  best  provided  with 
necessaries,  and  where  supplies  were  most  plentiful. 

So  natural  was  this  oblique  movement  from  the  Nizhni  to  the  Ryazan, 
Tula,  and  Kaluga  road,  that  that  direction  was  the  one  taken  by  the  flying 
bands  of  marauders  from  the  Russian  army,  and  the  one  which  the  au¬ 
thorities  in  Petersburg  insisted  upon  Kutuvoz’s  taking.  At  Tarutino 
Kutuzov  received  what  was  almost  a  reprimand  from  the  Tsar  for  moving 
the  army  to  the  Ryazan  road,  and  he  was  directed  to  take  up  the  very 
position  facing  Kaluga,  in  which  he  was  encamped  at  the  time  when  the 
Tsar’s  letter  reached  him. 

After  recoiling  in  the  direction  of  the  shock  received  during  the  whole 
campaign,  and  at  the  battle  of  Borodino,  the  ball  of  the  Russian  army, 


WARANDPEACE  931 

as  the  force  of  that  blow  spent  itself,  and  no  new  blow  came,  took  the 
direction  that  was  natural  for  it. 

Kutuzov’s  merit  lay  in  no  sort  of  military  genius,  as  it  is  called,  in  no 
strategic  manoeuvre,  but  in  the  fact  that  he  alone  grasped  the  significance 
of  what  had  taken  place.  He  alone  grasped  even  then  the  significance  of 
the  inactivity  of  the  French  army;  he  alone  persisted  in  maintaining  that 
the  battle  of  Borodino  was  a  victory;  he  alone — the  man  who  from  his 
position  as  commander-in-chief  might  have  been  expected  to  be  the  first 
to  be  eager  for  battle — he  alone  did  everything  in  his  power  to  hold  the 
Russian  army  back  from  useless  fighting. 

The  wild  beast  wounded  at  Borodino  lay  where  the  fleeing  hunter  had 
left  him;  but  whether  alive  and  strong,  or  only  feigning,  the  hunter  knew 
not.  All  at  once  a  moan  was  heard  from  the  creature.  The  moan  of  that 
wounded  creature,  the  French  army,  that  betrayed  its  hopeless  plight, 
was  the  despatch  of  Lauriston  to  the  camp  of  Kutuzov  with  overtures 
for  peace. 

Napoleon,  with  his  conviction  that  not  what  was  right  was  right,  but 
whatever  came  into  his  head  was  right,  wrote  to  Kutuzov  the  first  words 
that  occurred  to  his  mind,  words  that  had  no  meaning  at  all. 

‘M.  le  Prince  Koutouzoff,’  he  wrote,  T  am  sending  you  one  of  my 
aides-de-camp  to  converse  with  you  on  various  interesting  subjects.  I 
desire  that  your  highness  will  put  faith  in  what  he  says,  especially  when  he 
expresses  the  sentiments  of  esteem  and  particular  consideration  that  I 
have  long  entertained  for  your  person.  This  letter  having  no  other  object, 
I  pray  God  to  have  you  in  His  holy  and  powerful  keeping. 

(Signed)  Napoleon. 

‘Moscow,  October  30,  1812.’ 

‘I  should  be  cursed  by  posterity  if  I  were  regarded  as  the  first  instigator 
of  any  sort  of  settlement.  Tel  est  l’ esprit  actuel  de  via  nation,’  answered 
Kutuzov,  and  went  on  doing  everything  in  his  power  to  hold  the  army 
back  from  advance. 

.  A  month  spent  by  the  French  army  in  pillaging  Moscow,  and  by  the 
Russian  army  quietly  encamped  at  Tarutino,  brought  about  a  change  in 
the  relative  strength  of  the  two  armies,  a  change  both  in  spirit  and  in 
numbers,  which  was  all  to  the  advantage  of  the  Russians.  Although  the 
position  of  the  French  army  and  its  numbers  were  unknown  to  the 
Russians,  as  soon  as  their  relative  strength  had  changed,  a  great  number 
of  signs  began  to  show  that  an  attack  would  be  inevitable.  Among  the 
causes  that  contributed  to  bring  about  this  result  were  Lauriston ’s  mis¬ 
sion,  and  the  abundance  of  provisions  at  Tarutino,  and  the  reports  that 
were  continually  coming  in  from  all  sides  of  the  inactivity  and  lack  of 
discipline  in  the  French  army,  and  the  filling  up  of  our  regiments  by 
recruits,  and  the  fine  weather,  and  the  long  rest  enjoyed  by  the  Russian 
soldiers,  and  the  impatience  to  do  the  work  for  which  they  have  been 
brought  together,  that  always  arises  in  troops  after  repose,  and  curiosity 


932  WAR  AND  PEACE 

to  know  what  was  going  on  in  the  French  army,  of  which  they  had  so  long 
seen  nothing,  and  the  daring  with  which  the  Russian  outposts  dashed  in 
among  the  French  encamped  at  Tarutino,  and  the  news  of  the  easy  vic¬ 
tories  gained  by  bands  of  peasants  and  free-lances  over  the  French,  and 
the  envy  aroused  by  them,  and  the  desire  of  revenge,  that  every  man 
cherished  at  heart  so  long  as  the  French  were  in  Moscow;  and — stronger 
than  all — the  vague  sense  growing  up  in  every  soldier’s  heart  that  the 
relative  strength  of  the  armies  had  changed,  and  the  preponderance  was 
now  on  our  side.  The  relative  strength  of  the  armies  had  really  changed, 
and  advance  had  become  inevitable.  And  at  once,  as  surely  as  the  chimes 
in  a  clock  begin  to  beat  and  play  when  the  hand  has  made  the  full  round 
of  the  dial,  was  this  change  reflected  in  the  increased  activity,  and  bustle 
and  stir  of  wheels  within  wheels  in  the  higher  spheres. 

Ill 

The  Russian  army  was  commanded  by  Kutuzov  and  his  staff  and  by  the 
Tsar  from  Petersburg.  Before  the  news  of  the  abandonment  of  Moscow 
had  reached  Petersburg,  a  detailed  plan  of  the  whole  campaign  had  been 
drawn  up  and  sent  to  Kutuzov  for  his  guidance.  In  spite  of  the  fact  that 
this  plan  had  been  made  on  the  supposition  that  Moscow  was  still  in  our 
hands,  it  was  approved  by  the  staff,  and  accepted  as  the  plan  to  be  carried 
out.  Kutuzov  simply  wrote  that  directions  from  a  distance  were  always 
difficult  to  carry  out.  And  to  solve  any  difficulties  that  might  arise,  fresh 
instructions  were  sent,  together  with  newer  persons,  whose  duty  it  was  to 
be  to  keep  a  watch  on  his  movements,  and  to  report  upon  them. 

Apart  from  these  new  authorities,  the  whole  staff  of  generals  in  the 
Russian  army  was  now  transferred.  The  places  of  Bagration,  who  had 
been  killed,  and  Barclay,  who  had  taken  offence  and  retired,  had  to  be 
filled.  The  question  was  deliberated  with  the  greatest  seriousness:  whether 
A  should  be  put  in  B’s  place,  and  B  in  the  place  of  D,  or  whether,  on  the 
other  hand,  D  in  A’s  place,  and  so  on,  as  though  the  matter  affected  any¬ 
thing  whatever  except  the  satisfaction  of  A  and  B  and  D. 

In  consequence  of  Kutuzov’s  hostility  to  the  head  officer  of  his  staff, 
Bennigsen,  and  the  presence  of  confidential  advisers  of  the  Tsar,  and  these 
various  new  appointments,  the  struggle  of  parties  at  headquarters  was 
even  more  complicated  than  usual.  A  was  trying  to  undermine  B’s  posi¬ 
tion,  D  to  undermine  C’s  position,  and  so  on,  in  all  the  possible  combina¬ 
tions  and  permutations.  In  all  these  conflicting  currents  the  object  of 
intrigue  was  for  the  most  part  the  management  of  the  war,  which  all 
these  men  supposed  they  were  controlling,  though  it  did,  in  fact,  follow 
its  inevitable  course  quite  apart  from  their  action,  a  course  that  never 
corresponded  with  their  schemes,  but  was  the  outcome  of  the  forces  inter¬ 
acting  in  the  masses.  All  these  schemes,  thwarting  and  stultifying  one 
another,  were  simply  accepted  in  the  higher  spheres  as  the  correct  reflec¬ 
tion  of  what  was  bound  to  come  to  pass. 


WARANDPEACE  933 

‘Prince  Mihail  Ilarionovitch!’  the  Tsar  wrote  on  the  2nd  of  October, 
a  letter  received  by  Kutuzov  after  the  battle  of  Tarutino.  ‘From  the  2nd 
of  September  Moscow  has  been  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  Your  last 
reports  were  dated  the  20th;  and  in  the  course  of  all  this  time  since,  no 
attempt  has  been  made  to  act  aganist  the  enemy,  and  to  relieve  the 
ancient  capital,  and  you  have  even,  from  your  last  reports,  retreated 
further.  Serpuhov  is  by  now  occupied  by  a  detachment  of  the  enemy,  and 
Tula,  with  its  famous  arsenal,  of  such  importance  to  the  army,  is  in 
danger.  From  the  reports  received  from  General  Wintzengerode,  I  see 
that  a  corps  of  the  enemy,  ten  thousand  strong,  is  marching  along  the 
Petersburg  road.  Another,  numbering  some  thousands,  is  already  close 
upon  Dmitrov.  A  third  is  advancing  along  the  Vladimir  road.  A  fourth 
force  of  considerable  strength  is  stationed  between  Ruza  and  Mozhaisk. 
Napoleon  himself  was  in  Moscow  on  the  25th.  In  face  of  these  facts,  with 
the  enemy’s  forces  split  up  into  these  detached  bodies,  and  Napoleon 
himself  with  his  guards  in  Moscow,  is  it  possible  that  the  enemy’s  forces 
confronting  you  are  too  strong  to  permit  of  your  acting  on  the  offensive? 
One  may,  with  far  more  probability,  assume  that  you  are  being  pursued  by 
detachments,  or  at  most  a  corps  by  far  inferior  to  the  army  under  your 
command.  It  would  seem  that  taking  advantage  of  these  circumstances, 
you  might  with  advantage  have  attacked  forces  inferior  in  strength  to 
lyour  army,  and  have  destroyed  them,  or  at  least  have  forced  them  to 
retreat,  and  have  kept  in  our  hands  a  considerable  part  of  the  province 
now  occupied  by  the  enemy,  and  thereby  have  averted  all  danger  from 
Tula  and  the  other  towns  of  the  interior.  You  will  be  responsible,  if  the 
enemy  is  able  to  send  a  considerable  body  of  men  to  Petersburg,  to 
menace  that  capital,  in  which  it  has  been  impossible  to  keep  any  great 
number  of  troops;  for  with  the  army  under  your  command,  acting  with 
energy  and  decision,  you  have  ample  means  at  your  disposal  for  averting 
such  a  calamity.  Recollect  that  you  have  still  to  answer  to  your  humiliated 
country  for  the  loss  of  Moscow.  You  have  had  experience  of  my  readiness 
to  reward  you.  That  readiness  is  no  less  now,  but  Russia  and  I  have  the 
right  to  expect  from  you  all  the  energy,  decision,  and  success,  which  your 
intellect,  your  military  talents,  and  the  valour  of  the  troops  under  your 
command  should  guarantee  us.’ 

But  while  this  letter,  proving  that  the  change  in  the  relative  strength 
of  the  armies  was  by  now  reflected  in  opinion  at  Petersburg,  was  on  its 
road,  Kutuzov  had  been  unable  to  hold  the  army  back,  and  a  battle  had 
already  been  fought. 

On  the  and  of  October,  a  Cossack  Shapovalov,  out  scouting,  shot  one 
hare  and  wounded  a  second.  Shapovalov  was  led  on  in  pursuit  of  the  game 
far  into  the  forest,  and  came  across  the  left  flank  of  Murat's  army,  which 
was  encamped  and  quite  off  guard.  The  Cossack  told  his  comrades  with 
laughter  the  tale  of  how  he  had  all  but  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  French. 
The  ensign,  who  heard  the  story,  repeated  it  to  his  superior  officer.  The 
Cossack  was  sent  for  and  questioned.  The  officers  of  the  Cossacks  wanted 
to  take  advantage  of  this  to  carry  off  some  horses  from  the  French,  but 


934  WARANDPEACE 

one  of  them,  who  was  intimate  with  some  of  the  higher  authorities  in 
the  army,  mentioned  the  incident  to  a  general  on  the  staff.  On  the  staff 
the  position  of  late  had  been  strained  to  the  utmost.  A  few  days  previ¬ 
ously,  Yermolov  had  gone  to  Bennigsen  and  besought  him  to  use  his 
influence  with  the  commander-in-chief  to  bring  about  an  attack. 

‘If  I  did  not  know  you,  I  should  suppose  you  did  not  desire  that  result. 
I  have  only  to  advise  one  course  for  his  highness  to  be  sure  to  adopt  the 
opposite  one,’  answered  Bennigsen. 

The  news  brought  by  the  Cossack,  confirmed  by  scouts,  proved  con¬ 
clusively  that  the  time  was  ripe.  The  strained  string  broke,  and  the  wheels 
of  the  clock  whirred,  and  the  chimes  began  to  strike.  In  spite  of  all  his 
supposed  power,  his  intellect,  his  experience,  and  his  knowledge  of  men, 
Kutuzov,  taking  into  consideration  the  note  from  Bennigsen,  who  was 
sending  a  personal  report  on  the  subject  to  the  Tsar,  the  desire  expressed 
by  all  the  generals  alike,  the  desire  assumed  by  them  to  be  the  Tsar’s 
wish,  and  the  news  brought  by  the  Cossack,  could  hold  back  the  inevitable 
movement  no  longer,  and  gave  orders  for  what  he  regarded  as  useless  and 
michievous — gave  his  assent,  in  fact,  to  the  accomplished  fact. 


IV 

The  note  submitted  by  Bennigsen,  and  the  report  sent  in  by  the  Cos¬ 
sacks  of  the  enemy’s  left  flank  being  unguarded,  were  simply  the  last 
straws  that  showed  the  inevitability  of  giving  the  signal  for  advance,  and 
it  was  arranged  to  advance  to  attack  on  the  5th  of  October. 

On  the  morning  of  the  4th,  Kutuzov  signed  the  disposition  of  the 
forces.  Toll  read  it  to  Yermolov,  proposing  that  he  should  superintend 
the  further  instructions  for  carrying  it  out. 

‘Very  good,  very  good,  I  haven’t  time  just  now,’  said  Yermolov,  and  he 
hurried  out  of  the  cottage.  The  arrangement  of  the  troops  as  drawn  up  by 
Toll  was  an  excellent  one.  The  disposition  had  been  written  out,  as  at 
Austerlitz,  though  not  in  German: 

‘The  First  Column  marches  here  and  there,  the  Second  Column  occu¬ 
pies  this  place,’  and  so  on. 

On  paper  all  these  columns  were  in  their  proper  place  at  a  fixed  time 
and  annihilated  the  enemy.  Everything  had  been,  as  in  all  such  cases, 
carefully  thought  of,  and  as  in  all  such  cases  not  a  single  column  did 
reach  its  right  place  at  the  right  time.  When  a  sufficient  number  of  copies 
of  the  disposition  were  ready,  an  officer  was  summoned  and»sent  off  to 
give  them  to  Yermolov,  that  he  might  see  that  instructions  were  given 
in  accordance  with  them.  A  young  officer  of  the  horseguards,  in  waiting! 
on  Kutuzov,  set  off  for  Yennolov’s  quarters,  delighted  at  the  importance 
of  the  commission  with  which  he  was  intrusted. 

•  ‘Not  at  home,’  Yermolov’s  servant  told  him.  The  officer  of  the  horse- 
guards  set  off  to  the  quarters  of  the  general,  with  whom  Yermolov  was 
often  to  be  found. 


935 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Not  here,  nor  the  general  either,’  he  was  told. 

The  officer  mounted  his  horse  again  and  rode  off  to  another  general’s. 
'  ‘No,  not  at  home.’ 

‘If  only  I  don’t  get  into  trouble  for  the  delay!  How  annoying!  ’  thought 
;he  officer. 

He  rode  all  over  the  camp.  One  man  told  him  he  had  seen  Yermolov 
riding  away  in  company  with  some  other  generals;  another  said  he  was 
'sure  to  be  at  home  again  by  now.  The  officer  was  hunting  him  till  six 
o’clock  in  the  evening  without  stopping  for  dinner.  Yermolov  was  no¬ 
where  to  be  found,  and  no  one  knew  where  he  was.  The  officer  took  a 
hasty  meal  at  a  comrade’s,  and  trotted  back  to  the  advance  guard  to  see 
Miloradovitch.  Miloradovitch,  too,  was  not  at  home,  but  there  he  was 
told  that  he  was  at  a  ball  at  General  Kikin’s  and  that,  most  likely,  Yermo¬ 
lov  was  there  too. 

‘But  where  is  that?’ 

‘At  Etchkino,  that  way,’  said  an  officer  of  the  Cossacks,  pointing  out  to 
him  a  country  house  in  the  far  distance. 

‘Out  there!  beyond  our  lines!  ’ 

‘Two  regiments  of  our  fellows  have  been  sent  out  to  the  outposts,  and 
there  is  a  spree  going  on  there  now,  fine  doings!  Two  bands,  three  choruses 
of  singers.’ 

The  officer  rode  out  beyond  our  lines  to  Etchkino.  While  yet  a  long  way 
off,  he  heard  the  gay  sounds  of  a  soldier’s  dance  tune  sung  in  chorus. 

‘In  the  meadows  ...  in  the  meadows,’  he  heard  with  a  whistle  and 
string  music,  drowned  from  time  to  time  in  a  roar  of  voices.  The  officer’s 
spirits,  too,  rose  at  these  sounds,  but  at  the  same  time  he  was  in  terror  lest 
he  shQuld  be  held  responsible  for  having  so  long  delayed  giving  the  im¬ 
portant  message  intrusted  to  him.  It  was  by  now  nearly  nine  o’clock.  He 
dismounted  and  walked  up  to  the  entrance  of  a  big  manor-house  that 
had  been  left  uninjured  between  the  French  and  the  Russian  lines.  Foot¬ 
men  were  bustling  about  with  wines  and  edibles  in  the  vestibule  and  the 
buffet.  Choruses  were  standing  under  the  windows.  The  officer  was  led  up 
to  a  door,  and  he  saw  all  at  once  all  the  most  important  generals  in  the 
army,  among  them  the  big,  impressive  figure  of  Yermolov.  All  the  gen¬ 
erals  were  standing  in  a  semicircle,  laughing  loudly,  their  uniforms 
unbuttoned,  and  their  faces  flushed  and  animated.  In  the  middle  of  the 
room  a  handsome,  short  general  with  a  red  face,  was  smartly  and  jauntily 
executing  the  steps  of  the  trepak. 

‘Ha,  ha,  ha!  Bravo,  Nikolay  Ivanovitch!  ha,  ha!  .  . 

The  officer  felt  doubly  guilty  in  breaking  in  at  such  a  moment  wjth 
important  business,  and  he  would  have  waited;  but  one  of  the  generals 
caught  sight  of  him,  and  hearing  what  he  had  come  for,  told  Yermolov. 
The  latter,  with  a  frowning  face,  came  out  to  the  officer,  and  hearing  his 
story,  took  the  papers  from  him  without  a  word. 

‘Do  you  suppose  it  was  by  chance  that  he  was  not  at  home?’  said  a 
comrade  of  the  officer’s  who  was  on  the  staff,  speaking  of  Yermolov  that 
evening.  ‘That’s  all  stuff  and  nonsense;  it  was  all  done  on  purpose.  To 


036  WAR  AND  PEACE 

play  a  trick  on  Konovnitsyn.  You  see,  there’ll  be  a  pretty  kettle  of  fish 
to-morrow !  ’ 

V 

The  decrepit  old  man,  Kutuzov,  had  bade  them  wake  him  early  next 
day,  and  in  the  early  morning  he  said  his  prayers,  dressed,  and  with  a  dis¬ 
agreeable  consciousness  that  he  had  to  command  in  a  battle  of  which  he 
did  not  approve,  he  got  into  his  carriage  and  drove  from  Letashevka,  five 
versts  behind  Tarutino,  to  the  place  where  the  attacking  columns  were  to 
be  gathered  together.  Kutuzov  drove  along,  dropping  asleep  and  waking 
up  again,  and  listening  to  hear  whether  that  were  the  sound  of  shots  on 
the  right,  whether  the  action  had  not  begun.  But  everything  was  still 
quiet.  A  damp  and  cloudy  autumn  day  was  dawning.  As  he  approached 
Tarutino,  Kutuzov  noticed  cavalry  soldiers  leading  their  horses  to  a 
watercourse  across  the  road  along  which  he  was  riding.  Kutuzov  looked  at 
them,  stopped  his  carriage,  and  asked  what  regiment  did  they  belong  to. 
They  belonged  to  a  column  which  was  to  have  been  far  away  in  front  in 
ambush. 

‘A  mistake,  perhaps,’  thought  the  old  commander-in-chief.  But  as  he 
drove  on  further,  Kutuzov  saw  infantry  regiments  with  their  arms 
stacked,  and  the  soldiers  in  their  drawers  busy  cooking  porridge  and 
fetching  wood.  He  sent  for  their  officer.  The  officer  submitted  that  no 
command  to  advance  had  been  given. 

‘No  command  .  .  .’  Kutuzov  began,  but  he  checked  himself  at  once, 
and  ordered  the  senior  officer  to  be  summoned  to  him.  Getting  out  of  the 
carriage,  with  drooping  head  he  walked  to  and  fro  in  silence,  breathing 
heavily.  When  the  general  staff  officer,  Eichen,  for  whom  he  had  sent, 
arrived,  Kutuzov  turned  purple  with  rage,  not  because  that  officer  was 
to  blame  for  the  mistake,  but  because  he  was  an  object  of  sufficient 
importance  for  him  to  vent  his  wrath  on.  And  staggering  and  gasping, 
the  old  man  fell  into  that  state  of  fury  in  which  he  would  sometimes 
roll  on  the  ground  in  frenzy,  and  flew  at  Eichen,  shaking  his  fists,  and 
shouting  abuse  in  the  language  of  the  gutter.  Another  officer,  Captain 
Brozin,  who  was  in  no  way  to  blame,  happening  to  appear,  suffered  the 
same  fate. 

‘What  will  the  blackguards  do  next?  Shoot  them!  The  scoundrels!  ’  he 
shouted  hoarsely,  shaking  his  fist  and  staggering.  He  was  in  a  state  of 
actual  physical  suffering.  He,  his  highness  the  commander-in-chief,  who 
was  assured  by  every  one  that  no  one  in  Russia  had  ever  had  such  power 
as  he,  he  put  into  this  position — made  a  laughing-stock  to  the  whole 
army.  ‘Worrying  myself,  praying  over  to-day,  not  sleeping  all  night,  and 
thinking  about  everything — all  for  nothing!’  he  thought  about  himself. 
‘When  I  was  a  mere  boy  of  an  officer  no  one  would  have  dared  to  make 
a  laughing-stock  of  me  like  this  .  .  .  And  now!’  He  was  in  a  state  of 
physical  suffering,  as  though  from  corporal  punishment,  and  could 
not  help  expressing  it  in  wrathful  and  agonised  outcries.  But  soon  his 


WARANDPEACE  937 

s'ength  was  exhausted,  and  looking  about  him,  feeling  that  he  had  said 
a;reat  deal  that  was  unjust,  he  got  into  his  carriage  and  drove  back  in 
si;nce. 

His  wrath  once  spent  did  not  return  again,  and  Kutuzov,  blinking 
fibly,  listened  to  explanations  and  self-justifications  (Yermolov  himself 
dl  not  put  in  an  appearance  till  next  day),  and  to  the  earnest  repre- 
satation  of  Bennigsen,  Konovnitsyn,  and  Toll  that  the  battle  that 
hi  not  come  off  should  take  place  on  the  following  day.  And  again 
Iituzov  had  to  acquiesce. 

VI 

Nxt  day  the  troops  were  massed  in  their  appointed  places  by  the  evening, 
ad  were  moving  forward  in  the  night.  It  was  an  autumn  night  with  a 
sg  overcast  by  purplish-black  clouds,  but  free  from  rain.  The  earth  was 
dmp,  but  not  muddy,  and  the  troops  advanced  noiselessly,  except  for  a 
frdly  audible  jingling  now  and  then  from  the  artillery.  They  were 
f -bidden  to  talk  aloud,  to  smoke  or  to  strike  a  light;  the  horses  were  kept 
fim  neighing.  The  secrecy  of  the  enterprise  increased  its  attractiveness, 
he  men  marched  on  gaily.  Several  columns  halted,  stacked  their  guns 
i  piles,  and  lay  down  on  the  chilly  ground,  supposing  they  had  reached 
tfeir  destination.  Other  columns  (the  majority)  marched  all  night  long, 
Ed  arrived  somewhere,  unmistakably  not  where  they  were  meant  to  be. 

Count  Orlov-Denisov  with  his  Cossacks  (the  detachment  of  least  inr- 
jrtance  of  the  lot)  was  the  only  one  that  reached  the  right  place  at 
te  right  time.  This  detachment  halted  at  the  extreme  edge  of  a  forest, 
(  a  path  from  the  village  of  Stromilovo  to  Dmitrovskoe. 

Before  dawn  Count  Orlov,  who  had  fallen  asleep,  was  waked  up.  A 
cserter  from  the  French  camp  was  brought  to  him.  It  was  a  Polish 
i  der-officer  of  Poniatovsky’s  corps.  This  underofficer  explained  in  Polish 
lat  he  had  deserted  because  he  had  been  insulted  in  the  service;  because 
I  ought  long  ago  to  have  been  an  officer,  and  was  braver  than  any  of 
tem,  and  so  he  had  thrown  them  up  and  wanted  to  punish  them.  He 
‘id  that  Murat  was  camping  for  the  night  a  verst  from  them,  and  that 
i  they  would  give  him  a  convoy  of  a  hundred  men  he  would  take  him 
:  ve.  Count  Orlov-Denisov  took  council  with  his  comrades.  The  propo- 
fion  was  too  alluring  to  be  refused.  Every  one  clamoured  to  go,  every 
ie  advised  making  the  attempt.  After  many  disputes  and  confabula- 
ims,  it  was  settled  that  Major-General  Grekov,  with  two  regiments  of 
Pssacks,  should  go  with  the  Polish  deserter. 

‘Now,  remember,’  said  Count  Orlov-Denisov  to  the  Polish  deserter, 
:  he  dismissed  him,  ‘if  you  have  been  lying,  I  will  have  you  shot  like  a 
»  g,  but  if  it’s  true,  a  hundred  crowns.’ 

The  deserter  made  no  reply  to  these  words,  and  with  a  resolute  air 
minted  his  horse  and  rode  off  with  Grekov’s  men,  who  were  hurriedly 
.  thered  together.  They  disappeared  into  the  wood.  Count  Orlov,  shiver- 


938  WARANDPEACE 

ing  from  the  freshness  of  the  dawning  morning,  and  excited  by  1 
enterprise  he  had  undertaken  on  his  own  responsibility,  came  out  of  1 
wood,  accompanying  Grekov,  and  began  scrutinising  the  enemy’s  can 
faintly  visible  now  in  the  deceptive  light  of  the  approaching  dawn  and  1 
smouldering  camp-fires.  On  the  open  copse  on  Count  Orlov-Deniso 
right  our  columns  ought  to  have  been  visible.  Count  Orlov-Denisov  look 
in  that  direction ;  but  although  they  could  have  been  seen  even  if  a  lo 
distance  away,  these  columns  were  not  in  sight.  Count  Orlov-Denis 
fancied,  and  his  adjutant,  who  was  extremely  long-sighted,  confirmed  t 
idea,  that  they  were  beginning  to  move  in  the  French  camp. 

‘Oh,  of  course  it’s  too  late,’  said  Count  Orlov,  staring  at  the  can 
As  so  often  happens  when  the  man  in  whom  we  are  putting  faith  is 
longer  before  our  eyes,  it  all  seemed  at  once  perfectly  clear  and  obvio 
to  him  that  the  deserter  had  been  playing  them  false,  that  he  had  be 
telling  them  lies,  and  was  only  spoiling  the  whole  attack  by  removi 
these  two  regiments,  which  he  was  leading  away — God  only  knew  wher 
As  if  it  were  possible  to  capture  the  general  out  of  such  a  mass  of  troo[ 

‘No  doubt  he  was  lying,  the  scoundrel,’  said  the  Count. 

‘We  can  turn  them  back,’  said  one  of  the  suite,  who  was  feeling  ji 
the  same  mistrust  in  the  undertaking  as  he  gazed  at  the  camp. 

‘Ah!  Yes  .  .  .  what  do  you  think,  or  shall  we  leave  them?  Or  not?’ 

‘Do  you  command  them  to  return?’ 

‘To  return,  yes,  to  return!’  Count  Orlov  said,  with  sudden  decisic 
looking  at  his  watch ;  ‘it  will  be  too  late ;  it’s  quite  light.’ 

And  an  adjutant  galloped  into  the  wood  after  Grekov.  When  Greki 
came  back,  Count  Orlov-Denisov,  excited  by  giving  up  this  enterpri: 
and  by  vainly  waiting  for  the  infantry  columns,  which  still  did  not  a 
pear,  and  by  the  enemy’s  being  so  near  (every  man  in  his  detachme 
was  feeling  the  same),  resolved  to  attack. 

In  a  whisper  he  gave  the  command:  ‘Mount!’ 

The  men  got  into  their  places,  crossed  themselves  ...  ‘In  God 
name,  off!’ 

‘Hurrah!  ’  rang  out  in  the  wood,  and  the  Cossacks,  with  spears  lowere 
flew  gaily,  one  hundred  after  another,  across  the  stream  into  the  cam 
as  though  they  were  being  shot  out  of  a  sack. 

One  desperate,  frightened  scream  from  the  first  Frenchman  who  caugi 
sight  of  the  Cossacks,  and  every  creature  in  the  camp,  undressed  ar 
half-asleep,  was  running  away,  abandoning  cannons,  muskets,  and  horse 

If  the  Cossacks  had  pursued  the  French  without  regard  to  what  the 
left  all  around  and  behind  them,  they  could  have  captured  Murat  ar 
all  there  was  there.  Their  commanding  officers  tried  to  make  them  do  s 
But  there  was  no  making  the  Cossacks  budge  when  they  had  got  boot 
and  prisoners.  No  one  heeded  the  word  of  command.  They  had  take 
fifteen  hundred  prisoners,  thirty-eight  cannons,  flags,  and,  what  was  < 
most  consequence  in  the  eyes  of  the  Cossacks,  horses,  saddles,  covering 
and  various  other  objects.  All  of  this  they  wanted  to  see  after,  to  secui 
the  prisoners  and  the  cannons,  to  divide  the  booty,  to  shout  at  and  eve 


WARANDPEACE  939 

fight  with  one  another  over  the  spoils;  and  all  this  absorbed  the  Cossacks’ 
attention.  The  Frenchmen,  finding  themselves  not  pursued  further,  began 
to  rally;  they  formed  into  companies  and  began  firing.  Orlov-Denisov 
still  expected  the  other  columns  to  arrive,  and  did  not  advance  further. 

Meanwhile,  in  accordance  with  the  disposition — -die  erste  Colonne 
marschirt,’  and  so  on — the  infantry  regiments  of  the  belated  columns, 
under  the  command  of  Bennigsen  and  the  direction  of  Toll,  had  started 
off  in  due  course,  and  had,  in  the  usual  way,  arrived  somewhere,  but  not 
where  they  were  intended  to  arrive.  In  the  usual  way  too,  the  soldiers, 
who  had  set  off  gaily,  began  to  halt;  there  were  murmurs  of  dissatis¬ 
faction  and  a  sense  of  muddle,  and  they  were  marched  back  to  some 
point.  Adjutants  and  generals  galloped  to  and  fro,  shouting  angrily, 
quarrelling,  declaring  they  had  come  utterly  wrong  and  were  too  late, 
upbraiding  some  one,  and  so  on;  and  finally,  all  washed  their  hands  of 
the  business  in  despair,  and  marched  on  simply  in  order  to  get  some¬ 
where.  ‘We  must  arrive  somewhere  sooner  or  later!’  And  so  they  did,  in 
fact,  arrive  somewhere,  but  not  where  they  were  wanted.  And  some  did 
even  reach  their  destination,  but  reached  it  so  late  that  their  doing  so 
was  of  no  use  at  all,  and  only  resulted  in  their  being  fired  at  for  nothing. 
Toll,  who  in  this  battle  played  the  part  of  Weierother  in  the  battle  of 
Austerlitz,  galloped  with  unilagging  energy  from  one  part  of  the  field  to 
another,  and  found  everything  at  sixes  and  sevens  everywhere.  So,  for 
instance,  he  found  Bagovut’s  corps  in  the  wood,  when  it  was  broad  day¬ 
light,  though  the  corps  ought  to  have  been  there  long  before,  and  to  have 
gone  to  support  Orlov-Denisov.  Disappointed  and  excited  at  the  failure, 
and  supposing  some  one  must  be  to  blame  for  it,  Toll  galloped  up  to  the 
general  in  command  of  the  corps,  and  began  sternly  reprimanding  him, 
declaring  that  he  deserved  to  be  shot.  Bagovut,  a  sturdy  old  general  of 
placid  disposition,  had  been  worried  too  by  all  the  delays,  the  muddles, 
and  the  contradictory  orders,  and,  to  the  amazement  of  everybody,  he 
flew  into  a  violent  rage,  quite  out  of  keeping  with  his  character,  and  said 
some  very  nasty  things  to  Toll. 

‘I  am  not  going  to  be  taught  my  duty  by  anybody,  but  I  can  face 
death  with  my  men  as  well  as  any  one,’  he  said,  and  he  marched  forward 
with  one  division.  The  valiant  Bagovut,  not  considering  in  his  excitement 
whether  his  advance  into  action  now  with  a  single  division  was  likely  to 
be  of  use  or  not,  marched  his  men  straight  forward  into  the  enemy’s  fire. 
Danger,  shells,  and  bullets  were  just  what  he  wanted  in  his  fury.  One  of 
the  first  bullets  killed  him,  the  other  bullets  killed  many  of  his  men.  And 
his  division  remained  for  some  time  under  fire  for  no  object  whatever. 


VII 

Meanwhile  another  column  was  to  have  fallen  upon  the  French  in  the 
centre,  but  of  this  column  Kutuzov  was  in  command.  He  knew  very  well 
that  nothing  but  muddle  would  come  of  this  battle,  begun  against  his 


940  WARANDPEACE 

will,  and,  as  far  as  it  was  in  his  power,  he  held  his  forces  back.  He  did 
not  move. 

Kutuzov  rode  mutely  about  on  his  grey  horse,  making  languid  replies 
to  the  suggestions  for  an  attack. 

‘You  can  all  talk  about  attacking,  but  you  don’t  see  that  we  don’t  know 
how  to  execute  complicated  manoeuvres,’  he  said  to  Miloradovitch,  who 
was  begging  to  be  allowed  to  advance. 

‘We  couldn’t  take  Murat  alive  in  the  morning,  nor  be  in  our  places  in 
time;  now  there’s  nothing  to  be  done!  ’  he  said  to  another. 

When  it  was  reported  to  Kutuzov  that  there  were  now  two  battalions 
of  Poles  in  the  rear  of  the  French,  where  according  to  the  earlier  reports 
of  the  Cossacks  there  had  been  none,  he  took  a  sidelong  glance  behind 
him  at  Yermolov,  to  whom  he  had  not  spoken  since  the  previous  day. 

‘Here  they  are  begging  to  advance,  proposing  projects  of  all  sorts,  and 
as  soon  as  you  get  to  work,  there’s  nothing  ready,  and  the  enemy,  fore¬ 
warned,  takes  his  measures.’ 

Yermolov  half  closed  his  eyelids,  and  faintly  smiled,  as  he  heard  those 
words.  He  knew  that  the  storm  had  blown  over  him,  and  that  Kutuzov 
would  not  go  beyond  that  hint. 

‘That’s  his  little  joke  at  my  expense,’  said  Yermolov  softly,  poking 
Raevsky,  near  him,  with  his  knee. 

Soon  after  that,  Yermolov  moved  forward  to  Kutuzov  and  respectfully 
submitted: 

‘The  time  has  not  passed,  your  highness;  the  enemy  has  not  gone  away. 
If  you  were  to  command  an  advance?  Or  else  the  guards  won’t  have  a 
sight  of  smoke.’ 

Kutuzov  said  nothing,  but  when  news  was  brought  him  that  Murat’s 
troops  were  in  retreat,  he  gave  orders  for  an  advance;  but  every  hundred 
paces  he  halted  for  three-quarters  of  an  hour. 

The  whole  battle  was  confined  to  what  had  been  done  by  the  Cossacks 
of  Orlov-Denisov;  the  rest  of  the  troops  simply  lost  a  few  hundreds  of 
men  for  nothing. 

In  consequence  of  this  battle,  Kutuzov  received  a  diamond  decoration; 
Bennigsen,  too,  was  rewarded  with  diamonds  and  a  hundred  thousand 
roubles;  and  the  other  generals,  too,  received  agreeable  recognition 
according  to  their  rank,  and  more  changes  were  made  on  the  staff. 

‘That’s  how  things  are  always  done  among  us,  everything  topsy¬ 
turvy!’  the  Russian  officers  and  generals  said  after  the  battle  of  Tarutino; 
just  as  they  say  it  nowadays,  with  an  assumption  that  some  stupid 
person  had  muddled  everything,  while  we  would  have  managed  quite 
differently.  But  the  men  who  speak  like  this  either  do  not  understand 
what  they  are  talking  of,  or  intentionally  deceive  themselves.  Every 
battle — Tarutino,  Borodino,  Austerlitz — fails  to  come  off  as  those  who 
planned  it  expected  it  to  do.  That  is  inevitable. 

An  innumerable  collection  of  freely  acting  forces  (and  nowhere  is  a 
man  freer  than  on  the  field  of  battle,  where  it  is  a  question  of  life  and 
death)  influence  the  direction  taken  by  a  battle,  and  that  can  never  be 


WARANDPEACE  941 

mown  beforehand  and  never  corresponds  with  the  direction  of  any 
me  force. 

If  many  forces  are  acting  simultaneously  in  different  directions  on 
ny  body,  the  direction  of  its  motion  will  not  correspond  with  any  one  of 
he  forces,  but  will  always  follow  a  middle  course,  the  summary  of  them, 
diat  is  expressed  in  mechanics  by  the  diagonal  of  the  parallelogram 
if  forces. 

If  in  the  accounts  given  us  by  historians,  especially  by  French  ones, 
ve  find  that  wars  and  battles  appear  to  follow  a  definite  plan  laid  down 
leforehand,  the  only  deduction  we  can  make  from  that  is  that  these 
ccounts  are  not  true. 

The  battle  of  Tarutino  obviously  failed  to  attain  the  aim  which  Toll 
lad  in  view:  to  lead  the  army  into  action  in  accordance  with  his  disposi- 
ion  of  the  troops,  or  the  aim  which  Count  Orlov-Denisov  may  have  had: 
0  take  Murat  prisoner;  or  the  aim  of  destroying  at  one  blow  the  whole 
orps,  which  Bennigsen  and  others  may  have  entertained;  or  the  aim  of 
he  officer  who  desired  to  distinguish  himself  under  fire;  or  the  Cossack, 
dio  wanted  to  obtain  more  booty  than  he  did  attain,  and  so  on.  But  if 
/e  regard  the  object  of  the  battle  as  what  was  actually  accomplished  by 
L  and  what  was  the  universal  desire  of  all  Russians  (the  expulsion  of  the 
Tench  from  Russia  and  the  destruction  of  their  army),  it  will  be  per- 
ectly  evident  that  the  battle  of  Tarutino,  precisely  in  consequence  of  its 
lcongruities,  was  exactly  what  was  wanted  at  that  period  of  the  cam- 
aign.  It  is  difficult  or  impossible  to  imagine  any  issue  of  that  battle  more 
1  accordance  with  that  object  than  its  actual  result.  With  the  very 
mallest  effort,  in  spite  of  the  greatest  muddle,  and  with  the  most  trilling 
)ss,  the  most  important  results  in  the  whole  campaign  were  obtained — 
he  transition  was  made  from  retreat  to  attack,  the  weakness  of  the 
'rench  was  revealed,  and  the  shock  was  given  which  was  all  that  was 
eeded  to  put  Napoleon’s  army  to  flight. 


VIII 

Iapoleon  enters  Moscow  after  the  brilliant  victory  de  la  Moskowa : 
lere  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  victory,  since  the  French  are  left  in  pos- 
:ssion  of  the  field  of  battle.  The  Russians  retreat  and  leave  Moscow — 
ell  stocked  with  provisions,  arms,  implements,  and  countless  riches — 

I  the  hands  of  Napoleon.  The  Russian  army,  of  one-half  the  strength 
:  the  French,  during  the  course  of  a  whole  month  makes  no  effort  to 
tack.  Napoleon’s  position  is  most  brilliant.  One  would  have  supposed 
lat  no  great  genius  was  needed  with  an  army  of  double  the  strength  to 

II  upon  the  Russian  forces  and  destroy  them,  to  negotiate  an  advan- 
geous  peace;  or,  in  case  of  negotiations  being  refused,  to  make  a 
enacing  march  upon  Petersburg,  or  even,  in  case  of  failure  in  this,  to 
turn  to  Smolensk  or  to  Vilna,  or  to  remain  in  Moscow,  to  retain,  in 
lort,  the  brilliant  position  in  which  the  French  army  now  found  them- 


042  WAR  AND  PEACE 

selves.  To  do  all  this  it  was  only  necessary  to  take  the  simplest  am 
easiest  measures:  to  keep  the  soldiers  from  pillage,  to  prepare  winte 
clothes  (of  which  there  was  a  supply  in  Moscow  amply  sufficient  for  th 
whole  army),  and  regularly  to  collect  the  provisions,  of  which  the  suppl 
in  Moscow  was,  on  the  showing  of  the  French  historians,  sufficient  to  feei 
the  whole  army  for  six  months.  Napoleon,  the  greatest  of  all  militar 
geniuses,  with  absolute  power,  as  historians  assert,  over  the  army,  dii 
nothing  of  all  this. 

Far  from  doing  anything  of  the  sort,  he  used  his  power  to  select  ou 
of  all  the  various  courses  open  to  him  the  stupidest  and  most  perniciou 
of  all.  Of  all  the  different  things  Napoleon  might  have  done — spendin 
the  winter  in  Moscow,  going  to  Petersburg,  going  to  Nizhni-Novgoroc 
going  back  a  little  more  to  the  north  or  to  the  south,  by  the  roai1 
Kutuzov  afterwards  took — no  course  one  can  imagine  could  have  bee 
more  ruinous  for  his  army  (as  the  sequel  proved)  than  the  one  Na 
poleon  actually  did  adopt ;  that  is,  the  course  of  staying  in  Moscow  tii 
October,  letting  the  troops  plunder  the  town,  then  in  hesitation  leaving . 
garrison  behind,  marching  out  of  Moscow',  going  to  meet  Kutuzov  am 
not  giving  battle,  turning  to  the  right  and  going  as  far  as  Male; 
Yaroslavets,  again  refusing  to  risk  a  battle,  and  finally  retreating,  nc 
by  the  road  Kutuzov  had  taken,  but  by  Mozhaisk  and  the  Smolens 
route  through  devastated  country.  Let  the  most  skilful  tacticians,  suppos 
ing  that  Napoleon’s  object  was  the  destruction  of  his  army,  try  an 
devise  a  series  of  actions  which  could,  apart  from  any  measures  tha 
might  be  taken  by  the  Russian  forces,  have  ensured  with  such  certaint 
the  complete  destruction  of  the  whole  French  army  as  the  course  take 
by  Napoleon. 

This  the  genius  Napoleon  did.  But  to  say  that  Napoleon  ruined  hi 
army  because  he  wanted  to  do  so,  or  because  he  was  very  stupid,  woul 
be  just  as  unjust  as  to  say  that  Napoleon  got  his  troops  to  Mosco'1 
because  he  wanted  to,  and  because  he  was  very  clever  and  a  great  geniu: 

In  both  cases  his  personal  activity,  having  no  more  force  than  th 
personal  activity  of  every  soldier,  was  merely  coincidental  with  the  law 
by  which  the  event  was  determined. 

Quite  falsely  (and  simply  because  the  sequel  did  not  justify  Ns 
poleon’s  actions)  do  historians  represent  Napoleon’s  faculties  as  flaggin 
at  Moscow.  Just  as  before,  and  afterwards  in  the  year  1813,  he  used  a 
his  powers  and  faculties  to  do  the  best  for  himself  and  his  army,  Nape 
leon’s  activity  at  this  time  was  no  less  marvellous  than  in  Egypt,  i 
Italy,  in  Austria,  and  in  Prussia.  We  do  not  know  with  any  certaint 
how  real  was  the  genius  of  Napoleon  in  Egypt,  where  forty  centurii 
looked  down  upon  his  greatness,  because  all  his  great  exploits  there  a 
recounted  to  us  by  none  but  Frenchmen.  We  cannot  judge  with  certaint 
of  his  genius  in  Austria  and  Prussia,  as  the  accounts  of  his  doings  the 
must  be  drawn  from  French  and  German  sources.  And  the  unaccoun 
able  surrender  of  corps  of  soldiers  without  a  battle,  and  of  fortress' 
without  a  siege,  must  dispose  Germans  to  postulate  Napoleon’s  genii 


WARANDPEACE  943 

,  the  unique  explanation  of  the  war  as  it  was  waged  in  Germany.  But 
e  have,  thank  God,  no  need  to  plead  his  genius  to  cloak  our  shame. 
Te  have  paid  for  the  right  to  look  facts  simply  and  squarely  in  the  face, 
id  that  right  we  will  not  give  up. 

His  activity  in  Moscow’  was  as  marvellous  and  as  full  of  genius  as  any- 
here  else.  Command  upon  command  and  plan  upon  plan  w’as  con- 
nually  being  issued  by  him  from  the  time  he  entered  Moscow  to  the 
me  he  left  it.  The  absence  of  the  citizens  and  of  a  deputation,  and  even 
je  burning  of  Moscow,  did  not  daunt  him.  He  did  not  lose  sight  of  the 
elfare  of  his  army,  nor  of  the  doings  of  the  enemy,  nor  of  the  welfare 
if  the  people  of  Russia,  nor  the  conduct  of  affairs  at  Paris,  nor  of  diplo- 
latic  negotiations  as  to  the  terms  of  peace. 


IX 


»n  the  military  side,  immediately  on  entering  Moscow,  Napoleon  gives 
ieneral  Sebastiani  strict  orders  to  keep  a  watch  on  the  movements  of  the 
Russian  army,  sends  detachments  along  the  various  roads,  and  charges 
Jurat  to  find  Kutuzov.  Then  he  gives  careful  instructions  for  the  forti- 
cation  of  the  Kremlin;  then  he  makes  a  plan  of  the  coming  campaign 
ver  the  whole  map  of  Russia;  that  was  a  work  of  genius,  indeed.  On  the 
iplomatic  side,  Napoleon  summons  to  his  presence  Captain  Yakovlev, 
,'ho  had  been  robbed  and  reduced  to  rags  and  did  not  know  how  to  get 
ut  of  Moscow,  expounds  to  him  minutely  his  whole  policy  and  his 
nagnanimity;  and  after  writing  a  letter  to  the  Emperor  Alexander,  in 
vhich  he  considers  it  his  duty  to  inform  his  friend  and  brother  that 
lastoptchin  had  performed  his  duties  very  badly  in  Moscow,  he  des- 
tatches  Yakovlev  with  it  to  Petersburg. 

Expounding  his  views  and  his  magnanimity  with  equal  minuteness  to 
Futolmin,  he  despatches  that  old  man  too  to  Petersburg  to  open  nego- 
iations. 

On  the  judicial  side,  orders  were  issued,  immediately  after  the  fires 
proke  out,  for  the  guilty  persons  to  be  found  and  executed  And  the  mis- 
:reant  Rastoptchin  was  punished  by  the  order  to  set  fire  to  his  houses. 

On  the  administrative  side,  Moscow  was  presented  with  a  constitution. 
\  municipal  council  was  instituted,  and  the  following  proclamation  was 
ssued: — 


‘Citizens  of  Moscow! 


‘Your  misfortunes  have  been  cruel,  but  his  Majesty  the  Emperor  and 
King  wishes  to  put  an  end  to  them.  Terrible  examples  have  shown  you 
'how  he  punishes  crime  and  breach  of  discipline.  Stern  measures  have 
'been  taken  to  put  an  end  to  disorder  and  to  restore  public  security.  A 
[paternal  council,  chosen  from  among  yourselves,  will  compose  your 
municipality  or  town  council.  It  will  care  for  you,  for  your  needs  and  your 


944  W  A  R  A  N  D  P  E  A  C  E 

interests.  The  members  of  it  will  be  distinguished  by  a  red  ribbon,  which 
they  will  wear  across  the  shoulder,  and  the  mayor  will  wear  a  white  sash 
over  it.  But  except  when  discharging  their  duties,  they  will  wear  only  a 
red  ribbon  round  the  left  arm. 

‘The  city  police  are  established  on  their  former  footing,  and  they  are 
already  restoring  order.  The  government  has  appointed  two  general 
commissioners,  or  superintendents  of  police,  and  twenty  commissioners, 
or  police  inspectors,  stationed  in  the  different  quarters  of  the  town.  You 
will  recognise  them  by  the  white  ribbon  they  will  wear  round  the  left 
arm.  Several  churches  of  various  denominations  have  been  opened,  and 
divine  service  is  performed  in  them  without  hindrance.  Your  fellow- 
citizens  are  returning  every  day  to  their  dwellings,  and  orders  have  been 
given  that  they  should  find  in  them  the  aid  and  protection  due  to  mis¬ 
fortune.  These  are  the  measures  which  the  government  has  adopted  to 
restore  order  and  alleviate  your  position;  but  to  attain  that  end,  it  is 
necessary  that  you  should  unite  your  efforts  with  them;  should  forget,  if 
possible,  the  misfortunes  you  have  suffered;  should  look  hopefully  at  a 
fate  that  is  not  so  cruel ;  should  believe  that  a  shameful  death  inevitably 
awaits  those  guilty  of  violence  against  your  persons  or  your  deserted 
property,  and  consequently  leaves  no  doubt  that  they  will  be  preserved, 
■since  such  is  the  will  of  the  greatest  and  most  just  of  monarchs.  Soldiers 
and  citizens  of  whatever  nation  you  may  be!  Restore  public  confidence,  . 
the  source  of  the  prosperity  of  a  state ;  live  like  brothers,  give  mutual  aid 
and  protection  to  one  another;  unite  in  confounding  the  projects  of  the  ■ 
evil-minded ;  obey  the  civil  and  military  authorities,  and  your  tears  will 
soon  cease  to  flow.’ 

On  the  commissariat  side,  Napoleon  issued  orders  for  all  the  troops  to  < 
enter  Moscow  in  turn,  a  la  maraude,  to  gather  supplies  for  themselves; 
so  that  in  that  way  the  army  was  provided  with  supplies  for  the  future.  ; 

On  the  religious  side,  Napoleon  ordered  the  priests  to  be  brought  back, 
and  services  to  be  performed  again  in  the  churches. 

With  a  view  to  encouraging  commerce  and  providing  supplies  for  the 
troops,  the  following  notice  was  placarded  everywhere: — 

‘Proclamation. 

‘You,  peaceable  inhabitants  of  Moscow,  artisans,  and  working  men, 
who  have  been  driven  out  of  the  city  by  the  disturbance,  and  you,  scat¬ 
tered  tillers  of  the  soil,  who  are  still  kept  in  the  fields  by  groundless  terror,  i 
hear!  Tranquillity  is  returning  to  this  capital,  and  order  is  being  restored 
in  it.  Your  fellow-countrymen  are  coming  boldly  out  of  their  hiding- 
places,  seeing  that  they  are  treated  with  respect.  Every  act  of  violence 
against  them  or  their  property  is  promptly  punished.  His  Majesty  the 
Emperor  and  King  protects  them,  and  he  reckons  none  among  you  his 
enemies  but  such  as  disobey  his  commands.  He  wishes  to  put  an  end  to 
your  trouble,  and  to  bring  you  back  to  your  homes  and  your  families. 


WAR  AND  PEACE  045 

Co-operate  with  his  beneficent  designs  and  come  to  us  without  apprehen¬ 
sion.  Citizens!  Return  with  confidence  to  your  habitations;  you  will  soon 
find  the  means  of  satisfying  your  needs!  Artisans  and  industrious  handi- 
:raftsmen!  Return  to  your  employment;  houses,  shops,  and  guards  to 
protect  them  are  awaiting  you,  and  you  will  receive  the  payment  due  to 
you  for  your  toil!  And  you,  too,  peasants,  come  out  of  the  forests  where 
you  have  been  hiding  in  terror,  return  without  fear  to  your  huts  in  secure 
reliance  on  finding  protection.  Markets  have  been  established  in  the  city, 
,vhere  peasants  can  bring  their  spare  stores  and  country  produce.  The 
government  has  taken  the  following  measures  to  secure  freedom  of  sale 
:or  them:  (i)  From  this  day  forward,  peasants,  husbandmen,  and  in- 
mbitants  of  the  environs  of  Moscow  can,  without  any  danger,  bring  their 
*oods  of  any  kind  to  two  appointed  markets — namely,  the  Mohovaya 
ind  the  Ohotny  Ryad.  (2)  Goods  shall  be  bought  from  them  at  such  a 
>rice  as  seller  and  buyer  shall  agree  upon  together;  but  if  the  seller  can- 
lot  get  what  he  asks  for  as  a  fair  price,  he  will  be  at  liberty  to  take  his 
;oods  back  to  his  village,  and  no  one  can  hinder  his  doing  so  on  any 
>retext  whatever.  (3)  Every  Sunday  and  Wednesday  are  fixed  for  weekly 
narket  days:  to  that  end  a  sufficient  number  of  troops  will  be  stationed 
in  Tuesdays  and  Saturdays  along  all  the  high  roads  at  such  a  distance 
rom  the  town  as  to  protect  the  carts  coming  in.  (4)  Similar  measures 
vill  be  taken  that  the  peasants  with  their  carts  and  horses  may  meet 
vith  no  hindrance  on  their  homeward  way.  (5)  Steps  will  be  imme- 
liately  taken  to  re-establish  the  ordinary  shops. 

‘Inhabitants  of  the  city  and  of  the  country,  and  you  workmen  and 
landicraftsmen  of  whatever  nationality  you  may  be!  You  are  called  upon 
0  carry  out  the  paternal  designs  of  his  Majesty  the  Emperor  and  King, 
ind  to  co-operate  with  him  for  the  public  welfare.  Lay  your  respect  and 
onfidence  at  his  feet,  and  do  not  delay  to  unite  with  us!  ’ 

With  a  view  to  keeping  up  the  spirits  of  the  troops  and  the  people, 
eviews  were  continually  being  held,  and  rewards  were  distributed. 

The  Emperor  rode  about  the  streets  and  entertained  the  inhabitants; 
nd  in  spite  of  his  preoccupation  with  affairs  of  state,  visited  in  person 
he  theatre  set  up  by  his  orders. 

!  As  regards  philanthropy,  too — the  fairest  jewel  in  the  conqueror’s 
rown — Napoleon  did  everything  that  lay  within  him.  On  the  benevolent 
nstitutions  he  ordered  the  inscription  to  be  put  up,  ‘Maison  de  via  mere / 
hereby  combining  a  touching  filial  sentiment  with  a  monarch’s  grandeur 
>f  virtue.  He  visited  the  Foundling  Home;  and  as  he  gave  the  orphans  he 
lad  saved  his  white  hands  to  kiss,  he  conversed  graciously  with  Tutolmin. 
[Then,  as  Thiers  eloquently  recounts,  he  ordered  his  soldiers’  pay  to  be 
|  listributed  among  them  in  the  false  Russian  notes  he  had  counter- 
eited:— 

!  ‘Reinforcing  the  use  of  these  methods  by  an  act  worthy  of  him  and  of 
he  French  army,  he  had  assistance  distributed  to  those  who  had  suf- 
J  ered  loss  from  the  fire.  But  as  provisions  were  too  precious  to  be  given 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


946 

to  strangers,  mostly  enemies,  Napoleon  preferred  to  furnish  them  f 
money  for  them  to  provide  themselves  from  without,  and  ordered  p  e 
roubles  to  be  distributed  among  them.’ 

With  a  view  to  maintaining  discipline  in  the  army,  orders  were  r 
tinually  being  issued  for  severely  punishing  nonfulfilment  of  mill  r 
duty  and  for  putting  an  end  to  pillaging. 


X 

But,  strange  to  say,  all  these  arrangements,  these  efforts  and  pin 
which  were  no  whit  inferior  to  those  that  had  been  made  on  sir  a 
occasions  before,  never  touched  the  root  of  the  matter;  like  the  hand) 
the  face  of  a  clock,  when  detached  from  the  mechanism,  they  tu? 
aimlessly  and  arbitrarily,  without  catching  the  wheels. 

The  plan  of  campaign,  that  work  of  genius,  of  which  Thiers  says,  a 
his  genius  never  imagined  anything  more  profound,  more  skilful,  1 
more  admirable,  and  entering  into  a  polemical  discussion  with  M.  Fi 
proves  that  the  composition  of  this  work  of  genius  is  to  be  referred.) 
to  the  4th,  but  to  the  15th  of  October — that  plan  never  was  and  nj'< 
could  be  put  into  execution,  because  it  had  nothing  in  common  with! 
actual  facts  of  the  position.  The  fortification  of  the  Kremlin,  for  m 
it  was  necessary  to  pull  down  la  Mosquee  (as  Napoleon  called  the  ch  c 
of  Vassily  the  Blessed)  turned  out  to  be  perfectly  useless.  The  min 
of  the  Kremlin  was  only  of  use  for  carrying  out  the  desire  the  Empt 
expressed  on  leaving  Moscow,  to  blow  up  the  Kremlin,  like  a  child  ; 
beats  the  floor  against  which  it  has  hurt  itself.  The  pursuit  of  the  Ruea 
army,  on  which  Napoleon  laid  so  much  stress,  led  to  an  unheart 
result.  The  French  generals  lost  sight  of  the  sixty  thousand  men  oil 
Russian  army,  and  it  was  only,  in  the  words  of  Thiers,  thanks  to  the  ;  I 
and  apparently  also  the  genius,  of  Murat  that  they  succeeded  at  lad 
finding,  like  a  lost  pin,  this  army  of  sixty  thousand  men. 

On  the  diplomatic  side,  all  Napoleon’s  expositions  of  his  magnaniit 
and  justice,  both  to  Tutolmin  and  to  Yakovlev  (the  latter  was  principJ 
interested  in  finding  himself  a  great-coat  and  a  conveyance  for  tra veils 
turned  out  to  be  fruitless.  Alexander  would  not  receive  these  envoys,  n 
made  no  reply  to  the  message  they  brought. 

On  the  side  of  lav/,  of  order,  after  the  execution  of  the  supposed  ini 
diaries,  the  other  half  of  Moscow  was  burnt  down. 

The  establishment  of  a  municipal  council  did  not  check  pillage,  n 
was  no  benefit  to  any  one  but  the  few  persons,  who  were  members  ( i 
and  were  able  on  the  pretext  of  preserving  order  to  plunder  Moscow 
their  own  account,  or  to  save  their  own  property  from  being  plunda 

On  the  religious  side,  the  difficulty  had  so  easily  been  settled  by 
poleon’s  visit  to  a  mosque  in  Egypt,  but  here  similar  measures  led  t|r 
results  whatever.  Two  or  three  priests,  picked  up  in  Moscow,  did  at™ 


WAR  AND  PEACE  947 

j  arry  out  Napoleon’s  desire;  but  one  of  them  was  slapped  in  the  face 
yi  French  soldier  during  the  service,  and  in  regard  to  the  other,  the 
aliwing  report  was  made  by  a  French  official:  ‘The  priest,  whom  I  had 
hovered  and  invited  to  resume  saying  the  Mass,  cleaned  and  closed  the 
h  ch.  In  the  night  they  came  again  to  break  in  the  doors,  break  the 
alocks,  tear  the  books,  and  commit  other  disorders.’ 

s  for  the  encouragement  of  commerce,  the  proclamation  to  ‘indus- 
:i as  artisans  and  peasants,’  met  with  no  response  at  all.  Industrious 
nans  there  were  none  in  Moscow,  and  the  peasants  set  upon  the 
usengers  who  ventured  too  far  from  the  town  with  this  proclamation 
n  killed  them. 

he  attempts  to  entertain  the  people  and  the  troops  with  theatres  were 
qally  unsuccessful.  The  theatres  set  up  in  the  Kremlin  and  Toznyakov’s 
cse  were  closed  again  immediately,  because  the  actors  and  actresses 
't,e  stripped  of  their  belongings  by  the  soldiers. 

wen  philanthropy  did  not  bring  the  desired  results.  Moscow  was  full 
Gaper  money,  genuine  and  counterfeit,  and  the  notes  had  no  value. 
'!:  French,  accumulating  booty,  cared  for  nothing  but  gold.  The  coun- 
jeit  notes,  which  Napoleon  so  generously  bestowed  on  the  unfortunate, 
rie  of  no  value,  and  even  silver  fell  below  its  standard  value  in  relation 
gold. 

Jut  the  most  striking  example  of  the  ineffectiveness  of  all  efforts 
me  by  the  authorities  was  Napoleon’s  vain  endeavour  to  check  plunder, 
1  to  maintain  discipline. 

lere  are  reports  sent  in  by  the  military  authorities: 

Pillage  continues  in  the  city,  in  spite  of  the  orders  to  stop  it.  Order 
;  ot  yet  restored,  and  there  is  not  a  single  merchant  carrying  on  trade 
i.  lawful  fashion.  But  the  canteen-keepers  permit  themselves  to  sell  the 
•  ts  of  pillage. 

Part  of  my  district  continues  to  be  a  prey  to  the  pillaging  of  the 
lliers  of  the  3rd  corps,  who,  not  satisfied  with  tearing  from  the  poor 
tches,  who  have  taken  refuge  in  the  underground  cellars,  the  little 
:y  have  left,  have  even  the  ferocity  to  wound  them  with  sword-cuts,  as 
,ave  seen  in  several  instances. 

Nothing  new,  but  that  the  soldiers  give  themselves  up  to  robbery  and 
inder.  October  9th. 

Robbery  and  pillage  continue.  There  is  a  band  of  robbers  in  our 
:rict,  which  would  need  strong  guards  to  arrest  it.  October  nth. 

The  Emperor  is  exceedingly  displeased  that,  in  spite  of  the  strict 
!ers  to  stop  pillage,  bands  of  marauders  from  the  guards  are  continually 
.irning  to  the  Kremlin.  In  the  Old  Guards,  the  disorder  and  pillaging 
re  been  more  violent  than  ever  last  night  and  to-day.  The  Emperor 
b,  with  regret,  that  the  picked  soldiers,  appointed  to  guard  his  person, 
p  should  set  an  example  to  the  rest,  are  losing  discipline  to  such  a 
i;ree  as  to  break  into  the  cellars  and  stores  prepared  for  the  army, 
hers  are  so  degraded  that  they  refuse  to  obey  sentinels  and  officers  on 
ird,  abuse  them,  and  strike  them. 


948  WARANDPEACE 

‘The  chief  marshal  of  the  palace  complains  bitterly  that,  in  spit )(; 
repeated  prohibitions,  the  soldiers  continue  to  commit  nuisances  in  all  J 
courtyards,  and  even  before  the  Emperor’s  own  windows.’ 

The  army,  like  a  herd  of  cattle  run  wild,  and  trampling  underfoot  ie 
fodder  that  might  have  saved  them  from  starvation,  was  falling  to  pits, 
and  getting  nearer  to  its  ruin  with  every  day  it  remained  in  Moscov 

But  it  did  not  move. 

It  only  started  running  when  it  was  seized  by  panic  fear  at  the  cap  e 
of  a  transport  on  the  Smolensk  road  and  the  battle  of  Tarutino.  The  n>s 
of  the  battle  of  Tarutino  reached  Napoleon  unexpectedly  in  the  mice 
of  a  review,  and  aroused  in  him — so  Thiers  tells  us — a  desire  to  puili 
the  Russians,  and  he  gave  the  order  for  departure  that  all  the  army  s 
clamouring  for. 

In  their  flight  from  Moscow,  the  soldiers  carried  with  them  all  e 
plunder  they  had  collected.  Napoleon,  too,  carried  off  his  own  priie 
tresor.  Seeing  the  great  train  of  waggons,  loaded  with  the  booty  of  e 
army,  Napoleon  was  alarmed  (as  Thiers  tells  us).  But  with  his  militv 
experience,  he  did  not  order  all  unnecessary  waggons  of  goods  toe 
burnt,  as  he  had  done  with  a  marshal’s  baggage  on  the  way  to  Mosc. 
He  gazed  at  those  carts  and  carriages,  filled  with  soldiers,  and  said  ft 
it  was  very  well,  that  those  conveyances  would  come  in  useful  for  j- 
visions,  the  sick,  and  the  wounded. 

The  plight  of  the  army  was  like  the  plight  of  a  wounded  beast,  tt 
feels  its  death  at  hand,  and  knows  not  what  it  is  doing.  Studying  e 
intricate  manoeuvres  and  schemes  of  Napoleon  and  his  army  from  e 
time  of  entering  Moscow  up  to  the  time  of  the  destruction  of  that  ary 
is  much  like  watching  the  death  struggles  and  convulsions  of  a  bet 
mortally  wounded.  Very  often  the  wounded  creature,  hearing  a  s|, 
rushes  to  meet  the  hunter’s  shot,  runs  forward  and  back  again,  and  it: I 
hastens  its  end.  Napoleon  under  the  pressure  of  his  army  did  likew 
Panic-stricken  at  the  rumour  of  the  battle  of  Tarutino,  like  a  wild  be; 
the  army  made  a  rush  towards  the  shot,  reached  the  hunter,  and  ran  b;; 
again;  and  at  last,  like  every  wild  creature  took  the  old  familiar  tra 
that  was  the  worst  and  most  disastrous  way  for  it. 

Napoleon  is  represented  to  us  as  the  leader  in  all  this  movement,  ji 
as  the  figurehead  in  the  prow  of  a  ship  to  the  savage  seems  the  force  til 
guides  the  ship  on  its  course.  Napoleon  in  his  activity  all  this  time  vt 
like  a  child,  sitting  in  a  carriage,  pulling  the  straps  within  it,  and  fair 
ing  he  is  moving  it  along. 


XI 

Early  in  the  morning  of  the  6th  of  October,  Pierre  came  out  of  the  sb 
and  when  he  went  back,  he  stood  in  the  doorway,  playing  with  the  lc 
bandy-legged,  purplish-grey  dog,  that  jumped  about  him.  This  dog  li\ 
in  their  shed,  sleeping  with  Karataev,  though  it  sometimes  went  off  on 


WARANDPEACE  949 

crn  account  into  the  town,  and  came  back  again.  It  had  probably  never 
Ilonged  to  any  one,  and  now  it  had  no  master,  and  no  name.  The 
lench  called  it  Azor;  the  soldier  who  told  stories  called  it  Femgalka; 
Iirataev  called  it  ‘Grey-coat,’  and  sometimes  ‘Floppy.’  The  lack  of  a 
rister,  of  a  name,  of  any  particular  breed,  and  even  of  a  definite  colour, 
1  no  means  troubled  the  purplish-grey  dog.  Its  fluffy  tail  stood  up  firm 
ad  round  like  a  plume;  its  bandy  legs  served  it  so  well  that  often,  as 
tDUgh  disdaining  to  use  all  four,  it  would  hold  one  hind-leg  gracefully 
i];,  and  run  very  quickly  and  smartly  on  three  paws.  Everything  was  a 
surce  of  satisfaction  to  it.  At  one  moment,  it  was  barking  with  joy,  then 
i  would  bask  in  the  sun,  with  a  dreamy  and  thoughtful  air,  then  it 
vuld  frolic  about,  playing  with  a  chip  or  a  straw. 

Pierre’s  attire  now  consisted  of  a  dirty,  tattered  shirt,  the  sole  relic  left 
r  his  previous  wardrobe,  a  pair  of  soldier’s  drawers,  tied  with  string 
rund  the  ankles  by  Karataev’s  advice,  for  the  sake  of  warmth,  a  full 
[asant’s  coat  and  a  peasant’s  cap.  Physically  Pierre  had  changed  greatly 
cring  this  period.  He  no  longer  seemed  stout,  though  he  still  had  that 
bk  of  solidity  and  strength  that  was  characteristic  of  the  Bezuhov 
f.nily.  The  lower  part  of  his  face  was  overgrown  with  beard  and  mous- 
t:hes;  his  long,  tangled  hair,  swarming  with  lice,  formed  a  mat  of  curls 
c  his  head.  His  eyes  had  a  look  of  firmness,  calm,  and  alert  readiness, 
sch  as  had  never  been  seen  in  Pierre’s  face  before.  All  his  old  slackness, 
\iich  had  shown  even  in  his  eyes,  was  replaced  now  by  a  vigorous,  alert 
bk  of  readiness  for  action  and  for  resistance,  His  feet  were  bare. 

Pierre  looked  over  the  meadow,  across  which  waggons  and  men  on 
Irseback  were  moving  that  morning,  then  far  away  beyond  the  river, 
ten  at  the  dog,  who  was  pretending  to  be  meaning  to  bite  him  in  earnest, 
ten  at  his  bare  feet,  which  he  shifted  with  pleasure  from  one  position  to 
i  other,  moving  the  dirty,  thick,  big  toes.  And  every  time  he  looked  at 
b  bare  feet,  a  smile  of  eager  self-satisfaction  flitted  across  his  face, 
be  sight  of  those  bare  feet  reminded  him  of  all  he  had  passed  through 
;d  learned  during  this  time;  and  the  thought  of  that  was  sweet  to  him. 

The  weather  had  for  several  days  been  still  and  clear,  with  light  frosts 
i  the  mornings — the  so-called  ‘old  granny’s  summer.’ 

It  was  warm  out  of  doors  in  the  sunshine,  and  that  warmth  was  par- 
t  ularly  pleasant,  with  the  bracing  freshness  of  the  morning  frost  still 
i  the  air. 

Over  everything,  over  all  objects  near  and  far,  lay  that  magical,  crystal- 
<;ar  brightness,  which  is  only  seen  at  that  time  in  the  autumn.  In  the 
(stance  could  be  seen  the  Sparrow  Plills,  with  the  village,  the  church, 
;  d  the  great  white  house.  And  the  leafless  trees,  and  the  sand  and  the 
:)nes  and  roofs  of  the  houses,  the  green  spire  of  the  church,  and  the 
<  gles  of  the  white  house  in  the  distance,  all  stood  out  in  the  most  delicate 
( tlines  with  unnatural  distinctness  in  the  limpid  air.  Close  at  hand  stood 
ie  familiar  ruins  of  a  half-burnt  mansion,  occupied  by  French  soldiers, 
'  th  lilac  bushes  still  dark-green  by  the  fence.  And  even  this  charred  and 


95°  WARANDPEACE 

ruined  house,  which  looked  revoltingly  hideous  in  bad  weather,  had 

sort  of  soothing  comeliness  in  the  clear,  still  brightness. 

A  French  corporal,  in  a  smoking-cap,  with  his  coat  comfortably  u 
buttoned,  came  round  the  corner  of  the  shed,  with  a  short  pipe  betwe 
his  teeth,  and  with  a  friendly  wink,  approached  Pierre. 

‘What  sunshine,  hein,  M.  Kiril ? ’  (This  was  what  all  the  French  sc 
diers  called  Pierre.)  ‘One  would  say  it  was  spring.’  And  the  corpoi 
leaned  against  the  door,  and  offered  Pierre  his  pipe,  though  he  was  £ 
ways  offering  it,  and  Pierre  always  declined  it. 

‘If  one  were  marching  in  weather  like  this,’  he  began. 

Pierre  questioned  him  what  he  had  heard  of  the  departure  of  t 
French,  and  the  corporal  told  him  that  almost  all  the  troops  were  settii 
out,  and  that  to-day  instructions  were  expected  in  regard  to  the  prisonei 
In  the  shed  in  which  Pierre  was,  one  of  the  Russian  soldiers,  Sokolov,  w 
dangerously  ill,  and  Pierre  told  the  corporal  that  something  ought  to 
done  about  this  soldier.  The  corporal  said  that  Pierre  might  set  his  mil 
at  rest,  that  they  had  both  travelling  and  stationary  hospitals  for  su« 
cases,  that  instructions  would  be  given  in  regard  to  the  sick,  and  that 
fact  every  possible  contingency  was  provided  for  by  the  authoritic 

‘And  then,  M.  Kiril,  you  have  only  to  say  a  word  to  the  captain,  yi 
know.  Oh,  he  is  a  man  who  never  forgets  anything.  Speak  to  the  capta 
when  he  makes  his  round;  he  will  do  anything  for  you.’ 

The  captain  of  whom  the  corporal  spoke  used  often  to  have  long  co 
versations  with  Pierre,  and  did  him  all  kinds  of  favours. 

‘  “You  see,  St.  Thomas,”  he  said  to  me  the  other  day,  “Kiril  is 
man  of  education,  who  speaks  French;  he  is  a  Russian  lord  who  has  h; 
troubles,  but  he  is  a  man.  And  he  understands  ...  If  he  wants  an 
thing,  let  him  tell  me,  he  shall  not  meet  with  a  refusal.  When  one  h 
studied,  one  likes  education,  you  see,  and  well-bred  people.”  It’s  for  yo 
own  sake  I  tell  you  that,  M.  Kiril.  In  the  affair  that  happened  the  oth 
day,  if  it  hadn’t  been  for  you,  things  would  have  ended  badly.’ 

(The  corporal  was  alluding  to  a  fight  a  few  days  before  between  tj 
prisoners  and  the  French  soldiers,  in  which  Pierre  had  succeeded 
pacifying  his  companions.)  After  chatting  a  little  time  longer  the  corpoi 
went  away. 

Several  of  the  prisoners  had  heard  Pierre  talking  to  the  corporal,  a 
they  came  up  immediately  to  ask  what  the  latter  had  said.  While  Piei 
was  telling  his  companions  what  the  corporal  had  said  about  setting  < 
from  Moscow,  a  thin,  sallow,  ragged  French  soldier  came  up  to  the  do 
of  the  shed.  With  a  shy  and  rapid  gesture  he  put  his  fingers  to  his  for 
head  by  way  of  a  salute,  and  addressing  Pierre,  asked  him  if  the  soldi', 
Platoche,  who  was  making  a  shirt  for  him,  were  in  this  shed. 

The  French  soldiers  had  been  provided  with  linen  and  leather  a  we. 
previously,  and  had  given  out  the  materials  to  the  Russian  prisoners  • 
make  them  boots  and  shirts. 

‘It’s  ready,  darling,  it’s  ready!  ’  said  Karataev,  coming  out  with  a  car 
fully  folded  shirt.  On  account  of  the  heat  and  for  greater  convenience  i 


WARANDPEACE  951 

working,  Karataev  was  wearing  nothing  but  a  pair  of  drawers  and  a 
attered  shirt,  as  black  as  the  earth.  He  had  tied  a  wisp  of  bast  round  his 
air,  as  workmen  do,  and  his  round  face  looked  rounder  and  more 
leasing  than  ever. 

‘Punctuality  is  own  brother  to  good  business.  I  said  Friday,  and  so  I 
ave  done  it,’  said  Platon,  smiling  and  displaying  the  shirt  he  had  made. 

The  Frenchman  looked  about  him  uneasily,  and  as  though  overcoming 
ome  hesitation,  rapidly  slipped  off  his  uniform  and  put  on  the  shirt, 
finder  his  uniform  he  had  no  shirt,  but  a  long,  greasy,  flowered  silk  waist- 
oat  next  his  bare,  yellow,  thin  body.  The  Frenchman  was  evidently 
fraid  that  the  prisoners,  who  were  looking  at  him,  would  laugh  at  him, 
nd  he  made  haste  to  put  his  head  through  the  shirt.  None  of  the  pris- 
ners  said  a  word.  ‘To  be  sure,  it  fits  well,’  Platon  observed,  pulling  the 
hirt  down.  The  Frenchman,  after  putting  his  head  and  arms  through,  , 
ooked  down  at  the  shirt,  and  examined  the  stitching  without  lifting  his 
yes. 

‘Well,  darling,  this  isn’t  a  tailor’s,  you  know,  and  I  had  no  proper 
ewing  materials,  and  there’s  a  saying  without  the  right  tool  you  can’t 
ven  kill  a  louse  properly,’  said  Karataev,  still  admiring  his  own  handi- 
vork. 

‘Very  good,  thanks;  but  you  must  have  some  stuff  left  .  .  .’  said  the 
Frenchman. 

‘It  will  be  more  comfortable  as  it  wears  to  your  body,’  said  Karataev, 
;till  admiring  his  work.  ‘There,  you’ll  be  nice  and  comfortable.’ 

‘Thanks,  thanks,  old  fellow;  but  what  is  left  .  .  .  ?’  repeated  the 
Frenchman,  giving  Karataev  a  paper  note.  ‘Give  me  the  pieces  that 
are  over.’ 

Pierre  saw  that  Platon  did  not  want  to  understand  what  the  Frenchman 
said,  and  he  looked  on  without  interfering.  Karataev  thanked  him  for  the 
rouble  and  went  on  admiring  his  own  work.  The  Frenchman  persisted  in 
asking  for  what  was  left,  and  asked  Pierre  to  translate  what  he  said. 

‘What  does  he  want  with  the  pieces?’  said  Karataev.  ‘They  would  have 
made  me  capital  leg  wrappers.  Oh  well,  God  bless  the  man.’ 

And,  looking  suddenly  crestfallen  and  melancholy,  Karataev  took  a 
bundle  of  remnants  out  of  his  bosom  and  gave  it  to  the  Frenchman  with¬ 
out  looking  at  him.  ‘Ach-ma!  ’  he  cried,  and  walked  away.  The  Frenchman 
looked  at  the  linen,  he  hesitated,  glanced  inquiringly  at  Pierre,  and  as 
though  Pierre’s  eyes  had  told  him  something: 

‘Here,  Platoche!’  he  cried  in  a  shrill  voice,  suddenly  blushing.  ‘Keep 
them  yourself,’  he  said,  and  giving  him  the  remnants,  he  turned  and 
went  out. 

‘There,  look’ee  now,’  said  Karataev,  shaking  his  head.  ‘They  say 
they’re  not  Christians,  but  they  have  souls  too.  It’s  true  what  the  old 
folks  used  to  say:  a  sweating  hand  is  an  open  hand,  but  a  dry  hand  is 
closefisted.  His  own  back’s  bare,  and  yet  he  has  given  me  this.’  Karataev 
paused  for  a  while,  smiling  dreamily  and  gazing  at  the  cuttings  of  linen. 


952  WARANDPEACE 

'But  first-rate  leg  binders  they’ll  make  me,  my  dear,’  he  added,  as  h 
went  back  into  the  shed. 

XII 

Four  weeks  had  passed  since  Pierre  had  been  taken  prisoner.  Althoug' 
the  French  had  offered  to  transfer  him  from  the  common  prisoners’  shei  1 
to  the  officers’,  he  had  remained  in  the  same  shed  as  at  first. 

In  Moscow,  wasted  by  fire  and  pillage,  Pierre  passed  through  hard 
ships  almost  up  to  the  extreme  limit  of  privation  that  a  man  can  endure 
But,  owing  to  his  vigorous  health  and  constitution,  of  which  he  hac 
hardly  been  aware  till  then ;  and  still  more,  owing  to  the  fact  that  thesf 
privations  came  upon  him  so  gradually  that  it  was  impossible  to  saj 
when  they  began,  he  was  able  to  support  his  position,  not  only  with  ease 
but  with  positive  gladness.  And  it  was  just  at  this  time  that  he  attained 
that  peace  and  content  with  himself,  for  which  he  had  always  striven  ir, 
vain  before.  For  long  years  of  his  life  he  had  been  seeking  in  various 
directions  for  that  peace,  that  harmony  with  himself,  which  had  struck 
him  so  much  in  the  soldiers  at  Borodino.  He  had  sought  for  it  in  philan¬ 
thropy,  in  freemasonry,  in  the  dissipations  of  society,  in  wine,  in  heroic 
feats  of  self-sacrifice,  in  his  romantic  love  for  Natasha;  he  had  sought  it 
by  the  path  of  thought;  and  all  his  researches  and  all  his  efforts  had 
failed  him.  And  now  without  any  thought  of  his  own,  he  had  gained  that 
peace  and  that  harmony  with  himself  simply  through  the  horror  of  death, 
through  hardships,  through  what  he  had  seen  in  Karataev.  Those  fearful 
moments  that  he  had  lived  through  during  the  execution  had,  as  it  were, 
washed  for  ever  from  his  imagination  and  his  memory  the  disturbing  ideas 
and  feelings  that  had  once  seemed  to  him  so  important.  No  thought  came 
to  him  of  Russia,  of  the  war,  of  politics,  or  of  Napoleon.  It  seemed 
obvious  to  him  that  all  that  did  not  concern  him,  that  he  was  not  called 
upon  and  so  was  not  able  to  judge  of  all  that.  ‘Russia  and  summer  never 
do  well  together,’  he  repeated  Karataev’s  words,  and  those  words  soothed 
him  strangely.  His  project  of  killing  Napoleon,  and  his  calculations  of 
the  cabalistic  numbers,  and  of  the  beast  of  the  Apocalypse  struck  him 
now  as  incomprehensible  and  positively  ludicrous.  His  anger  with  his 
wife,  and  his  dread  of  his  name  being  disgraced  by  her,  seemed  to  him 
trivial  and  amusing.  What  business  of  his  was  it,  if  that  woman  chose  to 
lead  somewhere  away  from  him  the  life  that  suited  her  tastes?  What  did 
it  matter  to  any  one — least  of  all  to  him — whether  they  found  out  or 
not  that  their  prisoner’s  name  was  Count  Bezuhov? 

He  often  thought  now  of  his  conversation  with  Prince  Andrey,  and 
agreed  fully  with  his  friend,  though  he  put  a  somewhat  different  con¬ 
struction  on  his  meaning.  Prince  Andrey  had  said  and  thought  that 
happiness  is  only  negative,  but  he  had  said  this  with  a  shade  of  bitterness 
and  irony.  It  was  as  though  in  saying  this  he  had  expressed  another 
thought — that  all  the  strivings  towards  positive  happiness,  that  are 
innate  in  us,  were  only  given  us  for  our  torment.  But  Pierre  recognised 


WAR  AND  PEACE  953 

the  truth  of  the  main  idea  with  no  such  undercurrent  of  feeling.  The 
absence  of  suffering,  the  satisfaction  of  needs,  and  following  upon  that, 
freedom  in  the  choice  of  occupation,  that  is,  of  one’s  manner  of  life, 
seemed  to  Pierre  the  highest  and  most  certain  happiness  of  man.  Only 
here  and  now  for  the  first  time  in  his  life  Pierre  fully  appreciated  the 
enjoyment  of  eating  when  he  was  hungry,  of  drinking  when  he  was 
thirsty,  of  sleep  when  he  was  sleepy,  of  warmth  when  he  was  cold,  of 
talking  to  a  fellow  creature  when  he  wanted  to  talk  and  to  hear  men’s 
voices.  The  satisfaction  of  his  needs — good  food,  cleanliness,  freedom — 
seemed  to  Pierre  now  that  he  was  deprived  of  them  to  be  perfect  happi¬ 
ness;  and  the  choice  of  his  occupation,  that  is,  of  his  manner  of  life  now 
that  that  choice  was  so  limited,  seemed  to  him  such  an  easy  matter  that 
he  forgot  that  a  superfluity  of  the  conveniences  of  life  destroys  all  happi¬ 
ness  in  satisfying  the  physical  needs,  while  a  great  freedom  in  the  choice 
of  occupation,  that  freedom  which  education,  wealth,  and  position  in 
society  had  given  him,  makes  the  choice  of  occupations  exceedingly 
difficult,  and  destroys  the  very  desire  and  possibility  of  occupation. 

All  Pierre’s  dreams  now  turned  to  the  time  when  he  would  be  free.  And 
yet,  in  all  his  later  life,  Pierre  thought  and  spoke  with  enthusiasm  of  that 
month  of  imprisonment,  of  those  intense  and  joyful  sensations  that  could 
never  be  recalled,  and  above  all  of  that  full,  spiritual  peace,  of  that 
perfect,  inward  freedom,  of  which  he  had  only  experience  at  that  period. 

On  the  first  day,  when,  getting  up  early  in  the  morning,  he  came  out 
of  the  shed  into  the  dawn,  and  saw  the  cupolas  and  the  crosses  of  the  New 
Monastery  of  the  Virgin,  all  still  in  darkness,  saw  the  hoar  frost  on  the 
long  grass,  saw  the  slopes  of  the  Sparrow  Hills  and  the  wood-clad  banks 
of  the  encircling  river  vanishing  into  the  purple  distance,  when  he  felt  the 
contact  of  the  fresh  air  and  heard  the  sounds  of  the  rooks  flying  out  of 
Moscow  across  the  fields,  and  when  flashes  of  light  suddenly  gleamed  out 
of  the  east  and  the  sun’s  rim  floated  triumphantly  up  from  behind  a 
cloud,  and  cupolas  and  crosses  and  hoar  frost  and  the  horizon  and  the 
river  were  all  sparkling  in  the  glad  light,  Pierre  felt  a  new  feeling  of  joy 
and  vigour  in  life  such  as  he  had  never  experienced  before. 

And  that  feeling  had  not  left  him  during  the  whole  period  of  his  im¬ 
prisonment,  but  on  the  contrary  had  gone  on  growing  in  him  as  the 
hardships  of  his  position  increased. 

That  feeling — of  being  ready  for  anything,  of  moral  alertness — was 
strengthened  in  Pierre  by  the  high  opinion  in  which  he  began  to  be  held 
by  his  companions  very  soon  after  he  entered  the  shed.  His  knowledge 
of  languages,  the  respect  shown  him  by  the  French,  the  good-nature 
with  which  he  gave  away  anything  he  was  asked  for  (he  received  the 
allowance  of  three  roubles  a  week,  given  to  officers  among  the  prisoners), 
the  strength  he  showed  in  driving  nails  into  the  wall,  the  gentleness  of  his 
behaviour  to  his  companions,  and  his  capacity — which  seemed  to  him 
mysterious — of  sitting  stockstill  doing  nothing  and  plunged  in  thought 
all  made  him  seem  to  the  soldiers  a  rather  mysterious  creature  of  a  higher 
order.  The  very  peculiarities  that  in  the  society  he  had  previously  lived 


9S4  WAR  AND  PEACE 

in  had  been  a  source  of  embarrassment,  if  not  of  annoyance — his  strength, 
his  disdain  for  the  comforts  of  life,  his  absent-mindedness,  his  good¬ 
nature — here  among  these  men  gave  him  the  prestige  almost  of  a  hero. 
And  Pierre  felt  that  their  view  of  him  brought  its  duties. 


XIII 

On  the  night  of  the  6th  of  October,  the  march  of  the  retreating  French 
army  began:  kitchens  and  shanties  were  broken  up,  waggons  were 
packed,  and  troops  and  trains  of  baggage  began  moving. 

At  seven  o'clock  in  the  morning  an  escort  of  French  soldiers  in  march¬ 
ing  order,  in  shakoes,  with  guns,  knapsacks,  and  huge  sacks,  stood  before 
the  sheds  and  a  running  fire  of  eager  French  talk,  interspersed  with  oaths, 
was  kept  up  all  along  the  line. 

In  the  shed  they  were  ready,  dressed  and  belted  and  shod,  only  waiting 
for  the  word  of  command  to  come  out.  The  sick  soldier,  Sokolov,  pale 
and  thin,  with  blue  rings  round  his  eyes,  sat  alone  in  his  place,  without 
boots  or  out-of-door  clothes  on.  His  eyes,  that  looked  prominent  from 
the  thinness  of  his  face,  gazed  inquiringly  at  his  companions,  who  took 
no  notice  of  him,  and  he  uttered  low  groans  at  regular  intervals.  It  was 
evidently  not  so  much  his  sufferings — he  was  ill  with  dysentery — as  the 
dread  and  grief  of  being  left  alone  that  made  him  groan. 

Pierre  was  shod  with  a  pair  of  slippers  that  Karataev  had  made  for 
him  out  of  the  leather  cover  of  a  tea-chest,  brought  him  by  a  French¬ 
man  for  soling  his  boots.  With  a  cord  tied  round  for  a  belt,  he  went  up  to 
the  sick  man,  and  squatted  on  his  heels  beside  him. 

‘Come,  Sokolov,  they  are  not  going  away  altogether,  you  know.  They 
have  a  hospital  here.  Very  likely  you  will  be  better  off  than  we  others,’ 
said  Pierre. 

‘O  Lord!  it  will  be  the  death  of  me!  O  Lord!’  the  soldier  groaned 
more  loudly. 

‘Well,  I  will  ask  them  again  in  a  minute,’  said  Pierre,  and  getting  up, 
he  went  to  the  door  of  the  shed.  While  Pierre  was  going  to  the  door,  the 
same  corporal,  who  had  on  the  previous  day  offered  Pierre  a  pipe,  came  i 
in  from  outside,  accompanied  by  two  soldiers.  Both  the  corporal  and 
the  soldiers  were  in  marching  order,  with  knapsacks  on  and  shakoes, 
with  straps  buttoned,  that  changed  their  familiar  faces. 

The  corporal  had  come  to  the  door  so  as  to  shut  it  in  accordance  with 
the  orders  given  him.  Before  getting  them  out,  he  had  to  count  over 
the  prisoners. 

‘Corporal,  what  is  to  be  done  with  the  sick  man?’  Pierre  was  begin¬ 
ning,  but  at  the  very  moment  that  he  spoke  the  words  he  doubted  whether  i 
it  were  the  corporal  he  knew  or  some  stranger — the  corporal  was  so 
unlike  himself  at  that  moment.  Moreover,  at  the  moment  Pierre  was : 
speaking,  the  roll  of  drums  was  suddenly  heard  on  both  sides.  The  cor¬ 
poral  scowled  at  Pierre’s  words,  and  uttering  a  meaningless  oath,  he  i 


WARANDPEACE  955 

ammed  the  door.  It  was  half-dark  now  in  the  shed;  the  drums  beat  a 
iarp  tattoo  on  both  sides,  drowning  the  sick  man’s  groans. 

‘Here  it  is!  ...  Here  it  is  again!’  Pierre  said  to  himself,  and  an  in- 
iluntary  shudder  ran  down  his  back.  In  the  changed  face  of  the  cor- 
!>ral,  in  the  sound  of  his  voice,  in  the  stimulating  and  deafening  din  of 
te  drums,  Pierre  recognised  that  mysterious,  unsympathetic  force  which 
ove  men,  against  their  will,  to  do  their  fellow-creatures  to  death;  that 
irce,  the  effect  of  which  he  had  seen  at  the  execution.  To  be  afraid,  to 
:/  and  avoid  that  force,  to  appeal  with  entreaties  or  with  exhortations 
the  men  who  were  serving  as  its  instruments,  was  useless.  That  Pierre 
ew  now.  One  could  but  wait  and  be  patient.  Pierre  did  not  go  near 
le  sick  man  again,  and  did  not  look  round  at  him.  He  stood  at  the  door 
the  shed  in  silence,  scowling. 

When  the  doors  of  the  shed  were  opened,  and  the  prisoners,  huddling 
:ainst  one  another  like  a  flock  of  sheep,  crowded  in  the  entry,  Pierre 
shed  in  front  of  them,  and  went  up  to  the  very  captain  who  was,  so 
2  corporal  had  declared,  ready  to  do  anything  for  him.  The  captain 
as  in  marching  trim,  and  from  his  face,  too,  there  looked  out  the  same 
Pierre  had  recognised  in  the  corporal’s  words  and  in  the  roll  of  the 
:ums. 

'Filez,  filez!’  the  captain  was  saying,  frowning  sternly,  and  looking 
i  the  prisoners  crowding  by  him. 

Pierre  knew  his  effort  would  be  in  vain,  yet  he  went  up  to  him. 

Well,  what  is  it?’  said  the  officer,  scanning  him  coldly,  as  though 
i  did  not  recognise  him.  Pierre  spoke  of  the  sick  prisoner. 

He  can  walk,  damn  him !  ’  said  the  captain. 

Filez,  filez!'  he  went  on,  without  looking  at  Pierre. 

Well,  no,  he  is  in  agony  .  .  .!’  Pierre  was  beginning. 

Voulez-vous  bien?1  .  .  .  shouted  the  captain,  scowling  malignantly. 
Dram-da-da-dam,  dam-dam,’  rattled  the  drums,  and  Pierre  knew  that 

I  mysterious  force  had  already  complete  possession  of  those  men,  and 

I I  to  say  anything  more  now  was  useless. 

The  officers  among  the  prisoners  were  separated  from  the  soldiers  and 
»ered  to  march  in  front. 

fhe  officers,  among  whom  was  Pierre,  were  thirty  in  number ;  the  sol- 
li  s  three  hundred. 

Tese  officers,  who  had  come  out  of  other  sheds,  were  all  strangers  to 
3rre,  and  much  better  dressed  than  he  was.  They  looked  at  him  in  his 
per  foot-gear  with  aloof  and  mistrustful  eyes.  Not  far  from  Pierre 
vked  a  stout  major,  with  a  fat,  sallow,  irascible  countenance.  He  was 
lr>sed  in  a  Kazan  gown,  girt  with  a  linen  band,  and  obviously  enjoyed 
general  respect  of  his  companion  prisoners.  He  held  his  tobacco- 
xch  in  one  hand  thrust  into  his  bosom;  with  the  other  he  pressed  the 
t  i  of  his  pipe.  This  major,  panting  and  puffing,  grumbled  angrily  at 
iv  y  one  for  pushing  against  him,  as  he  fancied,  and  for  hurrying  when 
h  e  was  no  need  of  hurry,  and  for  wondering  when  there  was  nothing 
o  'onder  at.  Another,  a  thin,  little  officer,  addressed  remarks  to  every 


95  6  WARANDPEACE 

one,  making  conjectures  where  they  were  being  taken  now,  and  how  f 
they  would  go  that  day.  An  official,  in  felt  high  boots  and  a  commissar! 
uniform,  ran  from  side  to  side  to  get  a  good  view  of  the  results  of  t 
fire  in  Moscow,  making  loud  observations  on  what  was  burnt,  and  sayii 
what  this  or  that  district  of  the  town  was  as  it  came  into  view.  A  thi 
officer,  of  Polish  extraction  by  his  accent,  was  arguing  with  the  coi 
missariat  official,  trying  to  prove  to  him  that  he  was  mistaken  in  1 
identification  of  the  various  quarters  of  Moscow. 

‘Why  dispute?’  said  the  major  angrily.  ‘Whether  it’s  St.  Nikola  or  f 
Vlas,  it’s  no  matter.  You  see  that  it’s  all  burnt,  and  that’s  all  about 
.  .  .  Why  are  you  pushing,  isn’t  the  road  wide  enough?’  he  said,  angri 
addressing  a  man  who  had  passed  behind  him  and  had  not  push 
against  him  at  all. 

‘Aie,  aie,  aie,  what  have  they  been  doing?’  the  voices  of  the  prisone 
could  be  heard  crying  on  one  side  and  on  another  as  they  looked  at  t 
burnt  districts.  ‘Zamoskvoryetche,  too,  and  Zubovo,  and  in  the  Kreml 
.  .  .  Look,  there’s  not  half  left.  Why,  didn’t  I  tell  you  all  Zamoskv< 
yetche  was  gone,  and  so  it  is.’ 

“Well,  you  know  it  is  burnt,  well,  why  argue  about  it?’  said  the  maji 

Passing  through  Hamovniky  (one  of  the  few  quarters  of  Moscow  m 
had  not  been  burnt)  by  the  church,  the  whole  crowd  of  prisoners  he 
died  suddenly  on  one  side,  and  exclamations  of  horror  and  aversion  we 
heard. 

‘The  wretches!  The  heathens!  Yes;  a  dead  man;  a  dead  man;  it; 
.  .  .  They  have  smeared  it  with  something.’ 

Pierre,  too,  drew  near  the  church,  where  was  the  object  that  had  call! 
forth  these  exclamations,  and  he  dimly  discerned  something  leani; 
against  the  fence  of  the  church  enclosure.  From  the  words  of  his  co- 
panions,  who  saw  better  than  he  did,  he  learnt  that' it  was  the  dead  bor 
of  a  man,  propped  up  in  a  standing  posture  by  the  fence,  with  the  fi: 
smeared  with  soot. 

‘Move  on,  damn  you!  Go  on,  thirty  thousand  devils!’  .  .  .  Th: 
heard  the  escort  swearing,  and  the  French  soldiers,  with  fresh  vindictn- 
ness,  used  the  flat  sides  of  their  swords  to  drive  on  the  prisoners,  w) 
had  lingered  to  look  at  the  dead  man. 


XIV 

Through  the  lanes  of  Hamovniky,  the  prisoners  marched  alone  wi 
their  escort,  a  train  of  carts  and  waggons,  belonging  to  the  soldiers  f 
the  escort,  following  behind  them.  But  as  they  came  out  to  the  provisn 
shops  they  found  themselves  in  the  middle  of  a  huge  train  of  artiM 
moving  with  difficulty,  and  mixed  up  with  private  baggage-waggons; 

At  the  bridge  itself  the  whole  mass  halted,  waiting  for  the  foreim 
to  get  across.  From  the  bridge  the  prisoners  got  a  view  of  endless  tnjs 
of  baggage -waggon'  in  front  and  behind.  On  the  right,  where  the  Kalla 


WARANDPEACE  957 

iad  turns  by  Neskutchny  Gardens,  endless  files  of  troops  and  waggons 
fetched  away  into  the  distance.  These  were  the  troops  of  Beauharnais’s 
nrps,  which  had  set  off  before  all  the  rest.  Behind,  along  the  riverside, 
ad  across  Kamenny  bridge,  stretched  the  troops  and  transport  of  Ney’s 
crps. 

Davoust’s  troops,  to  which  the  prisoners  belonged,  were  crossing  by  the 
trimean  Ford,  and  part  had  already  entered  Kaluga  Street.  But  the  bag- 
j.ge-trains  were  so  long  that  the  last  waggons  of  Beauharnais’s  corps 
lid  not  yet  got  out  of  Moscow  into  Kaluga  Street,  while  the  vanguard 
i  Ney’s  troops  had  already  emerged  from  Bolshaya  Ordynka. 

After  crossing  the  Crimean  Ford,  the  prisoners  moved  a  few  steps  at 
;  time  and  then  halted,  and  again  moved  forward,  and  the  crowd  of 
hides  and  people  grew  greater  and  greater  on  all  sides.  After  taking  over 
,1  hour  in  crossing  the  few  hundred  steps  which  separates  the  bridge 
:om  Kaluga  Street  and  getting  as  far  as  the  square  where  the  Zamosk- 
'iryetche  streets  run  into  Kaluga  Street,  the  prisoners  were  jammed  in 
;dose  block  and  kept  standing  for  several  hours  at  the  cross-roads.  On 
;1  sides  there  was  an  unceasing  sound,  like  the  roar  of  the  sea,  of  rum- 
ling  wheels,  and  tramping  troops,  and  incessant  shouts  of  anger  and 
kid  abuse.  Pierre  stood  squeezed  against  the  wall  of  a  charred  house, 
I  tening  to  that  sound,  which  in  his  imagination  melted  off  into  the  roll 
(  drums. 

Several  of  the  Russian  officers  clambered  up  on  to  the  wall  of  the 
lirnt  house  by  which  Pierre  stood  so  as  to  get  a  better  view. 

‘The  crowds!  What  crowds!  .  .  .  They  have  even  loaded  goods  on 
|e  cannons!  Look  at  the  furs!  .  .  .’  they  kept  saying.  ‘I  say,  the  vermin, 
rey  have  been  pillaging.  .  .  .  Look  at  what  that  one  has  got  behind, 
i  the  cart.  .  .  .  Why,  they  are  holy  pictures,  by  God!  .  .  .  Those 
i|ust  be  Germans.  And  a  Russian  peasant;  by  God!  ...  Ah;  the 
’•etches!  .  .  .  See,  how  he’s  loaded;  he  can  hardly  move!  Look,  I 
jy,  chaises;  they  have  got  hold  of  them,  too!  .  .  .  See,  he  has  perched 
<  the  boxes.  Heavens!  .  .  .  They  have  started  fighting!  .  .  .  That’s 
i;ht;  hit  him  in  the  face!  We  shan’t  get  by  before  evening  like  this, 
ftok,  look!  .  .  .  Why,  that  must  surely  be  Napoleon  himself.  Do  you 
a  the  horses!  with  the  monograms  and  a  crown!  That’s  a  portable 
1  use.  He  has  dropped  his  sack,  and  doesn’t  see  it.  Fighting  again.  .  .  . 

.  woman  with  a  baby,  and  good-looking,  too!  Yes,  I  dare  say;  that’s 
ft  way  they  will  let  you  pass.  .  .  .  Look;  why,  there’s  no  end  to  it. 
lassian  wenches,  I  do  declare  they  are.  See  how  comfortable  they  are  in 
ft  carriages!’ 

Again  a  wave  of  general  curiosity,  as  at  the  church  in  Hamovniky, 
crried  all  the  prisoners  forward  towards  the  road,  and  Pierre,  thanks 
1  his  height,  saw  over  the  heads  of  the  others  what  attracted  thtf  pris- 
c|ers’  curiosity.  Three  carriages  were  blocked  between  caissons,  and 
i,  them  a  number  of  women  with  rouged  faces,  decked  out  in  flaring 
(Jiours,  were  sitting  closely  packed  together,  shouting  something  in  shrill 

fees- 


958  WAR  AND  PEACE 

From  the  moment  when  Pierre  had  recognised  the  manifestation  i 
that  mysterious  force,  nothing  seemed  to  him  strange  or  terrible;  not  tl 
corpse  with  its  face  blacked  for  a  jest,  nor  these  women  hurrying  awa 
nor  the  burnt  ruins  of  Moscow.  All  that  Pierre  saw  now  made  hardly  ar 
impression  on  him — as  though  his  soul,  in  preparation  for  a  hard  struj 
gle,  refused  to  receive  any  impression  that  might  weaken  it. 

The  carriages  of  women  drove  by.  They  were  followed  again  by  cart 
soldiers,  waggons,  soldiers,  carriages,  soldiers,  caissons,  and  again  so 
diers,  and  at  rare  intervals  women. 

Pierre  did  not  see  the  people  separately;  he  saw  only  their  mov 
ment. 

All  these  men  and  horses  seemed,  as  it  were,  driven  along  by  son 
unseen  force.  During  the  hour  in  which  Pierre  watched  them  they  a 
were  swept  out  of  the  different  streets  with  the  same  one  desire  to  gi 
on  as  quickly  as  possible.  All  of  them,  alike  hindered  by  the  rest,  bega1 
to  get  angry  and  to  light.  The  same  oaths  were  bandied  to  and  fro,  ar 
white  teeth  flashed,  and  every  frowning  face  wore  the  same  look  of  reel 
less  determination  and  cold  cruelty,  which  had  struck  Pierre  in  the  mori 
ing  in  the  corporal’s  face,  while  the  drums  were  beating. 

It  was  almost  evening  when  the  officer  in  command  of  their  escort  ra 
lied  his  men,  and  with  shouts  and  oaths  forced  his  way  in  among  tl 
baggage-trains;  and  the  prisoners,  surrounded  on  all  sides,  came  out ' 
the  Kaluga  road. 

They  marched  very  quickly  without  pausing,  and  only  halted  wht 
the  sun  was  setting.  The  baggage-carts  were  moved  up  close  to  one  a; 
other,  and  the  men  began  to  prepare  for  the  night.  Every  one  seemed  il 
humoured  and  dissatisfied.  Oaths,  angry  shouts,  and  fighting  could  1 
heard  on  ail  sides  till  a  late  hour.  A  carriage,  which  had  been  followir 
the  escort,  had  driven  into  one  of  their  carts  and  run  a  shaft  into  i 
Several  soldiers  ran  up  to  the  cart  from  different  sides;  some  hit  tl 
carriage  horses  on  the  head  as  they  turned  them  round,  others  were  figh 
ing  among  themselves,  and  Pierre  saw  one  German  seriously  wound* 
by  a  blow  from  the  flat  side  of  a  sword  on  his  head. 

It  seemed  as.  though  now  when  they  had  come  to  a  standstill  in  tl 
midst  of  the  open  country,  in  the  cold  twilight  of  the  autumn  evenin 
all  these  men  were  experiencing  the  same  feeling  of  unpleasant  awakei 
ing  from  the  hurry  and  eager  impulse  forward  that  had  carried  them  a 
away  at  setting  off.  Now  standing  still,  all  as  it  were  grasped  that  the 
knew  not  where  they  were  going,  and  that  there  was  much  pain  and  har< 
ship  in  store  for  them  on  the  journey. 

At  this  halting-place,  the  prisoners  were  even  more  roughly  treated  b 
their  escort  than  at  starting.  They  were  for  the  first  time  given  horsi 
flesh  to  eat. 

In  every  one  of  the  escort,  from  the  officers  to  the  lowest  soldie 
could  be  seen  a  sort  of  personal  spite  against  every  one  of  the  prisoner 
in  surprising  contrast  with  the  friendly  relations  that  had  existed  b! 
tween  them  before. 


WARANDPEACE  959 

This  spite  was  increased  when,  on  counting  over  the  prisoners,  it  was 
liscovered  that  in  the  bustle  of  getting  out  of  Moscow  one  Russian  sol- 
lier  had  managed  to  run  away  by  pretending  to  be  seized  with  colic, 
’ierre  had  seen  a  Frenchman  beat  a  Russian  soldier  unmercifully  for 
loving  too  far  from  the  road,  and  heard  the  captain,  who  had  been  his 
riend,  reprimanding  an  under-officer  for  the  escape  of  the  prisoner,  and 
hreatening  him  with  court-martial.  On  the  under-officer’s  urging  that 
he  prisoner  was  ill  and  could  not  walk,  the  officer  said  that  their  orders 
/ere  to  shoot  those  who  should  lag  behind.  Pierre (felt  that  that  fatal  force 
/hich  had  crushed  him  at  the  execution,  and  had  been  imperceptible 
uring  his  imprisonment,  had  now  again  the  mastery  of  his  existence, 
le  was  afraid;  but  he  felt,  too,  that  as  that  fatal  force  strove  to  crush 
im,  there  was  growing  up  in  his  soul  and  gathering  strength  a  force  of 
fe  that  was  independent  of  it.  Pierre  supped  on  soup  made  of  rye  flour 
.nd  horseflesh,  and  talked  a  little  with  his  companions. 

Neither  Pierre  nor  any  of  his  companions  talked  of  what  they  had 
een  in  Moscow,  nor  of  the  harsh  treatment  they  received  from  the  French, 
or  of  the  orders  to  shoot  them,  which  had  been  announced  to  them.  As 
hough  in  reaction  against  their  more  depressing  position,  all  were  par- 
icularly  gay  and  lively.  They  talked  of  personal  reminiscences,  of  amus- 
ag  incidents  they  had  seen  as  they  marched,  and  avoided  touching  on 
heir  present  position. 

The  sun  had  long  ago  set.  Stars  were  shining  brightly  here  and  there 
i  the  sky;  there  was  a  red  flush,  as  of  a  conflagration  on  the  horizon, 
/here  the  full  moon  was  rising,  and  the  vast,  red  ball  seemed  trembling 
trangely  in  the  grey  darkness.  It  became  quite  light.  The  evening  was 
ver,  but  the  night  had  not  yet  begun.  Pierre  left  his  new  companions 
nd  walked  between  the  camp-fires  to  the  other  side  of  the  road,  where 
e  had  been  told  that  the  common  prisoners  were  camping.  He  wanted  to 
ilk  to  them.  On  the  road  a  French  sentinel  stopped  him  and  bade  him 
o  back. 

Pierre  did  go  back,  but  not  to  the  camp-fire  where  his  companions 
ere,  but  to  an  unharnessed  waggon  where  there  was  nobody.  Tucking 
is  legs  up  under  him,  and  dropping  his  head,  he  sat  down  on  the  cold 
•ound  against  the  waggon  wheel,  and  sat  there  a  long  while  motionless, 
.linking.  More  than  an  hour  passed  by.  No  one  disturbed  Pierre.  Sud¬ 
denly  he  burst  into  such  a  loud  roar  of  his  fat,  good-humoured  laughter, 
lat  men  looked  round  on  every  side  in  astonishment  at  this  strange 
id  obviously  solitary  laughter.  ‘Ha,  ha,  ha!’  laughed  Tierre.  And  he 
Iked  aloud  to  himself.  ‘The  soldier  did  not  let  me  pass.  They  have 
ken  me — shut  me  up.  They  keep  me  prisoner.  Who  is  “me”?  Me? 
jfe — my  immortal  soul!  Pla.ha,  ha!  .  .  .  Ha,  ha,  ha!  .  .  .’ he  laughed, 
ith  the  tears  starting  into  his  eyes. 

A  man  got  up  and  came  to  see  what  this  strange,  big  man  was  laugh- 
g  at  all  by  himself.  Pierre  left  off  laughing,  got  up,  walked  away  from 
e  inquisitive  intruder,  and  looked  about  him. 

The  immense,  endless  bivouac,  wrhich  had  been  full  of  the  sound  of 


960  WAR  AND  PEACE 

crackling  fires  and  men  talking,  had  sunk  to  rest;  the  red  camp-fire 
burnt  low  and  dim.  High  overhead  in  the  lucid  sky  stood  the  full  mooi 
Forests  and  fields,  that  before  could  not  be  seen  beyond  the  camp,  carr 
into  view  now  in  the  distance.  And  beyond  those  fields  and  forests  coul 
be  seen  the  bright,  shifting,  alluring,  boundless  distance.  Pierre  glance 
at  the  sky,  at  the  far-away,  twinkling  stars.  ‘And  all  that  is  mine,  an 
all  that  is  in  me,  and  all  that  is  II’  thought  Pierre.  ‘And  all  this  the 
caught  and  shut  up  in  a  shed  closed  in  with  boards!  ’  He  smiled  and  wer 
to  lie  down  to  sleep  beside  his  companions. 


XV 

Early  in  October  another  messenger  came  to  Kutuzov  from  Napoleo 
with  overtures  for  peace  and  a  letter,  falsely  professing  to  come  froi 
Moscow,  though  Napoleon  was  in  fact  not  far  ahead  of  Kutuzov  on  th 
old  Kaluga  road.  Kutuzov  answered  this  letter  as  he  had  done  tb 
first  one,  brought  him  by  Lauriston ;  he  said  that  there  could  be  no  que; 
tion  of  peace. 

Soon  after  this  Dorohov’s  irregulars,  which  were  moving  on  the  left  c 
Tarutino,  sent  a  report  that  French  troops  had  appeared  at  Fominsko* 
that  these  troops  were  of  Broussier’s  division,  and  that  that  divisior 
being  separate  from  the  rest  of  the  army,  might  easily  be  cut  to  piece; 
The  soldiers  and  officers  again  clamoured  for  action.  The  staff  general; 
elated  by  the  easy  victory  of  Tarutino,  urged  on  Kutuzov  that  Dorohov' 
suggestion  should  be  acted  upon. 

Kutuzov  did  not  consider  any  action  necessary.  A  middle  course,  a 
was  inevitable,  was  adopted;  a  small  detachment  was  sent  to  Fominsko 
to  attack  Broussier. 

By  strange  chance  this  appointment,  a  most  difficult  and  most  irr 
portant  one,  as  it  turned  out  to  be  later,  v/as  given  to  Dohturov,  tha 
modest  little  general,  whom  no  one  has  depicted  to  us  making  plans  c 
campaign,  dashing  at  the  head  of  regiments,  dropping  crosses  about  bal 
teries,  or  doing  anything  of  the  kind;  whom  people  looked  on  and  spok 
of  as  lacking  decision  and  penetration,  though  all  through  the  Russia 
wars  with  the  French,  from  Austerlitz  to  the  year  1813,  we  always  fin' 
him  in  command  where  the  position  is  particularly  difficult.  At  Auster 
litz  he  was  the  last  to  remain  at  the  ford  of  Augest,  rallying  the  regi 
ments,  saving  what  he  could,  when  all  was  flight  and  ruin,  and  not  , 
single  other  general  was  to  be  found  in  the  rearguard.  When  ill  wit; 
fever,  he  marched  with  twenty  thousand  men  to  Smolensk  to  defend  th 
town  against  the  whole  of  Napoleon’s  army.  In  Smolensk  he  had  onl; 
just  fallen  asleep  at  the  Malahovsky  gates  in  a  paroxysm  of  fever  whe 
he  was  waked  by  the  cannonade  of  Smolensk,  and  Smolensk  held  out 
whole  day.  At  Borodino  when  Bagration  was  killed,  and  nine-tenths  0 
the  men  of  our  left  flank  had  been  slain,  and  the  fire  of  all  the  Frenc 
artillery  was  turned  upon  it,  Kutuzov  made  haste  to  recall  another  gen 


WAR  AND  PEACE  961 

al  he  had  sent  by  mistake,  and  sent  there  no  other  than  Dohturov,  who 
as  said  to  be  lacking  in  decision  and  penetration.  And  unpretentious 
ttle  Dohurov  went  there,  and  Borodino  became  the  greatest  glory  of 
le  Russian  arms.  And  many  of  its  heroes  have  been  celebrated  in  prose 
pd  verse,  but  of  Dohturov  hardly  a  word.  Again  Dohturov  was  sent  to 
ominskoe,  and  from  there  to  Maley  Yaroslavets,  the  place  where  the 
st  battle  was  fought  with  the  French,  and  where  it  is  plain  the  final 
sstruction  of  the  French  army  really  begun.  And  again  many  heroes 
id  men  of  genius  are  described  to  us  in  accounts  of  this  period  of  the 
impaign,  but  of  Dohturov  nothing  is  said,  or  but  few  words  of  dubious 
-aise.  This  silence  in  regard  to  Dohturov  is  the  plainest  testimony  to 
Is  merits. 

It  is  natural  that  a  man  who  does  not  understand  the  working  of  a 
lachine  should  suppose,  when  he  sees  it  in  action,  that  a  shaving  that 
is  fallen  into  it  by  chance,  and  flaps  about  in  it,  hindering  its  progress, 
the  most  important  part  of  the  mechanism.  Any  one  who  does  not  un- 
erstand  the  construction  of  the  machine  cannot  conceive  that  this  shav- 
ig  is  only  clogging  and  spoiling  it,  while  the  little  cog-wheel,  which  turns 
Uselessly,  is  one  of  the  most  essential  parts  of  the  machine. 

On  the  10th  of  October  Dohturov  had  marched  halfway  to  Fominskoe, 
hd  halted  at  the  village  of  Aristovo,  making  every  preparation  for  ex- 
btly  carrying  out  the  orders  given  him.  On  the  same  day  the  whole 
rench  army,  after  reaching  in  its  spasmodic  rush  as  far  as  Murat’s 
osition,  seemingly  with  the  object  of  giving  battle,  suddenly,  with  no 
iparent  cause,  turned  off  to  the  left  to  the  new  Kaluga  road,  and  began 
arching  into  Fominskoe,  where  Broussier  had  before  been  alone.  Doh- 
irov  had  under  his  command  at  the  time  only  Dorohov’s  troops  and  the 
vo  small  detachments  of  Figner  and  Seslavin. 

On  the  evening  of  the  nth  of  October,  Seslavin  came  to  the  general 
L  Aristovo  with  a  French  prisoner  of  the  Guards.  The  prisoner  said 
lat  the  troops  that  had  reached  Fominskoe  that  day  were  the  advance 
iard  of  the  whole  army;  that  Napoleon  was  with  them;  that  the  whole 
my  had  marched  out  of  Moscow  five  days  before.  The  same  evening 
house-serf  coming  from  Borovsk  brought  word  that  he  had  seen  an  im- 
ense  army  entering  that  town.  Dorohov’s  Cossacks  reported  that  they 
id  seen  the  French  guards  marching  along  the  road  to  Borovsk.  From  all 
lis  it  was  evident  that  where  they  had  expected  to  find  one  division  there 
as  now  the  whole  army  of  the  French,  marching  from  Moscow  in  an 
lexpected  direction — along  the  old  Kaluga  road.  Dohturov  was  un- 
illing  to  take  any  action,  as  it  was  not  clear  to  him  now  where  his  duty 
y.  He  had  received  instructions  to  attack  Fominskoe.  But  there  had 
iien  been  only  Broussier  at  Fominskoe,  and  now  the  w'hole  French  army 
as  there.  Yermolov  wanted  to  act  on  his  own  judgment,  but  Dohturov 
sisted  that  he  must  have  instructions  from  his  highness  the  commander- 
-chief.  It  was  resolved  to  send  a  report  to  the  staff. 

For  this  purpose  they  chose  a  capable  officer,  Bolhovitinov,  who  was 
take  a  written  report,  and  to  explain  the  whole  matter  verbally.  At 


963  WAR  AND  PEACE 

midnight  Bolhovitinov  received  his  despatch  and  his  verbal  instructions 
and  galloped  off  to  headquarters,  accompanied  by  a  Cossack  with  spar 
horses. 


XVI 

It  was  a  dark,  warm  autumn  night.  Rain  had  been  falling  for  the  las 
four  days.  Changing  horses  twice,  Bolhovitinov  galloped  in  an  hour  am 
a  half  thirty  versts  over  a  muddy,  slippery  road.  He  reached  Letashevki 
after  one  o’clock  in  the  night.  Dismounting  at  a  hut,  on  the  hurdli 
fence  of  which  was  the  inscription  ‘Headquarters  of  the  Staff,’  and  lettin; 
his  horse  go,  he  walked  into  the  dark  entry. 

‘The  general  on  duty  at  once!  Very  important!’  he  cried  to  som 
one,  who  jumped  up,  wheezing  in  the  darkness. 

‘His  honour  has  been  very  unwell  since  the  evening;  he  has  not  slep 
for  three  nights,’  an  orderly’s  voice  whispered,  interposing.  ‘You  mus 
wake  the  captain  first.’ 

‘Very  important  from  General  Dohturov,’  said  Bolhovitinov,  feeling  fo 
the  opened  door  and  going  in. 

The  orderly  went  in  before  him,  and  began  waking  some  one  up.  ‘You 
honour,  your  honour,  a  courier.’ 

‘What?  what?  from  whom?’  said  a  sleepy  voice. 

‘From  Dohturov  and  from  Alexey  Petrovitch.  Napoleon  is  at  Fomin 
skoe,’  said  Bolhovitinov,  not  seeing  the  speaker  in  the  darkness,  but  as 
suming  from  the  voice  that  it  was  not  Konovnitsyn. 

The  man  who  had  been  waked  yawned  and  stretched.  ‘I  don’t  want  t< 
wake  him,’  he  said,  fumbling  for  something.  ‘He’s  ill!  Perhaps  it’s  onh 
a  rumour.’ 

‘Here  is  the  report,’  said  Bolhovitinov.  ‘My  instructions  are  to  give  i 
at  once  to  the  general  on  duty.’ 

‘Wait  a  minute,  I’ll  strike  a  light.  What  do  you  do  with  things,  dami 
you!’  said  the  sleepy  voice  addressing  the  orderly.  The  speaker  wa: 
Shtcherbinin,  Konovnitsyn’s  adjutant.  ‘I  have  found  it,  I  have  found  it. 
he  added. 

The  orderly  struck  a  light,  Shtcherbinin  felt  for  a  candlestick. 

‘Ah,  the  nasty  beasts!  ’  he  said  with  disgust. 

By  the  light  of  the  sparks  in  the  tinderbox  Bolhovitinov  had  a  glimpsi 
of  Shtcherbinin’s  youthful  face,  and  in  a  corner  another  man  asleep 
This  was  Konovnitsyn. 

When  the  tinder  broke  first  into  a  blue  and  then  into  a  red  flame 
Shtcherbinin  lighted  a  tallow  candle — the  cockroaches  that  had  beei 
gnawing  it  ran  away  in  all  directions — and  looked  at  the  messenger 
Bolhovitinov  was  bespattered  all  over,  and  on  rubbing  his  face  with  hi: 
sleeve,  had  smudged  that  too  with  mud. 

‘But  who  sends  the  report?’  said  Shtcherbinin,  taking  the  packet. 

‘The  news  is  certain,’  said  Bolhovitinov.  ‘Prisoners  and  Cossacks  am 
spies,  all  tell  the  same  story.’ 


WARANDPEACE  963 

‘Well  there’s  no  help  for  it,  we  must  wake  him,’  said  Shtcherbinin, 
.etting  up  and  going  to  the  sleeping  man  who  wore  a  nightcap  and  was 
overed  up  with  a  military  cloak.  ‘Pyotr  Petrovich!’  he  said.  Konov- 
itsyn  did  not  stir.  ‘Wanted  at  headquarters!’  he  said  with  a  smile, 
nowing  these  words  would  be  sure  to  wake  him.  And  the  head  in  the 
ightcap  was  in  fact  lifted  at  once.  Konovnitsyn’s  strong,  handsome  face, 
pith  feverishly  swollen  cheeks,  still  wore  for  an  instant  a  far-away, 
reamy  look,  but  he  gave  a  sudden  start  and  his  face  resumed  its  cus- 
imary  expression  of  calmness  and  strength. 

‘Well,  what  is  it?  From  whom?’  he  asked  at  once,  but  with  no  haste, 
linking  at  the  light.  Hearing  what  the  officer  had  to  tell  him,  Konov- 
itsyn  broke  open  the  packet  and  read  it.  He  had  hardly  read  it  before 
e  dropped  his  feet  in  worsted  stockings  on  to  the  earth  floor  and  began 
utting  on  his  boots.  Then  he  took  off  the  nightcap,  and  combing  his 
air,  put  on  a  forage  cap. 

‘Did  you  get  here  quickly?  Let  us  go  to  his  highness.’ 

Konovnitsyn  understood  at  once  that  the  news  was  of  great  impor- 
mce,  and  that  they  must  lose  no  time.  As  to  whether  it  were  good  news 
r  bad,  he  had  no  opinion  and  did  not  even  put  the  question  to  himself, 
'hat  did  not  interest  him.  He  looked  at  the  whole  subject  of  the  war, 
ot  with  his  intellect,  not  with  his  reason,  but  with  something  different.  In 
is  heart  he  had  a  deep,  unaltered  conviction  that  all  would  be  well,  yet 
lat  he  ought  not  to  believe  in  this,  and  still  more  ought  not  to  say  so, 
ut  ought  simply  to  do  his  duty.  And  that  he  did  do,  giving  all  his  energies 
)  it. 

Pyotr  Petrovich  Konovnitsyn,  like  Dohturov,  is  simply  as  a  for- 
lality  included  in  the  list  of  the  so-called  heroes  of  1812  with  the  Bar- 
ays,  Raevskys,  Yermolovs,  Platovs  and  Miloradovitchs.  Like  Dohturov, 
e  had  the  reputation  of  being  a  man  of  very  limited  capacities  and  in- 
irmation;  and,  like  Dohturov,  he  never  proposed  plans  of  campaign, 
ut  was  always  to  be  found  in  the  most  difficult  position.  Ever  since  he 
id  been  appointed  the  general  on  duty,  he  had  slept  with  his  door  open, 
id  given  orders  to  be  waked  on  the  arrival  of  any  messenger.  In  battle 
a  was  always  under  fire,  so  that  Kutuzov  even  reproached  him  for  it, 
id  was  afraid  to  send  him  to  the  front.  Like  Dohturov,  he  was  one  of 
lose  inconspicuous  cogwheels,  which,  moving  without  creaking  or  rat¬ 
ing,  make  up  the  most  essential  part  of  the  machine. 

Coming  out  of  the  hut  into  the  damp,  dark  night,  Konovnitsyn  frowned, 
irtly  from  his  headache  getting  worse,  and  partly  from  the  disagreeable 
ought  that  occurred  to  him  of  the  stir  this  would  make  in  all  the  nest 
influential  persons  on  the  staff;  of  its  effect  on  Bennigsen  in  particular, 
ho  since  the  battle  of  Tarutino  had  been  at  daggers  drawn  with  Kutu- 
v;  of  the  suppositions  and  discussions  and  orders  and  counter-orders, 
id  the  presentiment  of  all  that  was  disagreeable  to  him,  though  he  knew 
to  be  inevitable. 

Toll,  to  whom  he  went  to  communicate  the  news,  did  in  fact  begin 
.  once  expounding  his  views  on  the  situation  to  the  general  who  shared 


964  WAR  AND  PEACE 

his  abode;  and  IConovnitsyn,  after  listening  in  weary  silence,  remindet 
him  that  they  must  go  to  his  highness. 


XVII 

Like  all  old  people,  Kutuzov  slept  little  at  night.  He  often  dropped  inti 
sudden  naps  during  the  daytime,  but  at  night  he  lay  on  his  bed  withou 
undressing,  and  generally  not  asleep  but  thinking. 

He  was  lying  like  that  now  on  his  bedstead,  his  huge,  heavy,  misshapei 
head  leaning  on  his  fat  hand.  He  was  thinking  with  his  one  eye  wide  open 
gazing  into  the  darkness. 

Since  Bennigsen,  who  was  in  correspondence  with  the  Tsar  and  hai 
more  weight  than  all  the  rest  of  the  staff,  had  avoided  him,  Kutuzov  wa 
more  at  ease  so  far  as  not  being  compelled  to  lead  his  soldiers  into  use 
less  offensive  operations.  The  lesson  of  Tarutino  and  the  day  before  th< 
battle,  a  memory  that  rankled  in  Kutuzov’s  mind,  must,  he  thought,  hav 
its  effect  on  them  too. 

‘They  ought  to  understand  that  we  can  but  lose  by  taking  the  offensive 
Time  and  patience,  these  are  my  champions!’  thought  Kutuzov.  H 
knew  the  apple  mutt  not  be  picked  while  it  was  green.  It  will  fall  of  itsel 
when  ripe,  but  if  you  pick  it  green,  you  spoil  the  apple  and  the  tree  and  se 
your  teeth  on  edge.  Like  an  experienced  hunter,  he  knew  the  beast  wa 
wounded,  wounded  as  only  the  whole  force  of  Russia  could  wound  it 
but  whether  to  death  or  not,  was  a  question  not  yet  solved.  Now  fronj 
the  sending  of  Lauriston  and  Bertemy,  and  from  the  reports  brought  b; 
the  Irregulars,  Kutuzov  was  almost  sure  that  the  wound  was  a  dead! 
one.  But  more  proof  was  wanted;  he  must  wait. 

‘They  want  to  run  and  look  how  they  have  wounded  him.  Wait  a  bit 
you  will  see.  Always  manoeuvres,  attacks,’  he  thought.  ‘What  for?  Any 
thing  to  distinguish  themselves.  As  though  there  were  any  fun  in  fight 
ing.  They  are  like  children  from  whom  you  can  never  get  a  sensible  view  o 
things  because  they  all  want  to  show  how  well  they  can  fight.  But  that’ 
not  the  point  now.  And  what  skilful  manoeuvres  all  these  fellows  propose 
They  think  that  when  they  have  thought  of  two  or  three  contingencie 
(he  recalled  the  general  plan  from  Petersburg)  that  they  have  though 
of  all  of  them.  And  there  is  no  limit  to  them!  ’ 

The  unanswered  question,  whether  the  wound  dealt  at  Borodino  wer 
mortal  or  not,  had  been  for  a  whole  month  hanging  over  Kutuzov’s  heac 
On  one  side,  the  French  had  taken  possession  of  Moscow.  On  the  othe 
side,  in  all  his  being,  Kutuzov  felt  beyond  all  doubt  that  the  terrible  blm 
for  which,  together  with  all  the  Russians,  he  had  strained  all  his  strengt 
must  have  been  mortal.  But  in  any  case  proofs  were  wanted,  and  he  ha> 
been  waiting  for  them  now  a  month,  and  as  time  went  on  he  grew  mor 
impatient.  As  he  lay  on  his  bed  through  sleepless  nights,  he  did  the  ver; 
thing  these  younger  generals  did,  the  very  thing  he  found  fault  with  i 
them.  He  imagined  all  possible  contingencies,  just  like  the  younger  gen 


WARANDPEACE  965 

ration,  but  with  this  difference  that  he  based  no  conclusion  on  these  sup^ 
iositions,  and  that  he  saw  these  contingencies  not  as  two  or  three,  buf 
s  thousands.  The  more  he  pondered,  the  more  of  them  he  saw.  He 
nagined  all  sorts  of  movements  of  Napoleon’s  army,  acting  as  a  whole  or 
a  part,  on  Petersburg,  against  him,  to  out-flank  him  (that  was  what  he 
/as  most  afraid  of),  and  also  the  possibility  that  Napoleon  would  fight 
gainst  him  with  his  own  weapon,  that  he  would  stay  on  in  Moscow  wait- 
ig  for  him  to  move.  Kutuzov  even  imagined  Napoleon’s  army  marching 
iack  to  Medyn  and  Yuhnov.  But  the  one  thing  he  could  not  foresee  was 
i?hat  happened— the  mad,  convulsive  stampede  of  Napoleon’s  army  dur- 
ng  the  first  eleven  days  of  its  march  from  Moscow — the  stampede  that 
rade  possible  what  Kutuzov  did  not  yet  dare  to  think  about,  the  com¬ 
plete  annihilation  of  the  French.  Dorohov’s  report  of  Broussier’s  division, 
he  news  brought  by  the  irregulars  of  the  miseries  of  Napoleon’s  army, 
umours  of  preparations  for  leaving  Moscow,  all  confirmed  the  supposi- 
ion  that  the  French  army  was  beaten  and  preparing  to  take  flight.  But 
11  this  was  merely  supposition,  that  seemed  of  weight  to  the  younger 
aen,  but  not  to  Kutuzov.  With  his  sixty  years’  experience  he  knew  how 
auch  weight  to  attach  to  rumours;  he  knew  how  ready  men  are  when 
hey  desire  anything  to  manipulate  all  evidence  so  as  to  confirm  what 
hey  desire;  and  he  knew  how  readily  in  that  case  they  let  everything  of 
n  opposite  significance  pass  unheeded.  And  the  more  Kutuzov  desired 
his  supposition  to  be  correct,  the  less  he  permitted  himself  to  believe  it. 
"his  question  absorbed  all  his  spiritual  energies.  All  the  rest  was  for  him 
he  mere  customary  performance  of  the  routine  of  life.  Such  a  customary 
lerformance  and  observance  of  routine  were  his  conversations  with  the 
taff-officers,  his  letters  to  Madame  de  Stael  that  he  wrote  from  Tarutino, 
lis  French  novels,  distribution  of  rewards,  correspondence  with  Peters- 
>urg,  and  so  on.  But  the  destruction  of  the  French,  which  he  alone  fore- 
aw,  was  the  one  absorbing  desire  of  his  heart. 

On  the  night  of  the  nth  of  October  he  lay  leaning  on  his  arm  and 
hinking  of  that. 

There  was  a  stir  in  the  next  room,  and  he  heard  the  steps  of  Toll, 
ionovnitsyn  and  Bolhovitinov. 

‘Hey,  who  is  there?  Come  in,  come  in!  Anything  new?’  the  commander- 
n-chief  called  to  them.  • 

While  a  footman  lighted  a  candle,  Toll  told  the  drift  of  the  news. 

‘Who  brought  it?’  asked  Kutuzov,  with  a  face  that  impressed  Toll 
vhen  the  candle  was  lighted  by  its  frigid  sternness. 

‘There  can  be  no  doubt  of  it,  your  highness.’ 

‘Call  him,  call  him  here!’ 

Kutuzov  sat  with  one  leg  out  of  bed  and  his  unwieldy,  corpulent  body 
>ropped  on  the  other  leg  bent  under  him.  He  screwed  up  his  one  seeing 
ye  to  get  a  better  view  of  the  messenger,  as  though  he  hoped  in  his  face  to 
ead  what  he  cared  to  know. 

‘Tell  me,  tell  me,  my  dear  fellow,’  he  said  to  Bolhovitinov,  in  his  low, 
ged  voice,  pulling  the  shirt  together  that  had  come  open  over  his  chest. 


966  WARANDPEACE 

‘Come  here,  come  closer.  What  news  is  this  you  have  brought  me?  Eh? 
Napoleon  has  marched  out  of  Moscow?  Is  it  truly  so?  Eh?’ 

Bolhovitinov  began  repeating  in  detail  the  message  that  had  been 
given  him. 

‘Tell  me,  make  haste,  don’t  torture  me,’  Kutuzov  interrupted  him. 
Bolhovitinov  told  him  all  and  paused,  awaiting  instructions.  Toll  was 
beginning  to  speak,  but  Kutuzov  checked  him.  He  tried  to  say  something, 
but  all  at  once  his  face  began  to  work,  to  pucker;  waving  his  hand  at 
Toll,  he  turned  the  other  way  to  the  corner  of  the  hut,  which  looked  black 
with  the  holy  pictures.  ‘Lord,  my  Creator!  Thou  hast  heard  our  prayer 
.  .  .’  he  said  in  a  trembling  voice,  clasping  his  hands.  ‘Russia  is  saved.  I 
thank  Thee,  O  Lord.’  And  he  burst  into  tears. 


XVIII 

From  that  time  up  to  the  end  of  the  campaign,  all  Kutuzov’s  activity  was 
limited  to  trying  by  the  exercise  of  authority,  by  guile  and  by  entreaties, 
to  hold  his  army  back  from  useless  attacks,  manoeuvres,  and  skirmishes 
with  the  perishing  enemy.  Dohturov  marched  to  Maley  Yaroslavets,  but 
Kutuzov  lingered  with  the  main  army,  and  gave  orders  for  the  clearing 
of  the  Kaluga,  retreat  beyond  which  seemed  to  Kutuzov  quite  possible. 

Everywhere  Kutuzov  retreated,  but  the  enemy,  without  waiting  for 
him  to  retire,  fled  back  in  the  opposite  direction. 

Napoleon’s  historians  describe  to  us  his  skilful  manoeuvres  at  Taru- 
tino,  and  at  Maley  Yaroslavets,  and  discuss  what  would  have  happened  if 
Napoleon  had  succeeded  in  making  his  way  to  the  wealthy  provinces  of 
the  south. 

But  to  say  nothing  of  the  fact  that  nothing  hindered  Napoleon  from 
marching  into  these  southern  provinces  (since  the  Russian  army  left  the 
road  open),  the  historians  forget  that  nothing  could  have  saved  Napo¬ 
leon’s  army,  because  it  carried  within  itself  at  that  time  the  inevitable 
germs  of  ruin.  Why  should  that  army,  which  found  abundant  provisions 
in  Moscow  and  could  not  keep  them,  but  trampled  them  underfoot,  that 
army  which  could  not  store  supplies  on  entering  Smolensk,  but  plundered 
at  random,  why  should  that  army  have  mended  its  ways  in  the  Kaluga 
province,  where  the  inhabitants  were  of  the  same  Russian  race  as  in  Mos¬ 
cow,  and  where  fire  had  the  same  aptitude  for  destroying  whatever  they 
set  fire  to. 

The  army  could  not  have  recovered  itself  any  way.  From  the  battle  of 
Borodino  and  the  sacking  of  Moscow  it  bore  within  itself,  as  it  were, 
the  chemical  elements  of  dissolution. 

The  men  of  what  had  been  an  army  fled  with  their  leaders,  not  knowing 
whither  they  went,  Napoleon  and  every  soldier  with  him  filled  with  one 
desire :  to  make  his  own  escape  as  quickly  as  might  be  from  the  hopeless 
position  of  which  all  were  dimly  aware. 

At  the  council  in  Maley  Yaroslavets,  when  the  French  generals,  affecting 


WAR  AND  PEACE  967 

»  be  deliberating,  gave  various  opinions  as  to  what  was  to  be  done,  the 
finion  of  the  blunt  soldier,  Mouton,  who  said  what  all  were  thinking, 
lat  the  only  thing  to  do  was  to  get  away  as  quick  as  possible,  closed  every 
ae’s  mouth;  and  no  one,  not  even  Napoleon,  could  say  anything  in  op- 
asition  to  this  truth  that  all  recognised. 

But  though  everybody  knew  that  they  must  go,  there  was  still  a  feel- 
ig  of  shame  left  at  acknowledging  they  must  fly.  And  some  external 
lock  was  necessary  to  overcome  that  shame.  And  that  shock  came  when 
was  needed.  It  was  le  llourra  de  I’Empercur,  as  the  French  called  it. 
i  On  the  day  after  the  council,  Napoleon,  on  the  pretext  of  inspecting 
le  troops  and  the  field  of  a  past  and  of  a  future  battle,  rode  out  early 
1  the  morning  in  the  midst  of  the  lines  of  his  army  with  a  suite  of  mar- 
lals  and  an  escort.  The  Cossacks,  who  were  in  search  of  booty,  swept 
own  on  the  Emperor,  and  all  but  took  him  prisoner.  What  saved  Napo- 
■on  from  the  Cossacks  that  day  was  just  what  was  the  ruin  of  the  French 
rmy,  the  booty,  which  here  as  well  as  at  Tarutino  tempted  the  Cossacks 
)  let  their  prey  slip.  Without  taking  any  notice  of  Napoleon,  they  dashed 
t  the  booty,  and  Napoleon  succeeded  in  getting  away. 

When  les  en fonts  du  Don  might  positively  capture  the  Emperor  him- 
fif  in  the  middle  of  his  army,  it  was  evident  that  there  was  nothing  else 
9  do  but  to  fly  with  all  possible  haste  by  the  nearest  and  the  familiar  road, 
fapoleon,  with  his  forty  years  and  his  corpulence,  had  not  all  his  old 
;sourcefulness  and  courage,  and  he  quite  took  the  hint;  and  under  the 
lfluence  of  the  fright  the  Cossacks  had  given  him,  he  agreed  at  once  with 
louton,  and  gave,  as  the  historians  tell  us,  the  order  to  retreat  along 
le  Smolensk  road. 

The  fact  that  Napoleon  agreed  with  Mouton,  and  that  the  army  did 
ot  retreat  in  that  direction,  does  not  prove  that  his  command  decided 
hat  retreat,  but  that  the  forces  acting  on  the  whole  army  and  driving  it 
long  the  Mozhaisk  road  were  simultaneously  acting  upon  Napoleon  too. 


XIX 

Vhen  a  man  finds  himself  in  movement,  he  always  invents  a  goal  of 
hat  movement.  In  order  to  walk  a  thousand  versts,  a  man  must  believe 
hat  there  is  some  good  beyond  those  thousand  versts.  He  needs  a  vision 
f  a  promised  land  to  have  the  strength  to  go  on  moving.  The  promised 
ind  for  the  French  on  their  march  into  Russia  was  Moscow;  on  their 
etreat  it  was  their  own  country.  But  their  country  was  too  far;  and  a 
lan  walking  a  thousand  versts  must  inevitably  put  aside  his  final  goal 
nd  say  to  himself  every  day  that  he  is  going  to  walk  forty  versts  to  a 
esting-place  where  he  can  sleep;  and  before  the  first  halt  that  resting- 
lace  has  eclipsed  the  image  of  the  final  goal,  and  all  his  hopes  and  de- 
ires  are  concentrated  on  it.  All  impulses  manifest  in  the  individual  are 
lways  greatly  exaggerated  in  a  crowd. 

For  the  French,  marching  back  along  the  old  Smolensk  road,  the  final 


968  WAR  AND  PEACE 

goal,  their  own  country,  was  too  remote,  and  the  nearer  goal  on  which  a 
hopes  and  desires,  enormously  intensified  by  the  influence  of  the  crow( 
were  concentrated,  was  Smolensk. 

It  was  not  because  the  soldiers  knew  that  there  were  plentiful  supplie 
in  Smolensk  and  reinforcements,  nor  because  they  were  told  so  (on  th 
contrary,  the  generals  and  Napoleon  himself  knew  that  the  supplies  ther 
were  scanty),  but  because  this  was  the  only  thing  that  could  give  ther 
the  strength  to  move  and  to  bear  their  present  hardships,  that  they — thos 
that  knew  better  and  those  that  did  not  alike — deceived  themselves 
and  rushed  to  Smolensk  as  to  a  land  of  promise. 

When  they  got  out  on  the  high  road,  the  French  fled  to  their  imagine 
goal  with  extraordinary  energy  and  unheard-of  rapidity.  Apart  from  th 
common  impulse  that  bound  the  crowds  of  Frenchmen  together  into  on 
-whole  and  gave  them  a  certain  momentum,  there  was  another  cause  tha 
held  them  together,  that  cause  was  their  immense  number.  As  in  th 
physical  law  of  gravitation,  the  immense  mass  of  them  drew  the  separat 
atoms  to  itself.  They  moved  in  their  mass  of  hundreds  of  thousands  lik 
a  whole  state. 

Every  man  among  them  longed  for  one  thing  only — to  surrender  an* 
be  taken  prisoner,  to  escape  from  all  the  horrors  and  miseries  of  his  actus 
position.  But  on  one  hand  the  momentum  of  the  common  impulse  towari 
Smolensk  drew  each  individual  in  the  same  direction.  On  the  other  hand 
it  was  out  of  the  question  for  a  corps  to  surrender  to  a  squadron ;  and  al 
though  the  French  took  advantage  of  every  convenient  opportunity  ti 
straggle  away  from  one  another,  and  on  the  smallest  decent  pretext  t( 
be  taken  prisoners,  those  opportunities  did  not  always  occur.  Their  ver; 
number,  and  their  rapid  movement  in  such  a  closely-packed  mass,  de 
prived  them  of  such  possibilities,  and  made  it  not  only  difficult  bu 
impossible  for  the  Russians  to  stop  that  movement  into  which  the  wholi 
energy  of  that  great  mass  was  thrown.  No  mechanical  splitting  up  of  th( 
body  could  accelerate  beyond  certain  limits  the  process  of  dissolution  tha 
was  going  on  within  it. 

A  snowball  cannot  be  melted  instantaneously.  There  is  a  certain  limi 
of  time  within  which  no  application  of  heat  can  thaw  the  snow.  On  thf 
contrary,  the  greater  the  heat,  the  harder  the  snow  that  is  left. 

Of  the  Russian  generals  no  one  but  Kutuzov  understood  this.  Wher 
the  flight  of  the  French  army  took  its  final  direction  along  the  Smolensl 
road,  then  what  Kutuzov  had  foreseen  on  the  night  of  the  nth  ol 
October  began  to  come  to  pass.  All  the  generals  and  officers  of  the 
Russian  army  were  eager  to  distinguish  themselves,  to  cut  off  the 
enemy’s  retreat,  to  overtake,  to  capture,  to  fall  upon  the  French,  and  al’ 
clamoured  for  action. 

Kutuzov  alone  used  all  his  powers  (and  the  powers  of  any  commander- 
in-chief  are  far  from  great)  to  resist  this  clamour  for  attack. 

He  could  not  tell  them  what  we  can  say  now:  he  could  not  ask  them 
what  was  the  object  of  fighting  and  obstructing  the  road  and  losing  our 
men,  and  inhumanly  persecuting  the  poor  wretches,  when  one-third  ol 


WARANDPEACE  969 

hat  army  melted  away  of  itself  without  a  battle  between  Moscow  and 
/yazma.  But  drawing  from  the  stores  of  his  aged  wisdom  what  they 
ould  understand,  he  told  them  of  the  golden  bridge,  and  they  laughed 
t  him,  slandered  him,  pushed  on  and  dashed  forward,  exulting  over  the 
rounded  beast. 

Near  Vyazma,  Yermolov,  Miloradovitch,  Platov,  and  others,  finding 
hemselves  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  French,  could  not  resist  the  desire 
0  cut  them  off  and  to  fall  upon  two  French  corps.  In  sending  to  inform 
.Cutuzov  of  their  project,  they  slipped  a  blank  sheet  of  paper  into  the 
mvelope  instead  of  the  despatch. 

And  in  spite  of  Kutuzov’s  efforts  to  restrain  the  army,  our  soldiers  at- 
acked  the  French  and  tried  to  bar  their  way.  The  infantry  regiments, 
ve  are  told,  marched  to  attack  them  with  music  and  beating  of  drums, 
ind  slew  and  were  slain  by  thousands. 

But  as  for  cutting  off  their  retreat — none  were  cut  off  nor  turned 
iside.  And  the  French  army,  brought  into  closer  cohesion  by  danger,  and 
Jowly  melting  as  it  went,  kept  still  on  its  fatal  way  to  Smolensk. 


PART  XIV 


I 

The  battle  of  Borodino  with  the  occupation  of  Moscow  and  the  flight  o 
the  French,  that  followed  without  any  more  battles,  is  one  of  the  mos 
instructive  phenomena  in  history. 

All  historians  are  agreed  that  the  external  activity  of  states  and  people* 
in  their  conflicts  finds  expression  in  wars;  that  the  political  power  o 
states  and  peoples  is  increased  or  diminished  as  the  immediate  result  o: 
success  or  defeat  in  war. 

Strange  are  the  historical  accounts  that  tell  us  how  some  king  or  em 
peror,  quarrelling  with  another  king  or  emperor,  levies  an  army,  fights  g 
battle  with  the  army  of  his  foe,  gains  a  victory,  kills  three,  five,  or  ter 
thousand  men,  and  consequently  subdues  a  state  and  a  whole  people  con¬ 
sisting  of  several  millions;  and  incomprehensible  it  seems  that  the  defeat, 
of  any  army,  one  hundredth  of  the  whole  strength  of  a  people,  should 
force  that  people  to  submit.  Yet  all  the  facts  of  history  (so  far  as  we 
know  it)  confirm  the  truth  of  the  statement,  that  the  successes  or  defeats 
of  a  nation’s  army  are  the  causes  or,  at  least,  the  invariable  symptoms  of; 
the  increase  or  diminution  of  the  power  of  a  nation.  An  army  gains  a 
victory,  and  immediately  the  claims  of  the  conquering  people  are  increase'1) 
to  the  detriment  of  the  conquered.  An  army  is  defeated,  and  at  once  the 
people  loses  its  rights  in  proportion  to  the  magnitude  of  the  defeat;  and  if 
its  army  is  utterly  defeated,  the  people  is  completely  conquered.  So  (ac¬ 
cording  to  history)  it  has  been  from  the  most  ancient  times  up  to  the 
present.  All  Napoleon’s  earlier  wars  serve  as  illustrations  of  the  rule.  As: 
the  Austrian  armies  were  defeated,  Austria  was  deprived  of  her  rights, 
and  the  rights  and  power  of  France  were  increased.  The  victories  of  the 
French  at  Jena  and  at  Auerstadt  destroyed  the  independent  existence  of 
Prussia. 

But  suddenly,  in  1812,  the  French  gained  a  victory  before  Moscow. 
Moscow  was  taken,  and  in  consequence  of  that,  with  no  subsequent  bat¬ 
tles,  not  Russia,  but  the  French  army  of  six  hundred  thousand,  and  then* 
Napoleonic  France  itself  ceased  to  exist.  To  strain  the  facts  to  fit  the 
rules  of  history,  to  maintain  that  the  field  of  Borodino  was  left  in  the* 
hands  of  the  Russians,  or  that  after  the  evacuation  of  Moscow,  there) 
were  battles  that  destroyed  Napoleon’s  army — is  impossible. 

After  the  victory  of  the  French  at  Borodino,  there  was  no  general 
engagement,  nor  even  a  skirmish  of  any  great  importance,  yet  the  French 
army  ceased  to  exist.  What  is  the  meaning  of  it?  If  it  had  been  an  exam¬ 
ple  from  the  history  of  China,  we  could  have  said  it  was  not  an  historical 

97° 


WARANDPEACE  971 

tct  (the  resource  of  historians,  when  anything  will  not  fit  in  with  their 
lies).  If  it  had  occurred  in  a  conflict  on  a  small  scale,  in  which  only 
nail  numbers  of  soldiers  had  taken  part,  we  might  have  looked  upon  it 
;  an  exception.  But  all  this  took  place  before  the  eyes  of  our  fathers,  for 
hom  it  was  a  question  of  life  and  death  for  their  country;  and  the  war 
as  on  a  larger  scale  than  any  wars  we  know  of. 

The  sequel  of  the  campaign  of  1812 — from  Borodino  to  the  final  expul- 
on  of  the  French — has  proved  that  victories  are  not  always  a  cause  nor 
,'en  an  invariable  sign  of  conquest;  it  has  proved  that  the  force  that 
scides  the  fate  of  peoples  does  not  lie  in  military  leaders,  nor  even  in 
-mies  and  battles,  but  in  something  else. 

The  French  historians,  who  describe  the  position  of  the  French  troops-5 
?fore  they  marched  out  of  Moscow,  assert  that  everything  was  in  good 
•der  in  the  Grande  Armee,  except  the  cavalry,  the  artillery,  and  the 
ansport,  and  that  there  was  no  forage  for  the  horses  and  cattle.  There 
as  no  remedy  for  this  defect,  because  the  peasants  of  the  surrounding 
mntry  burned  their  hay  rather  than  let  the  French  have  it. 

Victory  did  not  bring  forth  its  usual  results,  because  the  peasants, 
arp  and  Vlas,  by  no  means  persons  of  heroic  feelings  (after  the  French 
/acuation,  they  hurried  with  their  carts  to  pillage  Moscow),  and  the 
nmense  multitude  of  others  like  them  burnt  their  hay  rather  than  bring 
to  Moscow,  however  high  the  prices  offered  them. 

Let  us  imagine  two  men,  who  have  come  out  to  fight  a  duel  with  swords 
1  accordance  with  all  the  rules  of  the  art  of  swordsmanship.  The  fencing 
as  lasted  for  some  time.  All  at  once  one  of  the  combatants,  feeling  that 
e  is  wounded,  grasping  that  it  is  no  joking  matter,  but  a  question  of 
fe  and  death,  flings  away  his  sword,  and  snatching  up  the  first  cudgel  that 
)mes  handy,  begins  to  brandish  that.  But  let  us  imagine  that  the  com- 
atant,  who  has  so  sensibly  made  use  of  the  best  and  simplest  means  for 
le  attainment  of  his  object,  should  be  inspired  by  the  traditions  of  chiv- 
iry  to  try  and  disguise  the  real  cause  of  the  conflict  and  should  persist  in 
eclaring  that  he  had  been  victor  in  the  duel  in  accordance  with  all  the 
lies  of  swordsmanship.  One  can  imagine  what  confusion  and  obscurity 
ould  arise  from  his  description  of  the  duel! 

The  duellist,  who  insisted  on  the  conflict  being  fought  in  accordance 
ith  the  principles  of  the  fencer’s  art,  stands  for  the  French ;  his  opponent, 
ho  flung  away  his  sword  and  snatched  up  a  cudgel,  did  like  the  Rus- 
ans;  and  the  attempted  description  of  the  duel  in  accordance  with  the 
lies  of  swordsmanship  has  been  given  us  by  the  historians  of  the  war. 

From  the  time  of  the  burning  of  Smolensk  a  war  began  which  did  not 
Alow  any  of  the  old  traditions  of  warfare.  The  burning  of  towns  and 
illages,  the  retreat  after  every  battle,  the  blow  dealt  at  Borodino  and 
fllowed  by  retreat,  the  burning  of  Moscow,  the  capture  of  marauders, 
le  seizing  of  transports, — the  whole  of  the  irregular  warfare  was  a  de- 
arture  from  the  rules. 

Napoleon  was  aware  of  it,  and  from  the  time  when  he  stood  waiting 
1  Moscow  in  the  correct  pose  of  the  victorious  fencer,  and  instead  of  his 


972 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

opponent’s  sword,  saw  the  bludgeon  raised  against  him,  he  never  ceas( 
complaining  to  Kutuzov  and  to  the  Emperor  Alexander  that  the  war  w; 
being  conducted  contrary  to  all  the  rules  of  war.  (As  though  any  rul 
existed  for  the  slaughter  of  men ! ) 

In  spite  of  the  complaints  of  the  French  that  they  did  not  keep  to  tl 
rules,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  Russians  in  the  highest  positions  fe 
it  somehow  shameful  to  be  fighting  with  a  cudgel,  and  wanted  to  take  e 
the  correct  position  en  quarte  or  en  tierce,  to  make  a  skilful  thrust,  { 
prime  and  so  on,  the  cudgel  of  the  people’s  war  was  raised  in  all  its  mena> 
ing  and  majestic  power;  and  troubling  itself  about  no  question  of  ar 
one’s  tastes  or  rules,  about  no  fine  distinctions,  with  stupid  simplicit; 
with  perfect  consistency,  it  rose  and  fell  and  belaboured  the  French  ti 
the  whole  invading  army  had  been  driven  out. 

And  happy  the  people  that  will  not,  as  the  French  did  in  1813,  salu 
ing  according  to  the  rules,  gracefully  and  cautiously  offer  the  sword  hi 
to  the  magnanimous  conqueror.  Happy  the  people  who,  in  the  moment  c 
trial,  asks  no  questions  how  others  would  act  by  the  recognised  rules  i 
such  cases,  but  with  ease  and  directness  picks  up  the  first  cudgel  thf 
comes  handy  and  deals  blows  with  it,  till  resentment  and  revenge  giv 
way  to  contempt  and  pity. 


II 

One  of  the  most  conspicuous  and  advantageous  departures  from  the  sc 
called  rules  of  warfare  is  the  independent  action  of  men  acting  separatel 
against  men  huddled  together  in  a  mass.  Such  independent  activity  i 
always  seen  in  a  war  that  assumes  a  national  character.  In  this  kind  c 
warfare,  instead  of  forming  in  a  crowd  to  attack  a  crowd,  men  dispers 
in  small  groups,  attack  singly  and  at  once  fly,  when  attacked  by  superio 
forces,  and  then  attack  again,  when  an  opportunity  presents  itself.  Sue 
were  the  methods  of  the  guerillas  in  Spain;  of  the  mountain  tribes  in  th 
Caucasus,  and  of  the  Russians  in  1812. 

War  of  this  kind  has  been  called  partisan  warfare  on  the  suppositio 
that  this  name  defined  its  special  significance.  But  this  kind  of  warfar 
does  not  follow  any  rules  of  war,  but  is  in  direct  contradiction  to  a  well 
known  rule  of  tactics,  regarded  as  infallible.  That  rule  lays  it  down  tha 
the  attacking  party  must  concentrate  his  forces  in  order  to  be  stronge 
than  his  opponent  at  the  moment  of  conflict. 

Partisan  warfare  (always  successful,  as  history  testifies)  acts  in  direc 
contradiction  of  this  rule. 

Military  science  assumes  that  the  relative  strength  of  forces  is  identica 
with  their  numerical  proportions.  Military  science  maintains  that  th 
greater  the  number  of  soldiers,  the  greater  their  strength.  Les  gros  batail 
Ions  ont  toujours  raison. 

To  say  this  is  as  though  one  were  in  mechanics  to  say  that  forces  wer 
equal  or  unequal  simply  because  the  masses  of  the  moving  bodies  wer 
equal  or  unequal. 


WARANDPEACE  973 

Force  (the  volume  of  motion)  is  the  product  of  the  mass  into  the 
'locity. 

In  warfare  the  force  of  armies  is  the  product  of  the  mass  multiplied  by 
:mething  else,  an  unknown  x. 

Military  science,  seeing  in  history  an  immense  number  of  examples  in 
nich  the  mass  of  an  army  does  not  correspond  with  its  force,  and  in 
nich  small  numbers  conquer  large  ones,  vaguely  recognise  the  existence 
(  this  unknown  factor,  and  try  to  find  it  sometimes  in  some  geometrical 
isposition  of  the  troops,  sometimes  in  the  superiority  of  weapons,  and 
ost  often  in  the  genius  of  the  leaders.  But  none  of  those  factors  yield 
suits  that  agree  with  the  historical  facts. 

One  has  but  to  renounce  the  false  view  that  glorifies  the  effect  of  the 
.•tivity  of  the  heroes  of  history  in  warfare  in  order  to  discover  this  un- 
aown  quantity,  x. 

X  is  the  spirit  of  the  army,  the  greater  or  less  desire  to  fight  and  to  face 
mgers  on  the  part  of  all  the  men  composing  the  army,  which  is  quite 
oart  from  the  question  whether  they  are  fighting  under  leaders  of  genius 
not,  with  cudgels  or  with  guns  that  fire  thirty  times  a  minute.  The  men 
ho  have  the  greater  desire  to  fight  always  put  themselves,  too,  in  the 
ore  advantageous  position  for  fighting.  The  spirit  of  the  army  is  the 
ctor  which  multiplied  by  the  mass  gives  the  product  of  the  force.  To 
?fine  and  express  the  significance  of  this  unknown  factor,  the  spirit  of 
le  army,  is  the  problem  of  science. 

This  problem  can  only  be  solved  when  we  cease  arbitrarily  substitut- 
ig  for  that  unknown  factor  x  the  conditions  under  which  the  force  is 
anifested,  such  as  the  plans  of  the  general,  the  arming  of  the  men  and  so 
i,  and  recognise  this  unknown  factor  in  its  entirety  as  the  greater  or 
ss  desire  to  fight  and  face  danger.  Then  only  by  expressing  known  his- 
irical  facts  in  equations  can  one  hope  from  comparison  of  the  relative 
ilue  of  this  unknown  factor  to  approach  its  definition.  Ten  men,  or  bat- 
ilions  or  divisions  are  victorious  fighting  with  fifteen  men  or  battalions 
•  divisions,  that  is,  they  kill  or  take  prisoner  all  of  them  while  losing 
nir  of  their  own  side,  so  that  the  loss  has  been  four  on  one  side  and  fif- 
•en  on  the  other.  Consequently,  four  on  one  side  have  been  equivalent  to 
fteen  on  the  other,  and  consequently  4X  =  i  sy.  Consequently  -f  = 
his  equation  does  not  give  us  the  value  of  the  unknown  factors,  but  it 
oes  give  us  the  ratio  between  their  values.  And  from  the  reduction  to 
jch  equations  of  various  historical  units  (battles,  campaigns,  periods 
|f  warfare)  a  series  of  numbers  are  obtained,  in  which  there  must  be 
nd  may  be  discovered  historical  laws. 

The  strategic  principle,  that  armies  should  act  in  masses  on  the  offen- 
ve,  and  should  break  up  into  smaller  groups  for  retreat,  unconsciously 
bnfirms  the  truth  that  the  force  of  an  army  depends  on  its  spirit.  To 
;ad  men  forward  under  fire  needs  more  discipline  (which  can  only  be 
jttainecl  by  marching  in  masses)  than  is  needed  for  self-defence  when  at- 
icked.  But  this  rule,  which  leaves  out  of  sight  the  spirit  of  the  army,  is 
ontinually  proving  unsound,  and  is  strikingly  untrue  in  practice  in  all 


974  WAR  AND  PEACE 

national  wars,  when  there  is  a  great  rise  or  fall  in  the  spirit  of  the  armies 
The  French,  on  their  retreat  in  1812,  though  they  should,  by  the  law 
of  tactics,  have  defended  themselves  in  detached  groups,  huddled  togethe 
in  a  crowd,  because  the  spirit  of  the  men  had  sunk  so  low  that  it  wa 
only  their  number  that  kept  them  up.  The  Russians  should,  on  the  con 
trary,  by  the  laws  of  tactics,  have  attacked  them  in  a  mass,  but  in  fac 
attacked  in  scattered  companies,  because  the  spirit  of  the  men  ran  si 
high  that  individual  men  killed  the  French  without  orders,  and  needed  m 
compulsion  to  face  hardships  and  dangers. 


Ill 

The  so-called  ‘partisan’  warfare  had  begun  with  the  enemy’s  entranct 
into  Smolensk.  Before  the  irregular  warfare  was  officially  recognised  In 
our  government  many  thousands  of  the  enemy’s  soldiers — straggling 
marauding,  or  foraging  parties — had  been  slain  by  Cossacks  and  peas 
ants,  who  killed  these  men  as  instinctively  as  dogs  set  upon  a  stray  mac 
dog.  Denis  Davydov  was  the  first  to  feel  with  his  Russian  instinct  the 
value  of  this  terrible  cudgel  which  belaboured  the  French,  and  asked  n; 
questions  about  the  etiquette  of  the  military  art;  and  to  him  belongs  the 
credit  of  the  first  step  towards  the  recognition  of  this  method  of  warfare 
The  first  detachment  of  irregulars — Davydov’s — was  formed  on  the 
24th  of  August,  and  others  soon  followed.  In  the  latter  stages  of  the  cam 
paign  these  detachments  became  more  and  more  numerous. 

The  irregulars  destroyed  the  Grande  Armee  piecemeal.  They  swept  uj 
the  fallen  leaves  that  were  dropping  of  themselves  from  the  withered  tree 
and  sometimes  they  shook  the  tree  itself.  By  October,  when  the  Frencl 
were  fleeing  to  Smolensk,  there  were  hundreds  of  these  companies,  dif 
fering  widely  from  one  another  in  number  and  in  character.  Some  were 
detachments  that  followed  all  the  usual  routine  of  an  army,  with  infantry 
artillery,  staff-officers,  and  all  the  conveniences  of  life.  Some  consistec 
only  of  Cossacks,  mounted  men.  Others  were  small  bands  of  men,  or 
foot  and  also  mounted.  Some  consisted  of  peasants,  or  of  landowners  and 
their  serfs,  and  remained  unknown.  There  was  a  deacon  at  the  head  oi 
such  a  band,  who  took  several  hundred  prisoners  in  a  month.  There  was 
the  village  elder’s  wife,  Vassilisa,  who  killed  hundreds  of  the  French, 
The  latter  part  of  October  was  the  time  when  this  guerilla  warfare 
reached  its  height.  That  period  of  this  warfare,  in  which  the  irregulars 
were  themselves  amazed  at  their  own  audacity,  were  every  moment  in 
dread  of  being  surrounded  and  captured  by  the  French,  and  never  un¬ 
saddling,  hardly  dismounting,  hid  in  the  woods,  in  momentary  expecta¬ 
tion  of  pursuit,  was  already  over.  The  irregular  warfare  had  by  now 
taken  definite  shape ;  it  had  become  clear  to  all  the  irregulars  what  they 
could,  and  what  they  could  not,  accomplish  with  the  French.  By  now  it 
was  only  the  commanders  of  detachments  marching  with  staff-officers 
according  to  the  rules  at  a  distance  from  the  French  who  considered 


WAR  AND  PEACE  975 

uch  impossible.  The  small  bands  of  irregulars  who  had  been  at  work  a 
ng  while,  and  were  at  close  quarters  with  the  French,  found  it  possible 
t  attempt  what  the  leaders  of  larger  companies  did  not  dare  to  think  of 
•Ding.  The  Cossacks  and  the  peasants,  who  crept  in  among  the  French, 
lought  everything  possible  now. 

On  the  22nd  of  October,  Denisov,  who  was  a  leader  of  a  band  of 
regulars,  was  eagerly  engaged  in  a  typical  operation  of  this  irregular 
arfare.  From  early  morning  he  had  been  with  his  men  moving  about 
ie  woods  that  bordered  the  high  road,  watching  a  big  convoy  of  cavalry 
iggage  and  Russian  prisoners  that  had  dropped  behind  the  other  French 
oops,  and  under  strong  escort — as  he  learned  from  his  scouts  and  from 
•isoners — was  making  its  way  to  Smolensk.  Not  only  Denisov  and 
•olohov  (who  was  also  a  leader  of  a  small  band  acting  in  the  same  dis- 
(ict)  were  aware  of  the  presence  of  this  convoy.  Some  generals  in 
bmmand  of  some  larger  detachments,  with  staff-officers  also,  knew  of 
lis  convoy,  and,  as  Denisov  said,  their  mouths  were  watering  for  it.  Two 
f  these  generals — one  a  Pole,  the  other  a  German — had  almost  at  the 
ime  time  sent  to  Denisov,  an  invitation  to  join  their  respective  detach- 
lents  in  attacking  the  convoy. 

‘No,  friend,  I  wasn’t  born  yesterday!’  said  Denisov,  on  reading  these 
ocuments;  and  he  wrote  to  the  German  that  in  spite  of  his  ardent  desire 
)  serve  under  so  brilliant  and  renowned  a  general,  he  must  deprive  him- 
:lf  of  that  happiness  because  he  was  already  under  the  command  of  the 
olish  general.  To  the  Pole  he  wrote  the  same  thing,  informing  him  that 
e  was  already  serving  under  the  command  of  the  German. 

Having  thus  disposed  of  that  difficulty,  Denisov,  without  communicat- 
ig  on  the  subject  to  the  higher  authorities,  intended  with  Dolohov  to 
ttack  and  carry  off  this  transport  with  his  own  small  force.  The  transport 
;as,  on.the  22nd  of  October,  going  from  the  village  of  Mikulino  to  the 
illage  of  Shamshevo.  On  the  left  side  of  the  road  between  Mikulino  and 
hamshevo  there  were  great  woods,  which  in  places  bordered  on  the  road, 
nd  in  places  were  a  verst  or  more  from  the  road.  Denisov,  with  a  small 
arty  of  followers,  had  been  the  whole  day  riding  about  in  these  woods, 
Dmetimes  plunging  into  their  centre,  and  sometimes  coming  out  at  the 
dge,  but  never  losing  sight  of  the  moving  French.  In  the  morning,  not 
ir  from  Mikulino,  where  the  wood  ran  close  to  the  road,  the  Cossacks 
f  Denisov’s  party  had  pounced  on  two  French  waggonloads  of  saddles, 
tuck  in  the  mud,  and  had  carried  them  off  into  the  wood.  From  that  time 
ight  on  to  evening,  they  had  been  watching  the  movements  of  the  French 
■'ithout  attacking  them.  They  wanted  to  avoid  frightening  them,  and  to 
:t  them  go  quietly  on  to  Shamshevo,  and  then,  joining  Dolohov  (who 
ras  to  come  that  evening  to  a  trysting-place  in  the  wood,  a  verst  from 
hamshevo,  to  concert  measures  with  them),  from  two  sides  to  fall  at 
awn  like  an  avalanche  of  snow  on  their  heads,  and  to  overcome  and 
apture  all  of  them  at  a  blow. 

Six  Cossacks  had  been  left  behind,  two  versts  from  Mikulino,  where 


976  WARANDPEACE 

the  wood  bordered  the  road.  They  were  to  bring  word  at  once  as  soon  , 
any  fresh  columns  of  French  came  into  sight. 

In  front  of  Shamhevo,  Dolohov  was  in  the  same  way  to  watch  the  ro; 
to  know  at  what  distance  there  were  other  French  troops.  With  tl 
transport  there  was  supposed  to  be  fifteen  hundred  men.  Denisov  hi 
two  hundred  men,  and  Dolohov  might  have  as  many  more.  But  superio 
ity  in  numbers  was  no  obstacle  to  Denisov.  There  was  only  one  thing  th; 
he  still  needed  to  know,  and  that  was  what  troops  these  were;  and  fi 
that  object  Denisov  needed  to  take  a  ‘tongue’  (that  is,  some  man  belonj 
ing  to  that  column  of  the  enemy.)  The  attack  on  the  waggons  in  tl 
morning  was  all  done  with  such  haste  that  they  killed  all  the  Frenc 
soldiers  in  charge  of  the  waggons,  and  captured  alive  only  a  little  drun 
mer-boy,  who  had  straggled  away  from  his  own  regiment,  and  could  te 
them  nothing  certain  about  the  troops  forming  the  column. 

To  make  another  descent  upon  them,  Denisov  thought,  would  be  1 
risk  alarming  the  whole  column,  and  so  he  sent  on  ahead  to  Shamshe\ 
a  peasant,  Tihon  Shtcherbatov,  to  try  if  he  could  capture  at  least  one  < 
the  French  quartermasters  from  the  vanguard. 


IV 

It  was  a  warm,  rainy,  autumn  day.  The  sky  and  the  horizon  were  all  ( 
the  uniform  tint  of  muddy  water.  Sometimes  a  mist  seemed  to  be  fallin; 
and  sometimes  there  was  a  sudden  downpour  of  heavy,  slanting  rail 
Denisov,  in  a  long  cape  and  a  high  fur  cap,  both  streaming  with  wate 
was  riding  a  thin,  pinched-looking,  thoroughbred  horse.  With  his  hea 
aslant,  and  his  ears  pricked  up,  like  his  horse,  he  was  frowning  at  tl 
driving  rain,  and  anxiously  looking  before  him.  Flis  face,  which  ha 
grown  thin,  and  was  covered  with  a  thick,  short,  black  beard,  looke 
wrathful. 

Beside  Denisov,  wearing  also  a  long  cape  and  a  high  cap,  and  mounte 
on  a  sleek,  sturdy  Don  horse,  rode  the  esaul,  or  hetman  of  the  Cossacks- 
Denisov’s  partner  in  his  enterprises. 

The  esaul,  Lovaisky,  a  third  man,  also  in  a  cape,  and  a  high  cap,  wa 
a  long  creature,  Hat  as  a  board,  with  a  pale  face,  flaxen  hair,  narrow,  ligt 
eyes,  and  an  expression  of  calm  self-confidence  both  in  his  face  and  hi 
attitude.  Though  it  was  impossible  to  say  what  constituted  the  peculiarii 
of  horse  and  rider,  at  the  first  glance  at  the  esaul  and  at  Denisov,  it  wa 
evident  that  Denisov  was  both  wet  and  uncomfortable;  that  Denisov  wa 
a  man  sitting  on  a  horse;  while  the  esaul  seemed  as  comfortable  and  calr 
as  always,  and  seemed  not  a  man  sitting  on  a  horse,  but  a  man  formin 
one  whole  with  a  horse — a  single  being  enlarged  by  the  strength  of  twc 
A  little  ahead  of  them  walked  a  peasant-guide,  soaked  through  an 
through  in  his  grey  full  coat  and  white  cap. 

A  little  behind,  on  a  thin,  delicate  Kirghiz  pony,  with  a  flowing  ta 
and  mane,  and  a  mouth  flecked  with  blood,  rode  a  young  officer  in  a  blu 


WAR  AND  PEACE  977 

rench  military  coat.  Beside  him  rode  an  hussar,  with  a  boy  in  a  tattered 
rench  uniform  and  blue  cap,  perched  upon  his  horse  behind  him.  The 
oy  held  on  to  the  hussar  with  hands  red  with  cold,  and  kept  moving 
is  bare  feet,  trying  to  warm  them,  and  lifting  his  eyebrows,  gazed  about 
im  wonderingly.  This  was  the  French  drummer,  who  had  been  taken 
1  the  morning. 

Along  the  narrow,  muddy,  cut-up  forest-track  there  came  hussars  in 
nots  of  three  and  four  at  a  time,  and  then  Cossacks;  some  in  capes, 
bme  in  French  cloaks;  others  with  horse-cloths  pulled  over  their  heads, 
he  horses,  chestnut  and  bay,  all  looked  black  from  the  soaking  rain, 
heir  necks  looked  strangely  thin  with  their  drenched  manes,  and  steam 
rise  in  clouds  from  them.  Clothes,  saddles,  and  bridles,  all  were  sticky 
nd  swollen  with  the  wet,  like  the  earth  and  the  fallen  leaves  with  which 
.re  track  was  strewn.  The  men  sat  huddled  up,  trying  not  to  move,  so  as 
b  keep  warm  the  water  that  had  already  reached  their  skins,  and  not  to 
fet  any  fresh  stream  of  cold  rain  trickle  in  anywhere  under  their  seat, 
T  at  their  knees  or  necks.  In  the  midst  of  the  file  of  Cossacks  two  wag¬ 
ons,  drawn  by  French  horses,  and  Cossack  saddle-horses  hitched  on  in 
ront,  rumbled  over  stumps  and  branches,  and  splashed  through  the 
uts  full  of  water. 

Denisov’s  horse,  in  avoiding  a  puddle  in  the  track,  knocked  his  rider's 
nee  against  a  tree. 

‘Ah,  devil!  ’  Denisov  cried  angrily;  and  showing  his  teeth,  he  struck  his 
orse  three  times  with  his  whip,  splashing  himself  and  his  comrades  wTith 
nid.  Denisov  was  out  of  humour,  both  from  the  rain  and  hunger  (no  one 
ad  eaten  anything  since  morning) ;  and,  most  of  all,  from  having  no 
tews  of  Dolohov,  and  from  no  French  prisoner  having  been  caught  to  give 
lim  information. 

i  ‘We  shall  never  have  such  another  chance  to  fall  on  the  transport  as 
o-day.  To  attack  them  alone  would  be  risky,  and  to  put  it  off  to  another 
lay — some  one  of  the  bigger  leaders  will  carry  the  booty  off  from  under 
iur  noses,’  thought  Denisov,  continually  looking  ahead,  and  fancying  he 
aw  the  messenger  from  Dolohov  he  expected. 

Coming  out  into  a  clearing  from  which  he  could  get  a  view  to  some 
distance  on  the  right,  Denisov  stopped. 

‘There’s  some  one  coming,’  he  said. 

The  esaul  looked  in  the  direction  Denisov  was  pointing  to. 

‘There  are  two  men  coming — an  officer  and  a  Cossack.  Only  I  wouldn’t 
>e  prepositive  that  is  the  colonel  himself,’  said  the  esaul,  who  loved  to  use 
words  that  were  unfamiliar  to  the  Cossacks.  The  two  figures,  riding 
downhill,  disappeared  from  sight,  and  came  into  view  again  a  few  minutes 
ater.  The  foremost  was  an  officer,  dishevelled  looking,  and  soaked 
hrough,  with  his  trousers  tucked  up  above  his  knees;  he  was  lashing  his 
lorse  into  a  weary  gallop.  Behind  him  a  Cossack  trotted  along,  standing 
ip  in  his  stirrups.  This  officer,  a  quite  young  boy,  with  a  broad,  rosy  face 
nd  keen,  merry  eyes,  galloped  up  to  Denisov,  and  handed  him  a  sopping 
•acke't. 


gjS  WARANDPEACE 

‘From  the  general,’  he  said.  ‘I  must  apologise  for  its  not  being  qui 
dry.  .  .  .’ 

Denisov,  frowning,  took  the  packet  and  broke  it  open. 

‘Why,  they  kept  telling  us  it  was  so  dangerous,’  said  the  officer,  turnii 
to  the  esaul  while  Denisov  was  reading  the  letter.  ‘But  Komarov’ — ai 
he  indicated  the  Cossack — ‘and  I  were  prepared.  We  have  both  tv 
pisto  .  .  .  But  what’s  this?’ he  asked,  seeing  the  French  drummer-boy. 1 
prisoner?  You  have  had  a  battle  already?  May  I  talk  to  him?’ 

‘Rostov!  Petya!’  Denisov  cried  at  that  moment,  running  through  tl 
packet  that  had  been  given  him.  ‘Why,  how  was  it  you  didn’t  say  wl 
you  were?’  and  Denisov,  turning  with  a  smile,  held  out  his  hand  to  tl 
officer.  This  officer  was  Petya  Rostov. 

Petya  had  been  all  the  way  preparing  himself  to  behave  with  Denise 
as  a  grown-up  person  and  an  officer  should  do,  making  no  reference  i 
their  previous  acquaintance.  But  as  soon  as  Denisov  smiled  at  hir 
Petya  beamed  at  once,  blushed  with  delight,  and  forgetting  all  the  form; 
demeanour  he  had  been  intending  to  preserve,  he  began  telling  him  ho 
he  had  ridden  by  the  French,  and  how  glad  he  was  he  had  been  give 
this  commission,  and  how  he  had  already  been  in  a  battle  at  Vyazm; 
and  how  a  certain  hussar  had  distinguished  himself  in  it. 

‘Well,  I  am  glad  to  see  you,’  Denisov  interrupted  him,  and  his  fac 
looked  anxious  again. 

‘Mihail  Feoklititch,’  he  said  to  the  esaul,  ‘this  is  from  the  Germa 
again,  you  know.  He’  (Petya)  ‘is  in  his  suite.’  And  Denisov  told  th 
esaul  that  the  letter,  which  had  just  been  brought,  repeated  the  Germa 
general’s  request  that  they  would  join  him  in  attacking  the  transport.  ‘1 
we  don’t  catch  them  by  to-morrow,  he’ll  snatch  them  from  under  ou 
noses,’  he  concluded. 

While  Denisov  was  talking  to  the  esaul,  Petya,  disconcerted  by  Deni 
sov’s  cold  tone,  and  imagining  that  that  tone  might  be  due  to  the  condi 
tion  of  his  trousers,  furtively  pulled  them  down  under  his  cloak,  tryin 
to  do  so  unobserved,  and  to  maintain  as  martial  an  air  as  possible. 

‘Will  your  honour  have  any  instructions  to  give  me?’  he  said  t 
Denisov,  putting  his  hand  to  the  peak  of  his  cap,  and  going  back  to  th 
comedy  of  adjutant  and  general,  which  he  had  prepared  himself  to  per 
form,  ‘or  should  I  remain  with  your  honour?’ 

‘Instructions?  .  .  .’  said  Denisov  absently.  ‘Well,  can  you  stay  til 
to-morrow?’ 

‘As,  please  .  .  .  May  I  stay  with  you?’  cried  Petya. 

‘Well,  what  were  your  instructions  from  your  general — to  go  back  a 
once?’  asked  Denisov. 

Petya  blushed. 

‘Oh,  he  gave  me  no  instructions.  I  think  I  may?’  he  said  interrogatively 

‘All  right,  then,’  said  Denisov.  And  turning  to  his  followers,  he  directec 
a  party  of  them  to  go  to  the  hut  in  the  wood,  which  they  had  fixed  on  as  < 
resting-place,  and  the  officer  on  the  Kirghiz  horse  (this  officer  per 


WARANuEEACE  979 

irmed  the  duties  of  an  adjutant)  to  go  and  look  for  Dolohov,  to  find  out 
here  he  was,  and  whether  he  were  coming  in  the  evening. 

Denisov  himself,  with  the  esaul  and  Petya,  intended  to  ride  to  the  edge 
f  the  wood  near  Shamshevo  to  have  a  look  at  the  position  of  the  French, 
here  their  attack  next  day  was  to  take  place. 

‘Come,  my  man,’  he  said  to  their  peasant  guide,  ‘take  us  to  Shamshevo.’ 
Denisov,  Petya,  and  the  esaul,  accompanied  by  a  few  Cossacks  and  the 
ussar  with  the  prisoner,  turned  to  the  left  and  crossed  a  ravine  towards 
lie  edge  of  the  wood. 

V 

he  rain  was  over,  but  a  mist  was  falling  and  drops  of  water  dripped 
•om  the  branches  of  the  trees.  Denisov,  the  esaul,  and  Petya,  in  silence, 
allowed  the  peasant  in  the  pointed  cap,  who,  stepping  lightly  and  noise- 
•ssly  in  his  bast  shoes  over  roots  and  wet  leaves,  led  them  to  the  edge  of 
le  wood. 

Coming  out  on  the  road,  the  peasant  paused,  looked  about  him,  and 
jrned  toward  a  thin  screen  of  trees.  He  stood  still  at  a  big  oak,  still 
overed  with  leaves,  and  beckoned  mysteriously  to  them. 

Denisov  and  Petya  rode  up  to  him.  From  the  place  where  the  peasant 
'as  standing  the  French  could  be  seen.  Just  beyond  the  wood  a  field  of 
oring  corn  ran  sharply  downhill.  On  the  right,  across  a  steep  ravine, 
buld  be  seen  a  little  village  and  a  manor-house  with  the  roofs  broken 
own.  In  that  village  and  in  the  house  and  all  over  the  high  ground  in 
he  garden,  by  the  wells  and  the  pond,  and  all  along  the  road  uphhill  from 
he  bridge  to  the  village,  not  more  than  five  hundred  yards  away,  crowds 
f  men  could  be  seen  in  the  shifting  mist.  They  could  distinctly  hear  their 
oreign  cries  at  the  horses  pulling  the  baggage  uphill  and  their  calls  to 
ne  another. 

‘Give  me  the  prisoner  here,’  said  Denisov,  in  a  low  voice,  never  taking 
lis  eyes  off  the  French. 

A  Cossack  got  off  his  horse,  lifted  the  boy  down,  and  came  with  him  to 
Denisov.  Denisov,  pointing  to  the  F'rench,  asked  the  boy  what  troops 
hey  were.  The  boy,  thrusting  his  chilled  hands  into  his  pockets  and 
aising  his  eyebrows,  looked  in  dismay  at  Denisov,  and  in  spite  of  his 
inmistakable  desire  to  tell  all  he  knew,  he  was  confused  in  his  answers, 
nd  merely  repeated  Denisov’s  questions.  Denisov,  frowning,  turned 
way  from  him,  and  addressing  the  esaul,  told  him  his  own  views  on  the 
natter. 

Petya,  turning  his  head  rapidly,  looked  from  the  drummer  to  Denisov, 
ind  from  the  esaul  to  the  French  in  the  village  and  on  the  road,  trying  not 
0  miss  anything  of  importance. 

‘Whether  Dolohov  comes  or  not,  we  must  take  them.  .  .  .  Eh?’  said 
Denisov,  his  eyes  sparkling  merrily. 

‘It  is  a  convenient  spot,’  said  the  esaul. 

‘We  will  send  the  infantry  down  below,  by  the  marshes,’  Denisov  went 


$So  WAR  AND  PEACE 

on.  ‘They  will  creep  up  to  the  garden;  you  clash  down  with  the  Cossack 
from  there’ — Denisov  pointed  to  the  wood  beyond  the  village — ‘and 
from  here  with  my  hussars.  And  at  a  shot  .  .  .’ 

‘It  won't  do  to  go  by  the  hollow;  it’s  a  bog,’  said  the  esaul.  ‘The  horse 
will  sink  in,  you  must  skirt  round  more  to  the  left.  .  .  .’ 

While  they  were  talking  in  undertones,  there  was  the  crack  of  a  sho 
and  a  puff  of  white  smoke  in  the  hollow  below  near  the  pond,  and  th 
voices  of  hundreds  of  Frenchmen  halfway  up  the  hill  rose  in  a  ringim 
shout,  as  though  in  merry  chorus.  At  the  first  minute  both  Denisov  am 
the  esaul  darted  back.  They  were  so  near  that  they  fancied  they  wer 
the  cause  of  that  shot  and  those  shouts.  But  they  had  nothing  to  do  wit! 
them.  A  man  in  something  red  was  running  through  the  marshes  below 
The  French  were  evidently  firing  and  shouting  at  him. 

‘Why,  it’s  our  Tihon,’  said  the  esaul. 

‘It’s  he!  it’s  he! ’  • 

‘The  rogue,’  said  Denisov. 

‘He’ll  get  away!  ’  said  the  esaul,  screwing  up  his  eyes. 

The  man  they  called  Tihon,  running  up  to  the  little  river,  splashed  intc 
it,  so  that  the  water  spurted  up  round  him,  and  disappearing  for  an  in 
stant,  scrambled  out  on  all  fours,  looking  dark  from  the  water,  and  ran  on 
The  French,  who  had  been  pursuing  him,  stopped. 

‘Well,  he’s  a  smart  fellow,’  said  the  esaul. 

‘The  beast,’  said  Denisov,  with  the  same  expression  of  vexation.  ‘Anc 
what  has  he  been  about  all  this  time?’ 

‘Who  is  he?’  asked  Petya. 

‘It’s  our  scout.  I  sent  him  to  catch  a  “tongue”  for  us.’ 

‘Ah,  to  be  sure,’  said  Petya,  nodding  at  Denisov’s  first  word,  as  thougl 
he  knew  all  about  it,  though  he  did  not  understand  a  word. 

Tihon  Shtcherbatov  was  one  of  the  most  useful  men  among  Denisov’s 
followers.  He  was  a  peasant  of  the  village  of  Pokrovskoe,  near  Gzhat 
Denisov  had  come  to  Pokrovskoe  early  in  his  operations  as  a  guerilla 
leader,  and  sending,  as  he  always  did,  for  the  village  elder,  asked  him 
what  he  knew  about  the  French. 

The  village  elder  had  answered,  as  all  village  elders  always  did  answer 
that  he  knew  nothing  about  them,  and  had  seen  nothing  of  them.  But1 
when  Denisov  explained  to  him  that  his  object  was  to  kill  the  French, 
and  inquired  whether  no  French  had  strayed  into  his  village,  the  village 
elder  replied  that  there  had  been  some  miroders  certainly,  but  that  the 
only  person  who  took  any  heed  of  such  things  was  Tishka  Shtcherbatov. 
Denisov  ordered  Tihon  to  be  brought  before  him,  and  praising  his  activ-1 
ity,  said  in  the  presence  of  the  elder  a  few  words  about  the  devotion  to 
the  Tsar  and  the  Fatherland  and  the  hatred  of  the  French  that  all  sons 
of  the  Fatherland  must  cherish  in  their  hearts. 

‘We  don’t  do  any  harm  to  the  French,’  said  Tihon,  evidently  scared 
at  Denisov’s  words.  ‘It’s  only,  you  know,  just  a  bit  of  fun  for  the  lads 
and  me.  The  miroders  now — we  have  killed  a  dozen  or  so  of  them,  but 
we  have  done  no  harm  else  .  .  .’ 


WAR  AND  PEACE  981 

Next  day,  when  Denisov  was  leaving  Pokrovskoe,  having  forgotten 
a  about  this  peasant,  he  was  told  that  Tihon  was  with  his  followers, 
ad  asked  to  be  allowed  to  remain  with  them.  Denisov  bade  them  let 
bjn  stay. 

At  first  Tihon  undertook  the  rough  work  of  making  fires,  fetching 
v  ter,  skinning  horses,  and  so  on,  but  he  soon  showed  great  zeal  and 
coacity  for  guerilla  warfare.  He  would  go  after  booty  at  night,  and 
rver  failed  to  bring  back  French  clothes  and  weapons,  and  when  he 
v.s  bidden,  he  would  bring  back  prisoners  too.  Denisov  took  Tihon  from 
b  menial  work,  and  began  to  employ  him  on  expeditions,  and  to  reckon 
1  n  among  the  Cossacks. 

Tihon  did  not  like  riding,  and  always  went  on  foot,  yet  never  lagged 
l  hind  the  cavalry.  His  weapons  were  a  musket,  which  he  carried  rather 
;  a  joke,  a  pike,  and  an  axe,  which  he  used  as  skilfully  as  a  wolf  does 
i  teeth — catching  fleas  in  its  coat  and  crunching  thick  bones  with  them 
eually  easily.  With  equal  precision  Tihon  swinging  his  axe  split  logs, 
c,  taking  it  by  the  head,  cut  thin  skewers  or  carved  spoons.  Among 
bnisov’s  followers,  Tihon  was  on  a  special  footing  of  his  own.  When 
aything  particularly  disagreeable  or  revolting  had  to  be  done — to  put 
re’s  shoulder  to  a  waggon  stuck  in  the  mud,  to  drag  a  horse  out  of  a  bog 
h  the  tail,  to  flay  a  horse,  to  creep  into  the  midst  of  the  French,  to  walk 
ity  versts  in  a  day — every  one  laughed,  and  looked  to  Tihon  to  do  it. 
‘No  harm  will  come  to  him;  the  devil,  he’s  a  stalwart  beast,’  they 
led  to  say  of  him. 

One  day  a  Frenchman  he  had  captured  wounded  Tihon  with  a  pistol- 
;ot  in  the  fleshy  part  of  the  back.  This  wound,  which  Tihon  treated  only 
b  applications  of  vodka — internal  and  external — was  the  subject  of  the 
veliest  jokes  through  the  whole  party,  and  Tihon  lent  himself  readily 
their  jests. 

‘Well,  old  chap,  you  won’t  do  that  again!  Are  you  crook-backed!’ 
ughed  the  Cossacks;  and  Tihon,  assuming  a  doleful  face,  and  grimacing 
pretend  he  was  angry,  would  abuse  the  French  with  the  most  comical 
\ths.  The  effect  of  the  incident  on  Tihon  was  that  he  rarely  afterwards 
ought  prisoners  in. 

Tihon  was  the  bravest  and  most  useful  man  of  the  lot.  No  one  dis- 
ivered  so  many  opportunities  of  attack,  no  one  captured  or  killed  so 
any  Frenchmen.  And  consequently  he  was  the  favourite  subject  of  all 
ie  gibes  of  the  Cossacks  and  the  hussars,  and  readily  fell  in  with  the 
psition. 

Tihon  had  been  sent  overnight  by  Denisov  to  Shamshevo  to  capture 
‘tongue.’  But  either  because  he  was  not  satisfied  with  one  French 
,isoner,  or  because  he  had  been  asleep  all  night,  he  had  crept  by  day 
to  the  bushes  in  the  very  middle  of  the  French,  and,  as  Denisov  had 
en  from  the  hill,  had  been  discovered  by  them. 


982  WAR  AND  PEACE 

VI 

After  talking  a  little  while  longer  with  the  esaul  about  the  next  day 
attack,  which  Denisov  seemed  to  have  finally  decided  upon  after  seeii 
how  near  the  French  were,  he  turned  his  horse’s  head  and  rode  back. 

‘Now,  my  boy,  we  will  go  and  dry  ourselves,’  he  said  to  Petya. 

As  he  came  near  the  forester’s  hut,  Denisov  stopped,  looking  into  tl 
wood  before  him.  A  man  in  a  short  jacket,  bast  shoes,  and  a  Kazan  ha 
with  a  gun  across  his  shoulder,  and  an  axe  in  his  belt,  was  stridin: 
lightly  through  the  forest  with  long  legs  and  long  arms  swinging  at  h 
side.  Catching  sight  of  Denisov,  he  hastily  flung  something  into  th 
bushes,  and  taking  off  his  sopped  hat,  the  brim  of  which  drooped  limply 
he  walked  up  to  his  commanding  officer. 

This  was  Tihon.  His  pock-marked  and  wrinkled  face,  with  little  slit 
of  eyes,  beamed  with  self-satisfaction  and  merriment.  He  held  his  hea 
high,  and  looked  straight  at  Denisov  as  though  he  were  suppressing 
laugh. 

‘Well,  where  have  you  been?’  said  Denisov. 

‘Where  have  I  been?  I  have  been  after  the  French,’  Tihon  answere. 
boldly  and  hastily,  in  a  husky,  but  mellow  bass. 

‘Why  did  you  creep  in  in  the  daytime?  Ass!  Well,  why  didn’t  you  catcl 
one?’ 

‘Catch  one  I  did,’  said  Tihon. 

‘Where  is  he,  then?’ 

‘I  caught  one  at  the  very  first  at  daybreak,’  Tihon  went  on,  settinj 
his  feet  down  wider  apart,  in  their  flat,  turned-up  bast  shoes;  ‘and 
took  him  into  the  wood  too.  I  see  he’s  no  good.  So,  thinks  I,  better  g( 
and  get  another,  rather  more  the  proper  article.’ 

‘Ay,  the  rogue,  so  that’s  how  it  is,’  said  Denisov  to  the  esaul.  ‘Why 
didn’t  you  bring  that  one?’ 

‘Why,  what  was  the  use  of  bringing  him  in?’  Tihon  broke  in,  hurriedly 
and  angrily.  ‘A  worthless  fellow!  Don’t  I  know  what  sort  you  want? 

‘Ah,  you  brute!  .  .  .  Well?’ 

‘I  went  to  get  another,’  Tihon  went  on.  ‘I  crept  up  in  this  way  in  the 
wood,  and  I  lay  down.’  With  a  sudden,  supple  movement,  Tihon  lay 
down  on  his  stomach,  to  show  how  he  had  done  this.  ‘One  turned  up,’  he 
went  on,  ‘I  seized  him  like  this,’  Tihon  jumped  up  swiftly  and  lightly 
‘  “Come  along  to  the  colonel,”  says  I.  He  set  up  such  a  shouting;  ana 
then  I  saw  four  of  them.  And  they  rushed  at  me  with  their  sabres.  1 
went  at  them  like  this  with  my  axe.  “What  are  you  about?”  says  I 
“Christ  be  with  you,”  ’  cried  Tihon,  waving  his  arms  and  squaring  hi; 
chest  with  a  menacing  scowl. 

‘Oh  yes,  we  saw  from  the  hill  how  you  gave  them  the  slip,  through  thf 
pools;’  said  the  esaul,  screwing  up  his  sparkling  eyes. 

Petya  had  a  great  longing  to  laugh,  but  he  saw  that  all  the  others  re 
trained  from  laughing.  He  kept  looking  rapidly  from  Tihon’s  face  to  thf 


WARANDPEACE  983 

ice  of  the  esaul  and  Denisov,  not  knowing  what  to  make  of  it  all. 
‘Don’t  play  the  fool/  said  Denisov,  coughing  angrily.  ‘Why  didn’t 
vu  bring  the  first  man?’ 

Tihon  began  scratching  his  back  with  one  hand  and  his  head  with 
te  other,  and  all  at  once  his  countenance  expanded  into  a  beaming, 
iolish  grin,  showing  the  loss  of  a  tooth  that  had  given  him  his  name, 
htcherbatov  ( i.e .  lacking  a  tooth).  Denisov  smiled,  and  Petya  went 
(f  into  a  merry  peal  of  laughter,  in  which  Tihon  himself  joined. 

‘Why,  he  was  no  good  at  all/  said  Tihon.  ‘He  was  so  badly  dressed, 
]>w  could  I  bring  him?  And  a  coarse  fellow,  your  honour.  Why,  says  he, 

‘ ’m  a  general’s  son,”  says  he,  “I’m  not  going.”  ’ 

‘Ugh,  you  brute!’  said  Denisov.  ‘I  wanted  to  question  him  .  .  .’ 

‘Oh,  I  did  question  him/  said  Tihon.  ‘He  said  he  didn’t  know  much. 
There  are  a  lot  of  our  men,”  says  he,  “but  they  are  all  poor  creatures; 
at’s  all  you  can  say  for  them.  Give  a  good  shout,”  says  he,  “and  you 
nn  take  them  all,”  ’  Tihon  concluded,  with  a  merry  and  determined 
ok  at  Denisov. 

‘Mind,  I’ll  give  you  a  good  hundred  lashes  that  will  teach  you  to  play 
ie  fool/  said  Denisov  sternly. 

‘Why  be  angry/  said  Tihon,  ‘because  I  haven’t  seen  your  sort  of 
renchmen?  As  soon  as  it  gets  dark,  I’ll  catch  whatever  kind  you  like, 
iree  of  them  I’ll  bring.’ 

‘Well,  come  along/  said  Denisov,  and  all  the  way  to  the  forester’s 
jt  he  was  silent,  frowning  angrily. 

Tihon  was  walking  behind,  and  Petya  heard  the  Cossacks  laughing 
ith  him  and  at  him  about  a  pair  of  boots  that  he  had  thrown  into  the 
ushes. 

When  the  laughter  roused  by  Tihon’s  words  and  smile  had  passed, 
ad  Petya  understood  for  a  moment  that  Tihon  had  killed  the  man,  he 
ad  an  uneasy  feeling.  He  looked  round  at  the  boy  prisoner,  and  there 
as  a  sudden  pang  in  his  heart.  But  that  uneasiness  only  lasted  a  mo- 
ient.  He  felt  it  incumbent  on  him  to  hold  his  head  high,  and  with  a 
old  and  important  air  to  question  the  esaul  about  the  next  day’s  ex¬ 
edition,  that  he  might  not  be  unworthy  of  the  company  in  which  he 
>und  himself. 

The  officer  Denisov  had  sent  to  Dolohov  met  him  on  the  way  with 
ie  news  that  everything  was  going  well  with  Dolohov,  and  that  he  was 
oming  himself  immediately. 

Denisov  at  once  became  more  cheerful,  and  beckoned  Petya  to  him. 
‘Come,  tell  me  about  yourself/  he  said. 


VII 

)n  leaving  Moscow,  Petya  had  parted  from  his  parents  to  join  his  regi- 
lent,  and  shortly  afterwards  had  been  appointed  an  orderly  in  attend- 
nce  on  a  general  who  was  in  command  of  a  large  detachment.  From  the 


9S4  WAR  AND  PEACE 

time  of  securing  his  commission,  and  even  more  since  joining  a  regime 
in  active  service,  and  taking  part  in  the  battle  of  Vyazma,  Petya  hi 
been  in  a  continual  state  of  happy  excitement  at  being  grown-up,  ai 
of  intense  anxiety  not  to  miss  any  opportunity  of  real  heroism.  He  w 
highly  delighted  with  all  he  had  seen  and  experienced  in  the  army,  bi 
at  the  same  time,  he  was 'always  fancying  that  wherever  he  was  nc  ' 
there  the  most  real  and  heroic  exploits  were  at  that  very  moment  beii 
performed.  And  he  was  in  constant  haste  to  be  where  he  was  not. 

On  the  2 1  st  of  October,  when  his  general  expressed  a  desire  to  ser 
some  one  to  Denisov’s  company,  Petya  had  so  piteously  besought  hi 
to  send  him,  that  the  general  could  not  refuse.  But,  as  he  was  sendir 
him  off,  the  general '  recollected  Petya’s  foolhardy  behaviour  at  tl 
battle  of  Vyazma,  when,  instead  of  riding  by  way  of  the  road  to  tal 
a  message,  Petya  had  galloped  across  the  lines  under  the  fire  of  tl 
French,  and  had  there  fired  a  couple  of  pistol-shots.  Recalling  the 
prank,  the  general  explicitly  forbade  Petya’s  taking  part  in  any  entei 
prise  whatever  that  Denisov  might  be  planning.  This  was  why  Pety 
had  blushed  and  been  disconcerted  when  Denisov  asked  him  if  he  migl 
stay.  From  the  moment  he  set  off  till  he  reached  the  edge  of  the  wooc 
Petya  had  fully  intended  to  do  his  duty  steadily,  and  to  return  at  onci 
But  when  he  saw  the  French,  and  saw  Tihon,  and  learned  that  the  attac 
would  certainly  take  place  that  night,  with  the  rapid  transition  fror 
one  view  to  another,  characteristic  of  young  people,  he  made  up  hi! 
mind  that  his  general,  for  whom  he  had  till  that  moment  had  the  greates 
respect,  was  a  poor  stick,  and  only  a  German,  that  Denisov  was  a  here' 
and  the  esaul  a  hero,  and  Tihon  a  hero,  and  that  it  would  be  shamefu 
to  leave  them  at  a  moment  of  difficulty. 

It  was  getting  dark  when  Denisov,  with  Petya  and  the  esaul,  reachei 
the  forester’s  hut.  In  the  half-dark  they  could  see  saddled  horses,  Cos 
sacks  and  hussars,  rigging  up  shanties  in  the  clearing,  and  building  u] 
a  glowing  fire  in  a  hollow  near,  where  the  smoke  would  not  be  seen  b\ 
the  French.  In  the  porch  of  the  little  hut  there  was  a  Cossack  with  hi: 
sleeves  tucked  up,  cutting  up  a  sheep.  In  the  hut,  three  officers  of  Deni 
sov’s  band  were  setting  up  a  table  made  up  of  doors.  Petya  took  off  hi: 
wet  clothes,  gave  them  to  be  dried,  and  at  once  set  to  work  to  help  th( 
officers  in  fixing  up  a  dining-table. 

In  ten  minutes  the  table  was  ready  and  covered  with  a  napkin.  On  thf 
table  was  set  vodka,  a  flask  of  rum,  white  bread,  and  roast  mutton,  anc 
salt. 

Sitting  at  the  table  v/ith  the  officers,  tearing  the  fat,  savoury  muttor 
with  greasy  fingers,  Petya  was  in  a  childishly  enthusiastic  condition  of 
tender  love  for  all  men  and  a  consequent  belief  in  the  same  feeling  fotj 
himself  in  others. 

‘So  what  do  you  think,  Vassily  Fyodorovitch,’  he  said  to  Denisov, 
‘it  won’t  matter  my  staying  a  day  with  you,  will  it?'  And  without  wait¬ 
ing  for  an  answer,  he  answered  himself:  ‘Why,  I  was  told  to  find  out. 
and  here  I  am  finding  out  .  .  .  Only  you  must  let  me  go  into  the  middle 


WARANDPEACE  96^ 

.  o  mto  the  real  ...  I  don’t  care  about  rewards  .  .  .  But  I  do  want 
.  .’  Petya  clenched  his  teeth  and  looked  about  him,  tossing  his  head 
id  waving  his  arm. 

‘Into  the  real,  real  thing  .  .  Denisov  said,  smiling. 

‘Only,  please,  do  give  me  a  command  of  something  altogether,  so  that 
really  might  command,’  Petya  went  on.  ‘Why,  what  would  it  be  to 
Ini?  Ah,  you  want  a  knife?’  he  said  to  an  officer,  who  was  trying  to 
ar  off  a  piece  of  mutton.  And  he  gave  him  his  pocket-knife. 

The  officer  praised  the  knife. 

‘Please  keep  it.  I  have  several  like  it  .  .  .’  said  Petya,  blushing, 
leavens!  Why,  I  was  quite  forgetting,’  he  cried  suddenly.  ‘I  have  some 
xpital  raisins,  you  know  the  sort  without  stones.  We  have  a  new  can- 
en-keeper,  and  he  does  get  first-rate  things.  I  bought  ten  pounds  of 
lem.  I’m  fond  of  sweet  things.  Will  you  have  some?’  .  .  .  And  Petya 
in  out  to  his  Cossack  in  the  porch,  and  brought  in  some  panniers  in 
hich  there  were  five  pounds  of  raisins.  ‘Please  take  some.’ 

‘Don’t  you  need  a  coffee-pot?’  he  said  to  the  esaul;  ‘I  bought  a  famous 
le  from  our  canteen-keeper!  He  has  first-rate  things.  And  he’s  very 
onest.  That’s  the  great  thing.  I'll  be  sure  and  send  it  you.  Or  perhaps 
bur  flints  are  worn  out;  that  does  happen  sometimes.  I  brought  some 
ith  me,  I  have  got  them  here  .  .  .’  he  pointed  to  the  panniers.  ‘A  hun- 
red  flints.  I  bought  them  very  cheap.  You  must  please  take  as  many 
B  you  want  or  all,  indeed  .  .  .’  And  suddenly,  dismayed  at  the  thought 
lat  he  had  let  his  tongue  run  away  with  him,  Petya  stopped  short  and 
lushed. 

He  began  trying  to  think  whether  he  had  been  guilty  of  any  other 
lunders.  And  running  through  his  recollections  of  the  day  the  image 
f  the  French  drummer-boy  rose  before  his  mind. 

‘We  are  enjoying  ourselves,  but  how  is  he  feeling?  What  have  they 
one  with  him?  Have  they  given  him  something  to  eat?  Have  they  been 
asty  to  him?’  he  wondered. 

But  thinking  he  had  said  too  much  about  the  flints,  he  was  afraid  to 
peak  now. 

‘Could  I  ask  about  him?’  he  wondered.  ‘They'll  say:  he’s  a  boy  him- 
elf ,  so  he  feels  for  the  boy.  I’ll  let  them  see  to-morrow  whether  I’m  a 
oy!  Shall  I  feel  ashamed  if  I  ask?’  Petya  wondered.  ‘Oh,  well!  I  don't 
are,’  and  he  said  at  once,  blushing  and  watching  the  officers’  faces  in 
read  of  detecting  amusement  in  them: 

‘Might  I  call  that  boy  who  was  taken  prisoner,  and  give  him  some- 
jnng  to  eat  .  .  .  perhaps  .  .  .’ 

‘Yes,  poor  little  fellow,’  said  Denisov,  who  clearly  saw  nothing  to  be 
shamed  of  in  this  reminder.  ‘Fetch  him  in  here.  His  name  is  Vincent 
iosse.  Fetch  him  in.’ 

‘I’ll  call  him,’  said  Petya. 

‘Yes,  do.  Poor  little  fellow,’  repeated  Denisov. 

Petya  was  standing  at  the  door  as  Denisov  said  this.  He  slipped  in 
etween  the  officers  and  went  up  to  Denisov. 


986  WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Let  me  kiss  you,  dear  old  fellow,’  he  said.  ‘Ah,  how  jolly  it  is!  ho 
splendid!’  And,  kissing  Denisov,  he  ran  out  into  the  yard. 

‘Bosse!  Vincent!’  Petya  cried,  standing  by  the  door. 

‘Whom  do  you  want,  sir?’  said  a  voice  out  of  the  darkness.  Pety 
answered  that  he  wanted  the  French  boy,  who  had  been  taken  prisont 
that  day. 

‘Ah!  Vesenny?’  said  the  Cossack. 

His  name  Vincent  had  already  been  transformed  by  the  Cossacks  int 
Vesenny,  and  by  the  peasants  and  the  soldiers  into  Visenya.  In  hot 
names  there  was  a  suggestion  of  the  spring — vesna — which  seemed  t 
them  to  harmonise  with  the  figure  of  the  young  boy. 

‘He’s  warming  himself  there  at  the  fire.  Ay,  Visenya!  Visenya!’  voice 
called  from  one  to  another  with  laughter  in  the  darkness.  ‘He  is  a  shar; 
boy,’  said  an  hussar  standing  near  Petya.  ‘We  gave  him  a  meal  not  Ion 
ago.  He  was  hungry,  terribly.’ 

There  was  a  sound  of  footsteps  in  the  darkness,  and  the  drummer 
boy  came  splashing  through  the  mud  with  his  bare  feet  towards  th 
door. 

‘Ah,  that’s  you!’  said  Petya.  ‘Are  you  hungry?  Don’t  be  afraid,  the; 
won’t  hurt  ymu,’  he  added,  shyly  and  cordially  touching  his  hand.  ‘Com. 
in,  come  in.’ 

‘Thank  you,’  answered  the  drummer,  in  a  trembling,  almost  childisi 
voice,  and  he  began  wiping  the  mud  off  his  feet  on  the  threshold.  Pety; 
had  a  great  deal  he  longed  to  say  to  the  drummer-boy,  but  he  did  no 
dare.  He  stood  by  him  in  the  porch,  moving  uneasily.  Then  he  took  hi: 
hand  in  the  darkness  and  squeezed  it.  ‘Come  in,  come  in,’  he  repeated 
but  in  a  soft  whisper. 

‘Oh,  if  I  could  only  do  something  for  him!’  Petya  was  saying  in 
wardly,  and  opening  the  door  he  ushered  the  boy  in  before  him. 

When  the  drummer-boy  had  come  into  the  hut,  Petya  sat  down  a 
some  distance  from  him,  feeling  that  it  would  be  lowering  his  dignity  ti 
take  much  notice  of  him.  But  he  was  feeling  the  money  in  his  pockei 
and  wondering  whether  it  would  do  to  give  some  to  the  drummer-boy 


VIII 

Denisov  gave  orders  for  the  drummer-boy  to  be  given  some  vodka  and 
mutton,  and  to  be  put  into  a  Russian  dress,  so  that  he  should  not  be 
sent  off  with  the  other  prisoners,  but  should  stay  with  his  band.  Petya’s 
attention  was  diverted  from  the  boy  by  the  arrival  of  Dolohov.  He  had 
heard  a  great  many  stories  told  in  the  army  of  Dolohov’s  extraordinary 
gallantry  and  of  his  cruelty  to  the  French.  And  therefore  from  the  mo¬ 
ment  Dolohov  entered  the  hut  Petya  could  not  take  his  eyes  off  him. 
and  flinging  up  his  head,  he  assumed  a  more  and  more  swaggering  air. 
that  he  might  not  be  unworthy  of  associating  even  with  a  hero  like 
Dolohov. 


WARANDPEACE  987 

Dolohov’s  appearance  struck  Petya  as  strange  through  its  simplicity. 
Denisov  was  dressed  in  a  Cossack  coat;  he  had  let  his  beard  grow, 
ad  had  a  holy  image  of  Nikolay,  the  wonder-worker,  on  his  breast.  His 
vsole  manner  of  speaking  and  all  his  gestures  were  suggestive  of  his 
puliar  position.  Dolohov,  on  the  contrary,  though  in  old  days  he  had 
vrn  a  Persian  dress  in  Moscow,  looked  now  like  the  most  correct  officer 
o  the  Guards.  He  was  clean-shaven ;  he  wore  the  wadded  coat  of  the 
tiards  with  a  St.  George  medal  on  a  ribbon,  and  a  plain  forage  cap, 
pt  on  straight  on  his  head.  He  took  his  wet  cloak  off  in  the  corner 
ad,  without  greeting  any  one,  went  straight  up  to  Denisov  and  began 
a  once  asking  questions  about  the  matter  in  hand.  Denisov  told  him 
o  the  designs  the  larger  detachment  had  upon  the  French  convoy,  of 
t;  message  Petya  had  brought,  and  the  answer  he  had  given  to  both 
eaerals.  Then  he  told  him  all  he  knew  of  the  position  of  the  French. 
That’s  so.  But  we  must  find  out  what  troops  they  are,  and  what  are 
teir  numbers,’  said  Dolohov;  ‘we  must  go  and  have  a  look  at  them, 
le  can’t  rush  into  the  thing  without  knowing  for  certain  how  many 
t ;re  are  of  them.  I  like  to  do  things  properly.  Come,  won’t  one  of  you 
2'itlemen  like  to  come  with  me  to  pay  them  a  call  in  their  camp?  I  have 
a  extra  uniform  with  me.’ 

‘I,  I  .  .  .  I’ll  come  with  you!’  cried  Petya. 

There’s  not  the  slightest  need  for  you  to  go,’  said  Denisov,  addressing 
Idohov;  ‘and  as  for  him  I  wouldn’t  let  him  go  on  any  account.’ 
That’s  good!’  cried  Petya;  ‘why  shouldn’t  I  go?  .  .  .’ 

TVhy,  because  there’s  no  reason  to.’ 

:Oh,  well,  excuse  me  .  .  .  because  .  .  .  because  ...  I’m  going,  and 
tit’s  all.  You  will  take  me?’  he  cried,  turning  to  Dolohov. 
fWhy  not?  .  .  .’  Dolohov  answered,  absently,  staring  into  the  face 
:  the  French  drummer-boy. 

‘Have  you  had  that  youngster  long?’  he  asked  Denisov. 

‘We  caught  him  to-day,  but  he  knows  nothing;  I  have  kept  him  with 
li’ 

!Oh,  and  what  do  you  do  with  the  rest?’  said  Dolohov. 

‘What  do  I  do  with  them?  I  take  a  receipt  for  them,  and  send  them 
: !  ’  cried  Denisov,  suddenly  Hushing.  ‘And  I  make  bold  to  say  that  I 
iven’t  a  single  man’s  life  on  my  conscience.  Is  there  any  difficulty  in 
yur  sending  thirty,  or  three  hundred  men,  under  escort,  to  the  town 
r  her  than  stain — I  say  so  bluntly — one’s  honour  as  a  soldier?’ 

‘It’s  all  very  well  for  this  little  count  here  at  sixteen  to  talk  of  such 
rinements,’  Dolohov  said,  with  a  cold  sneer;  ‘but  it’s  high  time  for 
ju  to  drop  all  that.’ 

‘Why,  I  am  not  saying  anything,  I  only  say  that  I  am  certainly  going 
Uh  you,’  said  Petya  shyly. 

‘But  for  me  and  you,  mate,  it’s  high  time  to  drop  such  delicacy,’ 
blohov  went  on,  apparently  deriving  peculiar  gratification  from  talking 
(  a  subject  irritating  to  Denisov.  ‘Why  have  you  kept  this  lad,’  he  said, 
‘:cept  because  you  are  sorry  for  him?  Why,  we  all  know  how  much 


OSS  WAR  AND  PEACE 

your  receipts  are  worth.  You  send  off  a  hundred  men  and  thirty  rea 
the  town.  They  die  of  hunger  or  are  killed  on  the  way.  So  isn’t  it  ji 
as  well  to  make  short  work  of  them?’ 

The  esaul,  screwing  up  his  light-coloured  eyes,  nodded  his  head  a 
provingly. 

‘That’s  not  my  affair,  no  need  to  discuss  it.  I  don’t  care  to  have  thi 
lives  on  my  conscience.  You  say  they  die.  Well,  let  them.  Only  r 
through  my  doing.’ 

Dolohov  laughed. 

‘Who  prevented  their  taking  me  twenty  times  over?  But  you  kn< 
if  they  do  catch  me — and  you  too  with  your  chivalrous  sentiments— 
will  just  be  the  same— the  nearest  aspen-tree.’  He  paused.  ‘We  must 
getting  to  work,  though.  Send  my  Cossack  here  with  the  pack.  I  ha 
two  French  uniforms.  Well,  are  you  coming  with  me?’  he  asked  Pet} 

‘I?  Yes,  yes,  of  course,’  cried  Petya,  blushing  till  the  tears  came  in 
his  eyes,  and  glancing  at  Denisov. 

While  Dolohov  had  been  arguing  with  Denisov  what  should  be  do 
with  prisoners,  Petya  had  again  had  that  feeling  of  discomfort  a: 
nervous  hurry;  but  again  he  had  not  time  to  get  a  clear  idea  of  wh 
they  were  talking  about.  ‘If  that’s  what  is  thought  by  grown-up  mt 
famous  leaders,  then  it  must  be  so,  it  must  be  all  right,’  he  thougl 
‘And  the  great  thing  is,  that  Denisov  shouldn’t  dare  to  imagine  that 
must  obey  him,  that  he  can  order  me  about.  I  shall  certainly  go  wi 
Dolohov  into  the  French  camp.  He  can  go,  and  so  can  I!’ 

To  all  Denisov’s  efforts  to  dissuade  him  from  going,  Petya  replied  th 
he  too  liked  doing  things  properly  and  not  in  haphazard  fashion,  and  tit 
he  never  thought  about  danger  to  himself. 

‘For,  you  must  admit,  if  we  don’t  know  exactly  how  many  men  the 
are  there,  it  might  cost  the  life  of  hundreds,  and  it  is  only  we  two,  and 
I  very  much  wish  it,  and  I  shall  certainly,  most  certainly  go,  and  doi 
try  to  prevent  me,’ he  said; ‘it  won’t  be  any  use  .  .  .’ 


IX 

Petya  and  Dolohov,  after  dressing  up  in  French  uniforms  and  shakof 
rode  to  the  clearing  from  which  Denisov  had  looked  at  the  French  cam 
and  coming  out  of  the  wood,  descended  into  the  hollow  in  the  pitch  dar 
ness.  When  they  had  ridden  downhill,  Dolohov  bade  the  Cossacks  a 
companying  him  to  wait  there,  and  set  off  at  a  smart  trot  along  the  ro; 
towards  the  bridge.  Petya,  faint  with  excitement,  trotted  along  beside  hii 
‘If  we  are  caught,  I  won’t  be  taken  alive.  I  have  a  pistol,’  whisper 
Petya. 

‘Don’t  speak  Russian,’  said  Dolohov,  in  a  rapid  whisper,  and  at  th 
moment  they  heard  in  the  dark  the  challenge:  ‘Who  goes  there?’  and  t 
click  of  a  gun. 


989 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

The  blood  rushed  into  Petya’s  face,  and  he  clutched  at  his  pistol. 

Uhlans  of  the  Sixth  Regiment,’  said  Dolohov,  neither  hastening  nor 
sckening  his  horse’s  pace. 

The  black  figure  of  a  sentinel  stood  on  the  bridge. 

The  password?’ 

Dolohov  reined  in  his  horse,  and  advanced  at  a  walking  pace. 

Tell  me,  is  Colonel  Gerard  here?’  he  said. 

Password?’  repeated  the  sentinel,  making  no  reply  and  barring  their 

f- 

When  an  officer  makes  his  round,  sentinels  don’t  ask  him  for  the  pass¬ 
ed  .  .  .’  cried  Dolohov,  suddenly  losing  his  temper  and  riding  straight 
i the  sentinel.  ‘I  ask  you,  is  the  colonel  here?’ 

And  not  waiting  for  an  answer  from  the  sentinel,  who  moved  aside, 
[ilohov  rode  at  a  walking  pace  uphill. 

Noticing  the  black  outline  of  a  man  crossing  the  road,  Dolohov  stopped 
?  man,  and  asked  where  the  colonel  and  officers  were.  The  man,  a  soldier 
A/h  a  sack  over  his  shoulder,  stopped,  came  close  up  to  Dolohov’s  horse, 
poking  it  with  his  hand,  and  told  them  in  a  simple  and  friendly  way 
:  it  the  colonel  and  the  officers  were  higher  up  the  hill,  on  the  right,  in 
; :  courtyard  of  the  farm,  as  he  called  the  little  manor-house. 

After  going  further  along  the  road,  from  both  sides  of  which  they  heard 
F?nch  talk  round  the  camp-fires,  Dolohov  turned  into  the  yard  of  the 
inor-house.  On  reaching  the  gate,  he  dismounted  and  walked  towards  a 
3;,  blazing  fire,  round  which  several  men  were  sitting,  engaged  in  loud 
:«iversation.  There  was  something  boiling  in  a  cauldron  on  one  side,  and 
roldier  in  a  peaked  cap  and  blue  coat,  kneeling  in  the  bright  glow  of  the 
h,  was  stirring  it  with  his  ramrod. 

He’s  a  tough  customer,’  said  one  of  the  officers,  sitting  in  the  shadow 
)  the  opposite  side  of  the  fire. 

He’ll  make  them  run,  the  rabbits’  (a  French  proverb),  said  the  other, 
a  h  a  laugh . 

Both  paused,  and  peered  into  the  darkness  at  the  sound  of  the  steps 
)  Petya  and  Dolohov  approaching  with  their  horses. 

Bonjour,  messieurs!’  Dolohov  called  loudly  and  distinctly. 

There  was  a  stir  among  the  officers  in  the  shadow,  and  a  tall  officer  with 
nng  neck  came  round  the  fire  and  went  up  to  Dolohov. 

Is  that  you,  Clement?’  said  he.  ‘Where  the  devil  .  .  .’  but  becoming 
lare  of  his  mistake,  he  did  not  finish,  and  with  a  slight  frown  greeted 
f  lohov  as  a  stranger,  and  asked  him  what  he  could  do  for  him.  Dolohov 
:d  him  that  he  and  his  comrade  were  trying  to  catch  up  their  regiment, 
li  asked,  addressing  the  company  in  general,  whether  the  officers  knew 
1 /thing  about  the  Sixth  Regiment.  No  one  could  tell  them  anything 
lout  it;  and  Petya  fancied  the  officers  began  to  look  at  him  and  Dolohov 
n  h  unfriendly  and  suspicious  eyes. 

'For  several  seconds  no  one  spoke. 

If  you’re  reckoning  on  some  soup,  you  have  come  too  late,’  said  a  voice 
f  m  behind  the  fire,  with  a  smothered  laugh. 


990  W  A  R  A'*N  D  PEACE 

Dolohov  answered  that  they  had  had  supper,  and  wanted  to  push  o 
further  that  night. 

He  gave  their  horses  to  the  soldier  who  was  stirring  the  pot,  and  squatte 
down  on  his  heels  beside  the  officer  with  the  long  neck.  The  latter  neve 
took  his  eyes  off  Dolohov,  and  asked  him  again  what  regiment  did  h 
belong  to. 

Dolohov  appeared  not  to  hear  the  question.  Making  no  answer,  h 
lighted  a  short  French  pipe  that  he  took  from  his  pocket,  and  asked  th 
officers  whether  the  road  ahead  of  them  were  safe  from  Cossacks. 

‘The  brigands  are  everywhere,’  answered  an  officer  from  behind  the  fin 

Dolohov  said  that  the  Cossacks  were  only  a  danger  for  stragglers  lik 
himself  and  his  comrade ;  ‘he  supposed  they  would  not  dare  to  attack  larg 
detachments,’  he  added  inquiringly. 

No  one  replied. 

‘Well,  now  he  will  come  away,’  Petya  was  thinking  every  moment,  a 
he  stood  by  the  fire  listening  to  the  talk. 

But  Dolohov  took  up  the  conversation  that  had  dropped,  and  proceede 
to  ask  them  point-blank  how  many  men  there  were  in  their  battalion,  ho’ 
many  battalions  they  had,  and  how  many  prisoners. 

When  he  asked  about  the  Russian  prisoners,  Dolohov  added: 

‘Nasty  business  dragging  those  corpses  about  with  one.  It  would  b 
better  to  shoot  the  vermin,’  and  he  broke  into  such  a  strange,  loud  laugl 
that  Petya  fancied  the  French  must  see  through  their  disguise  at  onc< 
and  he  involuntarily  stepped  back  from  the  fire. 

Dolohov’s  words  and  laughter  elicited  no  response,  and  a  French  office 
whom  they  had  not  seen  (he  lay  rolled  up  in  a  coat),  sat  up  and  whispere 
something  to  his  companion.  Dolohov  stood  up  and  called  to  the  mer 
who  held  their  horses. 

‘Will  they  give  us  the  horses  or  not?’  Petya  wondered,  unconsciousl 
coming  closer  to  Dolohov. 

They  did  give  them  the  horses.  ‘Bonsoir,  messieurs,’  said  Dolohov. 

Petya  tried  to  say  ‘Bonsoir,’  but  he  could  not  utter  a  sound.  The  officer 
were  whispering  together.  Dolohov  was  a  long  while  mounting  his  horst 
who  would  not  stand  still ;  then  he  rode  out  of  the  gate  at  a  walking  pact 
Petya  rode  beside  him,  not  daring  to  look  round,  though  he  was  longin 
to  see  whether  the  French  were  running  after  him  or  not. 

When  they  came  out  on  to  the  road,  Dolohov  did  not  turn  back  toward 
the  open  country,  but  rode  further  along  it  into  the  village. 

At  one  spot  he  stood  still,  listening.  ‘Do  you  hear?’  he  said.  Petya  recof 
nised  the  sound  of  voices  speaking  Russian,  and  saw  round  the  camp-fir 
the  dark  outlines  of  Russian  prisoners.  When  they  reached  the  bridg 
again,  Petya  and  Dolohov  passed  the  sentinel,  who,  without  uttering 
word,  paced  gloomily  up  and  down.  They  came  out  to  the  hollow  whet 
the  Cossacks  were  waiting  for  them. 

‘Well  now,  good-bye.  Tell  Denisov,  at  sunrise,  at  the  first  shot,’  sai 
Dolohov,  and  he  was  going  on,  but  Petya  clutched  at  his  arm. 


WAR  AND  PEACE  ggt 

‘Oh!  ’  he  cried,  ‘you  are  a  hero!  Oh!  how  splendid  it  is!  how  jolly!  How 
love  you! ’ 

‘That’s  all  right,’  answered  Dolohov,  but  Petya  did  not  let  go  of  him, 
id  in  the  dark  Dolohov  made  out  that  he  was  bending  over  to  him  to  be 
ssed.  Dolohov  kissed  him,  laughed,  and  turning  his  horse’s  head,  van- 
hed  into  the  darkness. 


X 

|n  reaching  the  hut  in  the  wood,  Petya  found  Denisov  in  the  porch.  He 
as  waiting  for  Petya’s  return  in  great  uneasiness,  anxiety,  and  vexation 
ith  himself  for  having  let  him  go. 

‘Thank  God!  ’  he  cried.  ‘Well,  thank  God!  ’  he  repeated,  hearing  Petya’s 
:static  account.  ‘And,  damn  you,  you  have  prevented  my  sleeping!’  he 
Ided.  ‘Well,  thank  God;  now,  go  to  bed.  We  can  still  get  a  nap  before 
orning.’ 

‘Yes  .  .  .  no,’  said  Petya.  ‘I’m  not  sleepy  yet.  Besides,  I  know  what  I 
n;  if  once  I  go  to  sleep,  it  will  be  all  up  with  me.  And  besides,  it’s  not 
y  habit  to  sleep  before  a  battle.’ 

Petya  sat  for  a  little  while  in  the  hut,  joyfully  recalling  the  details  of 
.s  adventure,  and  vividly  imagining  what  was  coming  next  day.  Then, 
Dticing  that  Denisov  had  fallen  asleep,  he  got  up  and  went  out  of  doors. 

It  was  still  quite  dark  outside.  The  rain  was  over,  but  the  trees  were 
ill  dripping.  Close  by  the  hut  could  be  seen  the  black  outlines  of  the 
ossacks’  shanties  and  the  horses  tied  together.  Behind  the  hut  there  was 
dark  blur  where  two  waggons  stood  with  the  horses  near  by,  and  in  the 
dIIow  there  was  a  red  glow  from  the  dying  fire.  The  Cossacks  and  the 
'ussars  were  not  all  asleep;  there  mingled  with  the  sound  of  the  falling 
'ops  and  the  munching  of  the  horses,  the  sound  of  low  voices,  that  seemed 
i  be  whispering. 

Petya  came  out  of  the  porch,  looked  about  him  in  the  darkness,  and 
lent  up  to  the  waggons.  Some  one  was  snoring  under  the  waggons,  and 
iddled  horses  were  standing  round  them  munching  oats.  In  the  dark 
etya  recognised  and  approached  his  own  mare,  whom  he  called  Kara- 
ach,  though  she  was  in  fact  of  a  Little  Russian  breed. 

‘Well,  Karabach,  to-morrow  we  shall  do  good  service,’  he  said,  sniffing 
er  nostrils  and  kissing  her. 

‘Why,  aren’t  you  asleep,  sir?’  said  a  Cossack,  sitting  under  the  wagon. 
‘No;  but  .  .  .  Lihatchev — I  believe  that’s  your  name,  eh?  Y'ou  know 
have  only  just  come  back.  We  have  been  calling  on  the  French.’  And 
etya  gave  the  Cossack  a  detailed  account,  not  only  of  his  adventure,  but 
jso  of  his  reasons  for  going,  and  why  he  thought  it  better  to  risk  his  life 
lan  to  do  things  in  a  haphazard  way. 

>  ‘Well,  you  must  be  sleepy;  get  a  little  sleep,’  said  the  Cossack. 

‘No,  I  am  used  to  it,’  answered  Petya.  ‘And  how  are  the  flints  in  your 


902  WAR  AND  PEACE 

pistols — not  worn  out?  I  brought  some  with  me.  Don't  you  want  any?  Do 
take  some.’ 

The  Cossack  popped  out  from  under  the  waggon  to  take  a  closer  look 
at  Petya. 

'For,  you  see,  I  like  to  do  everything  carefully,’  said  Petya.  ‘Some  men, 
you  know,  leave  things  to  chance,  and  don’t  have  things  ready,  and  then 
they  regret  it.  I  don’t  like  that.’ 

‘No,  to  be  sure,’  said  the  Cossack. 

‘Oh,  and  another  thing,  please,  my  dear  fellow,  sharpen  my  sabre  for 
me;  I  have  blunt  .  .  .’  (but  Petya  could  not  bring  out  a  lie)  .  .  . ‘it  has 
never  been  sharpened.  Can  you  do  that?’ 

‘To  be  sure  I  can.’ 

Lihatchev  stood  up,  and  rummaged  in  the  baggage,  and  Petya  stood 
and  heard  the  martial  sound  of  steel  and  whetstone.  He  clambered  on  to 
the  waggon,  and  sat  on  the  edge  of  it.  The  Cossack  sharpened  the  sabre 
below. 

‘Are  the  other  brave  fellows  asleep?’  said  Petya. 

‘Some  are  asleep, 'and  some  are  awake,  like  us.’ 

‘And  what  about  the  boy?’ 

‘Vesenny?  He’s  lying  yonder  in  the  hay.  He’s  sleeping  well  after  his 
fright.  He  was  so  pleased.’ 

For  a  long  while  after  that  Petya  sat  quiet,  listening  to  the  sounds. 
There  was  a  sound  of  footsteps  in  the  darkness,  and  a  dark  figure  ap¬ 
peared. 

‘What  are  you  sharpening?’  asked  a  man  coming  up  to  the  waggon. 

‘A  sabre  for  the  gentleman  here.’ 

‘That’s  a  good  thing,’  said  the  man,  who  seemed  to  Petya  to  be  an  hus¬ 
sar.  ‘Was  the  cup  left  with  you  here?’ 

‘It’s  yonder  by  the  wheel.’  The  hussar  took  the  cup.  ‘It  will  soon  be 
daylight,’  he  added,  yawning,  as  he  walked  off. 

Petya  must,  one  would  suppose,  have  known  that  he  was  in  a  wood, 
with  Denisov’s  band  of  irregulars,  a  verst  from  the  road;  that  he  was 
sitting  on  a  waggon  captured  from  the  French;  that  there  were  horses 
fastened  to  it ;  that  under  it  was  sitting  the  Cossack  Lihatchev  sharpening 
his  sabre;  that  the  big,  black  blur  on  the  right  was  the  hut,  and  the  red, 
bright  glow  below  on  the  left  the  dying  camp-fire;  that  the  man  who  had 
come  for  the  cup  was  an  hussar  who  was  thirsty.  But  Petya  knew  nothing 
of  all  that,  and  refused  to  know  it.  He  was  in  a  fairyland,  in  which  nothing 
was  like  the  reality.  The  big  patch  of  shadow  might  be  a  hut  certainly,  but 
it  might  be  a  cave  leading  down  into  the  very  depths  of  the  earth.  The  red 
patch  might  be  a  fire,  but  it  might  be  the  eye  of  a  huge  monster.  Perhaps 
he  really  was  sitting  now  on  a  waggon,  but  very  likely  he  was  sitting  not  on 
a  waggon,  but  on  a  fearfully  high  tower,  and  if  he  fell  off,  he  would  go  on 
flying  to  the  earth  for  a  whole  day,  for  a  whole  month — fly  and  fly  for  ever 
and  never  reach  it.  Perhaps  it  was  simply  the  Cossack  Lihatchev  sitting 
under  the  waggon;  but  very  likely  it  was  the  kindest,  bravest,  most  won¬ 
derful  and  splendid  man  in  the  world  whom  no  one  knew  of.  Perhaps  it 


WAR  AND  PEACE  993 

really  was  an  hussar  who  had  come  for  water  and  gone  into  the  hollow ;  but 
perhaps  he  had  just  vanished,  vanished  altogether  and  was  no  more. 

Whatever  Petya  had  seen  now,  it  would  not  have  surprised  him.  He 
was  in  a  land  of  fairy,  where  everything  was  possible. 

He  gazed  at  the  sky.  The  sky  too  was  an  enchanted  realm  like  the 
earth.  It  had  begun  to  clear,  and  the  clouds  were  scudding  over  the  tree- 
tops,  as  though  unveiling  the  stars.  At  times  it  seemed  as  though  they 
were  swept  away,  and  there  were  glimpses  of  clear,  black  sky  between 
them.  At  times  these  black  patches  looked  like  storm-clouds.  At  times 
the  sky  seemed  to  rise  high,  high  overhead,  and  then  again  to  be  dropping 
down  so  that  one  could  reach  it  with  the  hand. 

Petya  closed  his  eyes  and  began  to  nod.  The  branches  dripped.  There 
was  a  low  hum  of  talk  and  the  sound  of  some  one  snoring.  The  horses 
neighed  and  scuffled. 

‘Ozheeg,  zheeg,  ozheeg,  zheeg  .  .  .’ hissed  the  sabre  on  the  whetstone; 
and  all  at  once  Petya  seemed  to  hear  harmonious  music,  an  orchestra  play¬ 
ing  some  unfamiliar,  solemnly  sweet  hymn.  Petya  was  as  musical  by  na¬ 
ture  as  Natasha,  and  far  more  so  than  Nikolay;  but  he  had  had  no  musi¬ 
cal  training,  and  never  thought  about  music,  so  that  the  melody  that  came 
unexpectedly  into  his  mind  had  a  special  freshness  and  charm  for  him. 
The  music  became  more  and  more  distinct.  The  melody  grew  and  passed 
from  one  instrument  to  another.  There  was  being  played  what  is  called 
a  fugue,  though  Petya  had  not  the  slightest  idea  of  what  was  meant  by  a 
fugue.  Each  instrument — one  like  a  violin,  others  like  flutes,  but  fuller  and 
more  melodious  than  violins  and  flutes — played  its  part,  and  before  it  had 
finished  the  air,  melted  in  with  another,  beginning  almost  the  same  air, 
and  with  a  third  and  a  fourth;  and  all  mingled  into  one  harmony,  and 
parted  again,  and  again  mingled  into  solemn  church  music,  and  then  into 
some  brilliant  and  triumphant  song  of  victory. 

‘Oh  yes,  of  course  I  am  dreaming,’  Petya  said  to  himself,  nodding  for¬ 
ward.  ‘It  is  only  in  my  ears.  Perhaps,  though,  it’s  my  own  music.  Come, 
again.  Strike  up,  my  music!  Come!  .  .  .’ 

He  closed  his  eyes.  And  from  various  directions  the  sounds  began  vi¬ 
brating  as  though  from  a  distance,  began  to  strike  up,  to  part,  and  to 
mingle  again,  all  joined  in  the  same  sweet  and  solemn  hymn.  ‘Ah  how 
exquisite!  As  much  as  I  want,  and  as  I  like  it!  ’  Petya  said  to  himself.  He 
tried  to  conduct  this  immense  orchestra. 

‘Come,  softly,  softly,  now!’  And  the  sounds  obeyed  him.  ‘Come,  now 
fuller,  livelier!  More  and  more  joyful!’  And  from  unknown  depths  rose 
the  swelling,  triumphant  sounds.  ‘Now,  voices,  join  in !  ’  Petya  commanded. 
And  at  first  in  the  distance  he  heard  men’s  voices,  then  women’s.  The 
voices  swelled  into  rhythmic,  triumphant  fulness.  Petya  felt  awe  and 
joy  as  he  drank  in  their  marvellous  beauty. 

With  the  triumphant  march  of  victory  mingled  the  song  of  voices,  and 
the  drip  of  the  branches  and  the  zheeg,  zheeg,  zheeg  of  the  sabre  on  the 
whetstone;  and  again  the  horses  neighed  and  scuffled,  not  disturbing  the 
harmony,  but  blending  into  it.  How  long  it  lasted,  Petya  could  not  tell; 


Q94 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

he  was  enjoying  it,  and  wondering  all  the  while  at  his  own  enjoyment,  and 
regretting  he  had  no  one  to  share  it  with.  He  was  waked  by  the  friendly 
voice  of  Lihatchev. 

‘It’s  ready,  your  honour,  you  can  cut  the  Frenchman  in  two  now.’ 

Petya  waked  up. 

‘Why,  it’s  light  already;  it’s  really  getting  light,’  he  cried.  The  horses, 
unseen  before,  were  visible  to  the  tails  now,  and  through  the  leafless 
boughs  there  could  be  seen  a  watery  light.  Petya  shook  himself,  jumped 
up,  took  a  rouble  out  of  his  pocket,  and  gave  it  to  Lihatchev,  brandished 
his  sabre  to  try  it,  and  thrust  it  into  the  scabbard.  The  Cossacks  were 
untying  the  horses  and  fastening  the  saddlegirths. 

‘And  here  is  the  commander,’  said  Lihatchev. 

Denisov  came  out  of  the  hut,  and  calling  to  Petya,  bade  him  get  ready. 

XI 

Rapidly  in  the  twilight  the  men  picked  out  their  horses,  tightened  saddle- 
girths,  and  formed  into  parties.  Denisov  stood  by  the  hut,  giving  the  last 
orders.  The  infantry  of  the  detachment  moved  on  along  the  road,  hun¬ 
dreds  of  feet  splashing  through  the  mud.  They  quickly  vanished  among 
the  trees  in  the  mist  before  the  dawn.  The  esaul  gave  some  order  to  the 
Cossacks.  Petya  held  his  horse  by  the  bridle,  eagerly  awaiting  the  word 
of  command  to  mount.  His  face  glowed  from  a  dip  in  cold  water,  and  his 
eyes  gleamed.  He  felt  a  chill  running  down  his  back,  and  a  kind  of  rapid, 
rhythmic  throbbing  all  over. 

‘Well,  have  you  everything  ready.?’  said  Denisov.  ‘Give  us  our  horses.’ 

They  brought  the  horses  up.  Denisov  was  vexed  with  the  Cossack  be¬ 
cause  the  saddlegirths  were  slack,  and  swore  at  him  as  he  mounted  his 
horse.  Petya  put  his  foot  in  the  stirrup.  The  horse,  as  its  habit  was,  made 
as  though  to  nip  at  his  leg;  but  Petya  leaped  into  the  saddle,  unconscious 
of  his  own  weight,  and  looking  round  at  the  hussars  moving  up  from  be¬ 
hind  in  the  darkness,  he  rode  up  to  Denisov. 

‘Vassily  Fyodorovitch,  you  will  trust  me  with  some  commission? 
Please  ...  for  God’s  sake  .  .  .’  he  said.  Denisov  seemed  to  have  for¬ 
gotten  Petya’s  existence.  He  looked  round  at  him. 

‘One  thing  I  beg  of  you,’  he  said  sternly,  ‘to  obey  me  and  not  to  put 
yourself  forward.’ 

All  the  way  Denisov  did  not  say  another  word  to  Petya ;  he  rode  on  in 
silence.  By  the  time  that  they  reached  the  edge  of  the  wood,  it  was  per¬ 
ceptibly  getting  light  in  the  open  country.  Denisov  whispered  something 
to  the  esaul,  and  the  Cossacks  began  riding  by  Petya  and  Denisov.  When 
they  had  all  passed  on  Denisov  put  his  spurs  to  his  horse,  and  rode  down¬ 
hill.  Slipping  and  sinking  back  on  their  haunches,  the  horses  slid  down 
into  the  hollow  with  their  riders.  Petya  kept  beside  Denisov.  The  tremor 
all  over  him  was  growing  more  intense.  It  was  getting  lighter  and  lighter, 


WARANDPEACE  ggS 

but  the  mist  hid  objects  at  a  distance.  When  he  had  reached  the  bottom, 
Denisov  looked  back  and  nodded  to  the  Cossack  beside  him. 

‘The  signal,’  he  said.  The  Cossack  raised  his  arm,  and  a  shot  rang  out. 
At  the  same  moment  they  heard  the  tramp  of  horses  galloping  in  front, 
shouts  from  different  directions,  and  more  shots. 

The  instant  that  he  heard  the  first  tramp  of  hoofs  and  shouts,  Petya 
gave  the  rein  to  his  horse,  and  lashing  him  on,  galloped  forward,  heedless 
of  Denisov,  who  shouted  to  him.  It  seemed  to  Petya  that  it  suddenly  be¬ 
came  broad  daylight,  as  though  it  were  midday,  at  the  moment  when  he 
heard  the  shot.  He  galloped  to  the  bridge.  The  Cossacks  were  galloping 
along  the  road  in  front.  At  the  bridge  he  jostled  against  a  Cossack  who  had 
lagged  behind,  and  he  galloped  on.  In  front  Petya  saw  men  of  some  sort — 
the  French  he  supposed — running  across  the  road  from  right  to  left.  One 
slipped  in  the  mud  under  his  horse’s  legs. 

Cossacks  were  crowding  about  a  hut,  doing  something.  A  fearful  scream 
rose  out  of  the  middle  of  the  crowd.  Petya  galloped  to  this  crowd,  and  the 
first  thing  he  saw  was  the  white  face  and  trembling  lower-jaw  of  a  French¬ 
man,  who  had  clutched  hold  of  a  lance  aimed  at  his  breast. 

‘Hurrah!  .  .  .  Mates  .  .  .  ours  .  .  .’  shouted  Petya,  and  giving  the 
rein  to  his  excited  horse,  he  galloped  on  down  the  village  street. 

He  heard  firing  in  front.  Cossacks,  hussars,  and  tattered  Russian  prison¬ 
ers,  running  up  from  both  sides  of  the  road,  were  all  shouting  something 
loud  and  unintelligible.  A  gallant-looking  Frenchman,  in  a  blue  coat,  with 
a  red,  frowning  face,  and  no  cap,  was  keeping  back  the  hussars  with  a 
bayonet.  By  the  time  that  Petya  galloped  up,  the  Frenchman  had  fallen. 
Too  late  again,’  flashed  through  Petya’s  brain,  and  he  galloped  to  the 
spot  where  he  heard  the  hottest  fire.  The  shots  came  from  the  yard  of  the 
manor-house  where  he  had  been  the  night  before  with  Dolohov.  The 
French  were  ambushing  there  behind  the  fence  in  among  the  bushes  of  the 
overgrown  garden,  and  firing  at  the  Cossacks  who  were  crowding  round 
the  gates.  As  he  rode  up  to  the  gates,  Petya  caught  a  glimpse  in  the  smoke 
of  Dolohov’s  white,  greenish  face,  as  he  shouted  something  to  the  men. 
Go  round.  Wait  for  the  infantry!  ’  he  was  shouting,  just  as  Petya  rode  up 
to  him. 

‘Wait?  .  .  .  Hurrah!  .  .  .’ shouted  Petya,  and  without  pausing  a  mo¬ 
ment,  he  galloped  towards  the  spot  where  he  heard  the  shots,  and  where 
the  smoke  was  the  thickest.  There  came  a  volley  of  shots  with  the  sound 
of  bullets  whizzing  by  and  thudding  into  something.  The  Cossacks  and 
Dolohov  galloped  in  at  the  gates  after  Petya.  In  the  thick,  hovering  smoke 
the  French  flung  down  their  arms  and  ran  out  of  the  bushes  to  meet  the 
Cossacks,  or  fled  downhill  towards  the  pond.  Petya  was  galloping  on  round 
the  courtyard,  but  instead  of  holding  the  reins,  he  was  flinging  up  both 
arms  in  a  strange  way,  and  slanting  more  and  more  to  one  side  in  the 
saddle.  The  horse  stepped  on  to  the  ashes  of  the  fire  smouldering  in  the 
morning  light,  and  stopped  short.  Petya  fell  heavily  on  the  wet  earth. 
The  Cossacks  saw  his  arms  and  legs  twitching  rapidly,  though  his  head 
did  not  move.  A  bullet  had  passed  through  his  brain. 


996  WARANDPEACE 

After  parleying  with  the  French  senior  officer,  who  came  out  of  the 
house  with  a  handkerchief  on  a  sword  to  announce  that  they  surrendered. 
Dolohov  got  off  his  horse  and  went  up  to  Petya,  who  lay  motionless  with 
outstretched  arms. 

‘Done  for,’  he  said  frowning,  and  walked  to  the  gate  to  Denisov,  who 
was  riding  towards  him. 

‘Killed?’  cried  Denisov,  even  from  a  distance  recognising  the  familiar, 
unmistakably  lifeless  posture  in  which  Petya’s  body  was  lying. 

‘Done  for,’  Dolohov  repeated,  as  though  the  utterance  of  those  words 
afforded  him  satisfaction ;  and  he  walked  rapidly  towards  the  prisoners, 
whom  the  Cossacks  were  hurriedly  surrounding.  ‘No  quarter!  ’  he  shouted 
to  Denisov.  Denisov  made  no  reply.  He  went  up  to  Petya,  got  off  his  horse, 
and  with  trembling  hands  turned  over  the  blood-stained,  mud-spattered 
face  that  was  already  turning  white. 

‘I’m  fond  of  sweet  things.  They  are  capital  raisins,  take  them  all,’  came 
into  his  mind.  And  the  Cossacks  looked  round  in  surprise  at  the  sound  like 
the  howl  of  a  dog,  that  Denisov  uttered  as  he  turned  away,  walked  to  the 
fence  and  clutched  at  it. 

Among  the  Russian  prisoners  rescued  by  Denisov  and  Dolohov  was 
Pierre  Bezuhov. 

XII 

The  party  of  prisoners,  of  whom  Pierre  was  one,  was  on  the  22nd  of 
October  not  with  the  troops  and  transport,  in  whose  company  they  had 
left  Moscow,  though  no  fresh  instructions  in  regard  to  them  had  been 
given  by  the  French  authorities.  Half  of  the  transport  with  stores  of  bis¬ 
cuit,  which  had  followed  them  during  the  early  stages  of  the  march,  had 
been  carried  off  by  the  Cossacks,  the  other  half  had  got  away  in  front. 
Of  the  cavalry  soldiers  on  foot,  who  had  marched  in  front  of  the  prisoners, 
not  one  was  left ;  they  had  all  disappeared.  The  artillery,  which  the  prison¬ 
ers  had  seen  in  front  during  the  early  stages,  was  now  replaced  by  the 
immense  train  of  Marshal  Junot’s  baggage,  convoyed  by  an  escort  of 
Westphalians.  Behind  the  prisoners  came  a  transport  of  cavalry  ac¬ 
coutrements. 

The  French  had  at  first  marched  in  three  columns,  but  from  Vyazma 
they  had  formed  a  single  mass.  The  symptoms  of  lack  of  discipline,  which 
Pierre  had  observed  at  the  first  halt  outside  Moscow,  had  by  now  reached 
their  extreme  limits. 

The  road  along  which  they  marched  was  strewn  on  both  sides  with  the 
carcases  of  dead  horses.  The  tattered  soldiers,  stragglers  from  different 
regiments,  were  continually  changing,  joining  the  column  as  it  marched, 
and  dropping  behind  it  again.  Several  times  there  had  been  false  alarms, 
and  the  soldiers  of  the  convoy  had  raised  their  guns,  and  fired  and  fled, 
trampling  one  another  underfoot.  Then  they  had  rallied  again,  and  abused 
one  another  for  their  causeless  panic. 

These  three  bodies,  travelling  together — the  cavalry  transport,  the  com 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


997 

voy  of  prisoners,  and  Junot's  baggage  transport — still  made  up  a  complete 
separate  whole,  though  each  of  its  three  parts  was  rapidly  dwindling  away. 

Of  the  cavalry  transport,  which  had  at  first  consisted  of  one  hundred 
and  twenty  waggons,  only  sixty  were  left;  the  rest  had  been  carried  off  or 
abandoned.  Several  waggonloads  of  Junot’s  baggage,  too,  had  been  dis¬ 
carded  or  captured.  Three  waggons  had  been  attacked  and  pillaged  by 
stragglers  from  Davoust’s  regiment.  From  the  talk  he  overheard  among 
the  Germans,  Pierre  learned  that  a  more  careful  watch  was  kept  over  this 
baggage-train  than  over  the  prisoners,  and  that  one  of  their  comrades,  a 
German,  had  been  shot  by  order  of  the  marshal  himself  because  a  silver 
spoon  belonging  to  the  marshal  had  been  found  in  the  soldier’s  possession. 

The  convoy  of  prisoners  had  dwindled  even  more  than  the  other  two 
convoys.  Of  the  three  hundred  and  thirty  men  who  had  started  from  Mos¬ 
cow  there  were  now  less  than  a  hundred  left.  The  prisoners  were  a  burden 
even  more  irksome  to  the  soldiers  than  the  cavalry  stores  and  Junot’s 
baggage.  The  saddles  and  Junot’s  spoons  they  could  understand  might  be 
of  some  use,  but  why  cold  and  starving  soldiers  should  stand  as  sentinels, 
keeping  guard  over  Russians  as  cold  and  starving,  who  were  continually 
dying  and  being  left  behind  on  the  road,  and  whom  they  had  orders  to 
shoot — it  was  not  only  incomprehensible,  but  revolting.  And  the  soldiers 
of  the  escort,  apparently  afraid  in  the  miserable  plight  they  were  in  them¬ 
selves,  to  give  way  to  the  pity  they  felt  for  the  prisoners,  for  fear  of  mak¬ 
ing  their  own  lot  harder,  treated  them  with  marked  moroseness  and 

I  severity. 

At  Dorogobuzh  the  soldiers  of  the  escort  had  gone  off  to  plunder  their 
own  stores,  leaving  the  prisoners  locked  in  a  stable,  and  several  prisoners 
had  burrowed  under  the  wall  and  run  away,  but  they  were  caught  by  the 
French  and  shot. 

The  arrangement,  made  at  the  start  from  Moscow,  that  the  officers 
among  the  prisoners  should  march  separately  from  the  common  soldiers, 
had  long  since  been  given  up.  All  who  could  walk  marched  together;  and 
at  the  third  stage  Pierre  had  rejoined  Karataev  and  the  bow-legged, 
purple-grey  dog,  who  had  chosen  Karataev  for  her  master. 

On  the  third  day  after  leaving  Moscow,  Karataev  had  a  return  of  the 
fever,  which  had  kept  him  in  the  Moscow  hospital,  and  as  Karataev’s 
strength  failed,  Pierre  held  more  aloof  from  him.  Pierre  could  not  have 
said  why  it  was,  but  from  the  time  Karataev  fell  sick,  he  had  to  make  an 
effort  to  force  himself  to  go  near  him.  And  when  he  did  go  near  him  and 
heard  the  subdued  moans,  which  Karataev  often  uttered,  as  he  lay  at  the 
halting-places,  and  smelt  the  increasing  odour  from  the  sick  man,  Pierre 
moved  further  away  from  him  and  did  not  think  about  him. 

In  captivity  in  the  shed  that  had  been  his  prison,  Pierre  had  learned,  not 
through  his  intellect,  but  through  his  whole  being,  through  life,  that  man 
is  created  for  happiness,  that  happiness  lies  in  himself,  in  the  satisfaction 
of  his  natural,  human  cravings;  that  all  unhappiness  is  due,  not  to  lack 
of  what  is  needful,  but  to  superfluity.  But  now,  during  the  last  three  weeks 
of  the  march,  he  had  learned  another  new  and  consolatory  truth — he  had 


998  WARANDPEACE 

learned  that  there  is  nothing  terrible  to  be  dreaded  in  the  world.  He  had 
learned  that  just  as  there  is  no  position  in  the  world  in  which  a  man  can  be 
happy  and  perfectly  free,  so  too  there  is  no  position  in  which  he  need  be 
unhappy  and  in  bondage.  He  had  found  out  that  there  is  a  limit  to  suffer¬ 
ing  and  a  limit  to  freedom,  and  that  that  limit  is  very  soon  reached;  that 
the  man  who  suffered  from  a  crumpled  petal  in  his  bed  of  roses,  suffered 
just  as  much  as  he  suffered  now,  sleeping  on  the  bare,  damp  earth,  with 
one  side  getting  chilled  as  the  other  side  got  warm;  that  when  in  former 
days  he  had  put  on  his  tight  dancing-shoes,  he  had  suffered  in  just  the 
same  way  as  now,  when  he  walked  quite  barefoot  (his  foot-gear  had  long 
since  fallen  to  pieces),  with  his  feet  covered  with  sores.  He  learned  that 
when  he  had — by  his  own  free-will,  as  he  had  fancied — married  his  wife, 
he  had  been  no  more  free  than  now  when  he  was  locked  up  for  the  night 
in  a  stable.  Of  all  that  he  did  himself  afterwards  call  sufferings,  though  at 
the  time  he  hardly  felt  them  so,  the  chief  was  the  state  of  his  bare,  blis¬ 
tered,  sore  feet.  The  horse-flesh  was  savoury  and  nourishing,  the  saltpetre 
flavour  given  it  by  the  gunpowder  they  used  instead  of  salt  was  positively 
agreeable;  there  was  no  great  degree  of  cold,  it  was  always  warm  in  the 
daytime  on  the  march,  and  at  night  there  were  the  camp-fires,  and  the  lice 
that  devoured  him  helped  to  keep  him  warm.  One  thing  was  painful  in  the 
earlier  days — that  was  his  feet. 

On  the  second  day  of  the  march,  as  he  examined  his  blisters  by  the 
camp-fire,  Pierre  thought  he  could  not  possibly  walk  on  them;  but  when 
they  all  got  up,  he  set  off  limping,  and  later  on,  when  he  got  warm,  he 
walked  without  pain,  though  his  feet  looked  even  more  terrible  that 
evening.  But  he  did  not  look  at  them,  and  thought  of  something  else. 

Only  now  Pierre  grasped  all  the  force  of  vitality  in  man,  and  the  saving 
power  innate  in  man,  of  transferring  his  attention,  like  the  safety-valve 
in  steam-engines,  that  lets  off  the  superfluous  steam  so  soon  as  its  pressure 
exceeds  a  certain  point. 

He  did  not  see  and  did  not  hear  how  the  prisoners  that  lagged  behind 
were  shot,  though  more  than  a  hundred  of  them  had  perished  in  that  way. 
He  did  not  think  about  Karataev,  who  was  getting  weaker  every  day,  and 
would  obviously  soon  fall  a  victim  to  the  same  fate.  Still  less  did  Pierre 
think  about  himself.  The  harder  his  lot  became,  the  more  terrible  his 
future,  the  more  independent  of  his  present  plight  were  the  glad  and 
soothing  thoughts,  memories,  and  images  that  occurred  to  him. 


XIII 

At  midday  on  the  22nd,  Pierre  was  walking  along  the  muddy,  slippery 
road  uphill,  looking  at  his  feet  and  at  the  unevenness  of  the  road.  From 
time  to  time  he  glanced  at  the  familiar  crowd  around  him,  and  then  again 
at  his  feet.  Both  that  crowd  and  those  feet  were  alike  his  and  familiar  to 
him.  The  purplish,  bandy-legged,  grey  dog  was  running  merrily  along 
at  the  side  of  the  road;  sometimes  picking  up  a  hind  leg,  and  skipping 


WARANDPEACE  999 

.long  on  three  paws  as  a  sign  of  content  and  briskness,  or  barking  at  the 
rows  that  perched  on  the  carrion.  The  grey  dog  was  sleeker  and  merrier 
han  in  Moscow.  All  around  lay  the  flesh  of  different  animals — from  men 
0  horses — in  different  stages  of  decomposition,  and  the  marching  soldiers 
>revented  wolves  from  coming  near  it,  so  that  the  grey  dog  could  feast 
0  her  heart’s  content. 

Rain  had  been  falling  since  early  morning;  and  it  seemed  continually 
is  though  in  another  minute  it  would  cease  and  the  sky  would  clear, 
,vhen,  after  a  short  break,  the  rain  came  on  again  more  heavily.  The 
•oad,  saturated  with  rain,  could  soak  up  no  more,  and  streams  flowed 
dong  the  ruts. 

Pierre  walked,  looking  from  side  to  side,  counting  his  steps,  and 
reckoning  them  off  in  threes  on  his  fingers.  Inwardly  addressing  the 
rain,  he  said  to  it,  ‘Now  then,  come  on  then,  pelt  away!  ’ 

It  seemed  to  him  that  he  was  thinking  of  nothing  at  all;  but  some¬ 
where  deep  down  his  soul  was  pondering  something  grave  and  consolatory. 
That  something  was  the  subtlest,  spiritual  deduction  arising  from  his 
talk  the  night  before  with  Karataev. 

Getting  chilled  by  the  dying  fire  on  the  previous  night’s  halt,  Pierre 
had  got  up  and  moved  to  the  next  fire,  which  was  burning  better.  There 
Platon  was  sitting,  with  a  coat  put  over  his  head,  like  a  priest’s  chasuble. 
In  his  flexible,  pleasant  voice,  feeble  now  from  illness,  he  was  telling  the 
soldiers  a  story  Pierre  had  heard  already.  It  was  past  midnight,  the  time 
when  Karataev’s  fever  usually  abated,  and  he  was  particularly  lively. 
As  he  drew  near  the  fire  and  heard  Platon’s  weak,  sickly  voice,  and  saw 
his  piteous  mien  in  the  bright  firelight,  Pierre  felt  a  pang  at  heart.  He 
was  frightened  at  his  own  pity  for  this  man,  and  would  have  gone  away, 
but  there  was  no  other  fire  to  go  to,  and  trying  not  to  look  at  Platon,  he 
sat  down  by  it. 

‘Well,  how  is  your  fever?’  he  asked. 

‘How  is  my  fever?  Weep  over  sickness,  and  God  won’t  give  you  death,’ 
said  Karataev,  and  he  went  back  at  once  to  the  story  he  had  begun. 

‘And  so,  brother,’  he  went  on  with  a  smile  on  his  thin,  white  face,  and 
a  peculiar,  joyful  light  in  his  eyes,  ‘And  so,  brother  .  .  .’ 

Pierre  had  heard  the  story  long  before.  Karataev  had  told  it  to  him 
about  six  times  already,  and  always  with  special  joyful  emotion.  But 
well  as  Pierre  knew  the  story,  he  listened  to  it  now  as  though  it  were 
something  new,  and  the  subdued  ecstasy,  which  Karataev  evidently  felt 
in  telling  it,  infected  Pierre  too. 

It  was  the  story  of  an  old  merchant,  who  had  lived  in  good  works  and 
in  the  fear  of  God  with  his  family,  and  had  made  a  journey  one  day 
with  a  companion,  a  rich  merchant,  to  Makary. 

Both  the  merchants  had  put  up  at  an  inn  and  gone  to  sleep;  and  next 
day  the  rich  merchant  had  been  found  robbed,  and  with  his  throat  cut. 
A  knife,  stained  with  blood,  was  found  under  the  old  merchant’s  pillow. 
The  merchant  was  tried,  sentenced  to  be  flogged,  and  to  have  his  nostrils 


iooo  WAR  AND  PEACE 

slit — all  according  to  the  law  in  due  course,  as  Karataev  said — and  ser. 
to  hard  labour. 

‘And  so,  brother’  (it  was  at  this  point  in  the  story  that  Pierre  fount' 
Karataev)  ‘ten  years  or  more  passed  by  after  that.  The  old  man  live! 
on  in  prison.  He  submits,  as  is  fitting;  lie  does  nothing  wrong.  Only  h< 
prays  to  God  for  death.  Very  well.  And  so  at  night-time  they  are  gatherec 
together,  the  convicts,  just  as  we  are  here,  and  the  old  man  with  them 
And  so  they  fall  to  talking  of  what  each  is  suffering  for,  and  how  he  ha; 
sinned  against  God.  One  tells  how  he  took  a  man’s  life,  another  two,  an¬ 
other  had  set  fire  to  something,  and  another  was  a  runaway  just  for  nc 
reason.  So  they  began  asking  the  old  man,  “What,”  they  say,  “are  yon 
suffering  for,  grandfather?”  “I  am  suffering,  dear  brethren,”  says  he. 
“for  my  own  sins,  and  for  other  men’s  sins.  I  have  not  taken  a  life,  nor 
taken  other  men’s  goods,  save  what  I  have  bestowed  on  poorer  brethren, 
I  was  a  merchant,  dear  brethren,  and  I  had  great  wealth.”  And  he  tells 
them  this  and  that,  and  how  the  whole  thing  had  happened.  “For  myself, ”i 
says  he,  “I  do  not  grieve.  God  has  chastened  me.  The  only  thing,”  says 
he,  “I  am  sorry  for  my  old  wife  and  my  children.”  And  so  the  old  man 
fell  a-weeping.  And  it  so  happened  that  in  that  company  there  was  the 
very  man,  you  know,  who  had  killed  the  merchant.  “Where  did  it  hnp- 
oen,  grandfather?”  says  he.  “When  and  in  what  month?”  and  so  he 
asked  him  all  about  it.  His  heart  began  to  ache.  Fie  goes  up  to  the  old 
man  like  this — and  falls  down  at  his  feet.  “You  are  suffering  for  me, 
old  man,”  says  he.  “It’s  the  holy  truth;  this  man  is  tormented  innocently, 
lor  nothing,  lads,”  says  he.  “I  did  that  deed,”  says  he,  “and  put  the  knife 
under  his  head  when  he  was  asleep.  Forgive  me,  grandfather,  for  Christ’s 
sake!  ”  says  he.’ 

Karataev  paused,  smiling  blissfully,  and  gazing  at  the  fire,  as  he 
rearranged  the  logs. 

‘The  old  man,  he  says,  “God  forgive  you,”  says  he,  “but  we  are  all 
sinners  before  God,”  says  he.  “I  am  suffering  for  my  own  sins.”  And  he 
wept  with  bitter  tears.  What  do  you  think,  darling?’  said  Karataev,  his 
ecstatic  smile  growing  more  and  more  radiant,  as  though  the  great  charm 
and  whole  point  of  his  story  lay  in  what  he  was  going  to  tell  now,  ‘what 
do  you  think,  darling,  that  murderer  confessed  of  himself  to  the  police. 
“I  have  killed  six  men,”  says  he  (for  he  was  a  great  criminal),  “but 
what  I  am  most  sorry  for  is  this  old  man.  Let  him  not  weep  through  my 
fault.’”  He  confessed.  It  was  written  down,  and  a  paper  sent  off  to  the 
right  place.  The  place  was  far  away.  Then  came  a  trial.  Then  all  the 
reports  were  written  in  due  course,  by  the  authorities,  I  mean.  It  was 
brought  to  the  Tsar.  Then  a  decree  comes  from  the  Tsar  to  let  the 
merchant  go  free;  to  give  him  the  recompense  they  had  awarded  him. 
The  paper  comes;  they  fall  to  looking  for  the  old  man.  Where  was  that 
old  man  who  had  suffered  innocently?  The  paper  had  come  from  the 
Tsar,  and  they  fell  to  looking  for  him.’  Karataev’s  lower  jaw  quivered. 
‘But  God  had  pardoned  him  already — he  was  dead!  So  it  happened, 


IOC  1 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

Barling!’  Karataev  concluded,  and  he  gazed  a  long  while  straight  before 
lim,  smiling  silently. 

Not  the  story  itself,  but  its  mysterious  import,  the  ecstatic  gladness 
nat  beamed  in  Karataev’s  face  as  he  told  it,  the  mysterious  significance 
if  that  gladness  vaguely  filled  and  rejoiced  Pierre’s  soul  now. 


XIV 

To  your  places!’  a  voice  shouted  suddenly. 

There  was  a  cheerful  stir  among  the  prisoners  and  convoy  soldiers, 
and  an  air  of  expecting  something  festive  and  solemn.  Shouted  com¬ 
mands  could  be  heard  on  all  sides,  and  a  party  of  well-dressed  cavalry 
[soldiers  on  good  horses  came  trotting  up  from  the  left,  making  a  circuit 
■round  the  prisoners.  Every  face  w'ore  the  look  of  nervousness  commonly 
seen  at  the  approach  of  men  in  authority.  The  prisoners  huddled  together 
and  were  shoved  out  of  the  way.  The  convoy  soldiers  formed  in  ranks. 

‘The  Emperor!  The  Emperor!  The  marshal!  The  duke!  .  .  .’ and  the 
sleek  cavalry  soldiers  had  hardly  ridden  by  when  a  carriage  rattled  up 
drawn  by  grey  horses.  Pierre  had  a  passing  glimpse  of  the  serene,  hand¬ 
some,  fat,  white  face  of  a  man  in  a  three-cornered  hat.  It  was  one  of  the 
marshals.  The  marshal’s  eye  was  caught  by  Pierre’s  big,  striking  figure; 
and  in  the  expression  with  which  he  frowned  and  looked  away  Pierre 
fancied  he  saw  pity  and  the  desire  to  conceal  it. 

The  general  in  charge  of  the  transport  whipped  up  his  lean  horse, 
and  galloped  after  the  carriage  with  a  red,  panic-stricken  face.  Several 
officers  met  in  a  group;  the  soldiers  came  round  them.  All  had  excited 
and  uneasy  faces. 

‘What  did  he  say?  What  was  it  he  said?  .  .  .’  Pierre  heard. 

While  the  marshal  was  driving  by,  the  prisoners  had  been  hustled  to¬ 
gether  into  one  group,  and  Pierre  caught  sight  of  Karataev,  whom  he 
had  not  yet  seen  that  morning.  He  was  sitting,  wrapped  in  his  little 
military  coat,  leaning  against  a  birch-tree.  His  face  still  wore  the  same 
look  of  joyous  emotion  as  when  he  had  been  telling  the  story  of  the 
merchant,  but  it  had  another  expression  too,  a  look  of  subdued  solemnity. 

Karataev  looked  at  Pierre  with  his  kindly,  round  eyes,  that  were 
bright  now  with  tears,  and  there  was  an  unmistakable  appeal  in  them. 
He  evidently  wanted  to  say  something  to  him.  But  Pierre  was  in  too 
great  dread  for  himself.  He  made  as  though  he  had  not  seen  that  look, 
and  hastily  walked  away. 

When  the  prisoners  set  off  again  Pierre  looked  back.  Karataev  was 
sitting  under  the  birch-tree  by  the  edge  of  the  road,  and  two  Frenchmen 
were  bending  over  him  in  conversation.  Pierre  did  not  look  again.  He 
went  on  limping  up  the  hill. 

There  was  the  sound  of  a  shot  behind,  at  the  spot  where  Karataev  was 
sitting.  Pierre  heard  that  shot  distinctly,  but  at  the  moment  that  he  heard 
it,  he  recalled  that  he  had  not  finished  reckoning  up  how  many  stages 


1002 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

were  left  to  Smolensk,  the  calculation  he  had  begun  before  the  marshal 
rode  by.  And  he  began  to  reckon.  Two  French  soldiers  ran  by  Pierre,  one 
holding  a  still  smoking  gun.  They  were  both  pale,  and  in  the  expression 
of  their  faces — one  of  them  glanced  timidly  at  Pierre — there  was  some¬ 
thing  like  what  he  had  seen  in  the  young  soldier  at  the  execution  in  Mos¬ 
cow.  Pierre  looked  at  the  soldier  and  remembered  how,  the  day  before 
j^esterday,  the  man  had  burnt  his  shirt  in  drying  it  before  the  fire,  and 
how  the  others  had  laughed  at  him. 

The  dog  began  to  howl  behind  at  the  spot  where  Karataev  was  sitting. 
‘Silly  creature!  what  is  she  howling  for?’  thought  Pierre. 

The  prisoners,  his  companions  marching  at  his  side,  like  him,  refrained 
from  looking  back  to  the  place  whence  came  the  sound  of  the  shot  and  the 
dog’s  howl.  There  was  a  set  look  on  all  their  faces. 


XV 

The  cavalry  transport,  and  the  prisoners,  and  the  marshal’s  baggage-train, 
halted  at  the  village  of  Shamshevo.  All  crowded  together  round  the  camp¬ 
fire.  Pierre  went  up  to  a  fire,  ate  some  roast  horse-flesh,  lay  down  with  his 
back  to  the  fire,  and  at  once  fell  asleep.  He  fell  into  the  same  sort  of  sleep 
that  he  had  slept  at  Mozhaisk,  after  the  battle  of  Borodino. 

Again  the  facts  of  real  life  mingled  with  his  dreams ;  and  again  some  one, 
himself  or  some  one  else,  was  uttering  thoughts  in  his  ear,  and  the  same 
thoughts,  indeed,  as  had  come  in  his  dream  at  Mozhaisk. 

Life  is  everything.  Life  is  God.  All  is  changing  and  moving,  and  that 
motion  is  God.  And  while  there  is  life,  there  is  the  joy  of  the  consciousness 
of  the  Godhead.  To  love  life  is  to  love  God.  The  hardest  and  the  most 
blessed  thing  is  to  love  this  life  in  one’s  sufferings,  in  undeserved  suffering. 

‘Karataev!’  flashed  into  Pierre’s  mind.  And  all  at  once  there  rose  up, 
as  vivid  as  though  alive,  the  image,  long  forgotten,  of  the  gentle  old 
teacher,  who  had  given  Pierre  geography  lessons  in  Switzerland.  ‘Wait  a 
minute,’  the  old  man  was  saying.  And  he  was  showing  Pierre  a  globe.  This 
globe  was  a  living,  quivering  ball,  with  no  definite  limits.  Its  whole  sur¬ 
face  consisted  of  drops,  closely  cohering  together.  And  those  drops  were  all 
in  motion,  and  changing,  several  passing  into  one,  and  then  one  splitting 
up  again  into  many.  Every  drop  seemed  striving  to  spread,  to  take  up  more 
space,  but  the  others,  pressing  upon  it,  sometimes  absorbed  it,  sometimes 
melted  into  it. 

‘This  is  life,’  the  old  teacher  was  saying. 

‘How  simple  it  is  and  how  clear,’  thought  Pierre.  ‘How  was  it  I  did  not 
know  that  before?  God  is  in  the  midst,  and  each  drop  strives  to  expand,  to 
reflect  Him  on  the  largest  scale  possible.  And  it  grows,  and  is  absorbed  and 
crowded  out,  and  on  the  surface  it  disappears,  goes  back  into  the  depths, 
and  falls  not  to  the  surface  again.  That  is  how  it  is  with  him,  with  Kara¬ 
taev;  he  is  absorbed  and  has  disappeared.’ 

‘You  understand,  my  child,’  said  the  teacher. 


1003 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘You  understand,  damn  you!  ’  shouted  a  voice,  and  Pierre  woke  up. 

He  raised  his  head  and  sat  up.  A  French  soldier  was  squatting  on  his 
leels  by  the  fire.  He  had  just  shoved  away  a  Russian  soldier,  and  was 
oasting  a  piece  of  meat  on  the  end  of  a  ramrod.  His  sinewy,  lean,  hairy, 
ed  hands,  with  short  fingers,  were  deftly  turning  the  ramrod.  His  brown, 
norose  face,  with  its  sullen  brows,  could  be  clearly  seen  in  the  light  of  the 
;lowing  embers. 

‘It’s  just  the  same  to  him,’  he  muttered,  quickly  addressing  a  soldier 
tanding  behind  him.  ‘Brigand!  go!’ 

And  the  soldier,  turning  the  ramrod,  glanced  gloomily  at  Pierre.  The 
atter  turned  away,  gazing  into  the  shadows.  A  Russian  soldier,  the  one 
vho  had  been  pushed  away,  was  sitting  near  the  fire,  patting  something 
nth  his  hand.  Looking  more  closely,  Pierre  saw  the  grey  dog,  who  was 
itting  by  the  soldier,  wagging  her  tail. 

‘Ah,  she  has  come  .  .  .’  said  Pierre.  ‘And  Plat  .  .  .’  he  was  beginning, 
>ut  he  did  not  go  on.  All  at  once,  instantly  in  close  connection,  there  rose 
ip  the  memory  of  the  look  Platon  had  fixed  upon  him,  as  he  sat  under  the 
ree,  of  the  shot  heard  at  that  spot,  of  the  dog’s  howl,  of  the  guilty  faces 
f  the  soldiers  as  they  ran  by,  of  the  smoking  gun,  of  Karataev’s  absence 
t  that  halting-place;  and  he  was  on  the  point  of  fully  realising  that 
Carataev  had  been  killed,  but  at  the  same  instant,  at  some  mysterious 
ummons,  there  rose  up  the  memory  of  a  summer  evening  he  had  spent 
vith  a  beautiful  Polish  lady  on  the  verandah  of  his  house  at  Kiev.  And 
nevertheless,  making  no  effort  to  connect  the  impressions  of  the  day, 
nd  to  deduce  anything  from  them,  Pierre  closed  his  eyes,  and  the  picture 
f  the  summer  night  in  the  country  mingled  with  the  thought  of  bathing 
nd  of  that  fluid,  quivering  globe,  and  he  seemed  to  sink  deep  down  into 
/ater,  so  that  the  waters  closed  over  his  head. 

Before  sunrise  he  was  wakened  by  loud  and  rapid  shots  and  outcries, 
"he  French  were  flying  by  him. 

‘The  Cossacks!’  one  of  them  shouted,  and  a  minute  later  a  crowd  of 
Russians  were  surrounding  Pierre.  For  a  long  while  Pierre  could  not 
nderstand  what  had  happened  to  him.  He  heard  all  about  him  his 
omrades’  wails  of  joy. 

‘Mates!  our  own  folk!  brothers!’  the  old  soldiers  cried,  weeping,  as 
hey  embraced  the  Cossacks  and  the  hussars.  The  hussars  and  the  Cos¬ 
acks  crowded  round  the  prisoners,  pressing  on  them  clothes,  and  boots, 
nd  bread.  Pierre  sat  sobbing  in  their  midst,  and  could  not  utter  one 
mrd;  he  hugged  the  first  soldier  who  went  up  to  him,  and  kissed  him, 
/eeping. 

Dolohov  was  standing  at  the  gates  of  a  dilapidated  house,  letting  the 
rowd  of  unarmed  Frenchmen  pass  by  him.  The  French,  excited  by  all 
bat  had  happened,  were  talking  loudly  among  themselves;  but  as  they 
assed  before  Dolohov,  who  stood  switching  his  boots  with  his  riding- 
'hip,  and  watching  them  with  his  cold,  glassy  eyes,  that  boded  nothing 


1004  WAR  AND  PEACE 

good,  their  talk  died  away.  One  of  Dolohov’s  Cossacks  stood  on  the 
other  side,  counting  the  prisoners,  and  marking  off  the  hundreds  with 
a  chalk  mark  on  the  gate. 

‘How  many?’  D'olohov  asked  him. 

‘The  second  hundred,’  answered  the  Cossack. 

‘Filez,  filez’  said  Dolohov,  who  had  picked  up  the  expression  from 
the  French;  and  when  he  met  the  eyes  of  the  passing  prisoners,  his  eyes 
gleamed  with  a  cruel  light. 

With  a  gloomy  face  Denisov,  holding  his  high  Cossack  hat  in  his 
hand,  was  walking  behind  the  Cossacks,  who  were  bearing  to  a  hole 
freshly  dug  in  the  garden  the  body  of  Petya  Rostov. 


XVI 

Fkom  the  28th  of  October,  when  the  frosts  began,  the  flight  of  the  French 
assumed  a  more  tragic  aspect,  from  the  men  being  frozen  or  roasted  to 
death  by  the  camp-fires,  while  the  Emperor,  and  kings,  and  dukes,  still 
drove  on  with  their  stolen  booty  in  fur  cloaks  and  closed  carriages.  But 
in  its  essentials,  the  process  of  the  flight  and  disintegration  of  the  French 
army  went  on  unchanged. 

From  Moscow  to  Vyazma  of  the  seventy- three  thousands  of  the  French 
army  (not  reckoning  the  Guards,  who  had  done  nothing  but  pillage  all 
through  the  war),  only  thirty-six  thousand  were  left,  though  only  five 
thousand  had  been  killed  in  battle.  Here  we  have  the  first  term  of  a 
progression,  by  which  the  remaining  terms  are  determined  with  mathe¬ 
matical  exactness.  The  French  army  went  on  melting  away  and  dis¬ 
appearing  in  the  same  ratio  from  Moscow  to  Vyazma,  from  Vyazma  to 
Smolensk,  from  Smolensk  to  the  Berezina,  from  the  Berezina  to  Vilna, 
apart  from  the  greater  or  less  degree  of  cold,  the  pursuit  and  barring  of 
the  way,  and  all  other  conditions  taken  separately.  After  Vyazma,  in¬ 
stead  of  three  columns,  the  French  troops  formed  a  single  mass,  and  so 
they  marched  on  to  the  end.  This  is  how  Berthier  wrote  to  the  Emperor 
(and  we  know  that  generals  feel  it  permissible  to  depart  rather  widely 
from  the  truth  in  describing  the  condition  of  their  armies): — 

‘I  think  it  my  duty  to  report  to  your  majesty  the  condition  of  the 
various  corps  under  my  observation  on  the  march  the  last  two  or  three 
days.  They  are  almost  disbanded.  Hardly  a  quarter  of  the  men  remain 
with  the  flags  of  their  regiments;  the  rest  wander  off  on  their  own 
account  in  different  directions,  trying  to  seek  food  and  to  escape  discipline. 
All  think  only  of  Smolensk,  where  they  hope  to  recover.  During  the  last 
few  days  many  soldiers  have  been  observed  to  throw  away  their  car¬ 
tridges  and  muskets.  In  such  a  condition  of  affairs,  whatever  your  further 
plans  may  be,  the  interests  of  your  majesty’s  service  make  it  essential 
to  muster  the  army  at  Smolensk,  and  to  rid  them  of  ineffectives,  such  as 
cavalrymen  without  horses,  as  well  as  of  superfluous  baggage  and  a  part 
of  the  artillery,  which  is  now  out  of  proportion  with  the  numbers  of  the 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1005 

effective  army.  Supplies  and  some  days’  rest  are  essential:  the  soldiers 
ire  exhausted  by  hunger  and  fatigue;  during  the  last  few  days  many 
have  died  by  the  roadside  or  in  the  bivouacs.  This  state  of  things  is  grow¬ 
ing  continually  worse,  and  if  steps  are  not  quickly  taken  for  averting  the 
danger,  we  shall  be  exposed  to  the  risk  of  being  unable  to  control  the 
army  in  the  event  of  a  battle.  , 

■  ‘November  9.  Thirty  versts  from  Smolensk.’ 

After  struggling  into  Smolensk,  the  promised  land  of  their  dreams, 
the  French  killed  one  another  fighting  over  the  food  there,  sacked  their 
own  stores,  and  when  everything  had  been  pillaged,  they  ran  on  further. 
All  hastened  on,  not  knowing  whither  or  for  what  end  they  were  going; 
least  of  all  knew  that  great  genius,  Napoleon,  since  there  was  no  one 
to  give  him  orders.  But  still  he  and  those  about  him  clung  to  their  old 
habits:  wrote  commands,  letters,  reports,  orders  of  the  day;  called  each 
other  your  majesty,  mon  jrere,  Prince  d’Eckmuhl,  roi  de  Naples,  and 
so  on.  But  the  orders  and  reports  were  all  on  paper:  no  attempt  was  made 
to  carry  them  out,  because  they  could  not  be  carried  out.  And  although 
they  addressed  each  other  as  ‘majesty,’  ‘highness,’  and  ‘ mon  cousin,’ 
they  all  felt  that  they  were  pitiful  and  loathsome  creatures,  who  had 
done  a  great  wrong,  for  which  they  had  now  to  pay  the  penalty.  And  in 
spite  of  their  pretence  of  caring  for  the  army,  each  was  thinking  only  of 
himself,  and  how  to  make  his  escape  as  quickly  as  possible  to  safety. 


XVII 

The  actions  of  the  Russian  and  French  armies  during  the  retreat  from 
'Moscow  to  the  Niemen  resemble  a  game  of  Russian  blindman’s  buff,  in 
which  there  are  two  players,  both  with  their  eyes  bandaged,  and  one 
rings  a  bell  at  intervals  to  let  the  other  know  of  his  whereabouts.  At 
first  he  rings  his  bell  with  no  fear  of  his  opponent;  but  when  he  begins 
to  find  himself  in  a  difficult  position,  he  runs  away  as  noiselessly  as  he 
can  from  his  opponent,  and  often  supposing  he  is  running  away  from 
him,  walks  straight  into  his  arms. 

:  At  first  Napoleon’s  army  made  its  whereabouts  known — that  was  in 
the  early  period  of  the  retreat  along  the  Kaluga  road — but  afterwards, 
when  they  had  taken  to  the  Smolensk  road,  they  ran  holding  the  tongue 
of  the  bell;  and  often  supposing  they  were  running  away,  ran  straight 
towards  the  Russians. 

!  Owing  to  the  rapidity  of  the  flight  of  the  French,  and  of  the  Russians 
after  them,  and  the  consequent  exhaustion  of  the  horses,  the  chief 
means  of  keeping  a  close  watch  on  the  enemy’s  position — by  means  of 
charges  of  cavalry — was  out  of  the  question.  Moreover,  in  consequence 
of  the  frequent  and  rapid  changes  of  position  of  both  armies,  what  news 
lid  come  always  came  too  late.  If  information  arrived  on  the  second 
that  the  army  of  the  enemy  had  been  in  a  certain  place  on  the  first, 


ioo6 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

by  the  third,  when  the  information  could  be  acted  upon,  the  army  was 
already  two  days’  march  further,  and  in  quite  a  different  position. 

One  army  fled,  the  other  pursued.  From  Smolensk,  there  were  a  num¬ 
ber  of  different  roads  for  the  French  to  choose  from;  and  one  would 
have  thought  that,  as  they  stayed  there  four  days,  the  French  might 
have  found  out  where  the  enemy  was,  have  thought  out  some  advan¬ 
tageous  plan,  and  undertaken  something  new.  Yet,  after  a  halt  of  four 
days,  the  crowds  of  them  ran  back;  again  not  to  right  or  to  left,  but, 
with  no  manoeuvres  or  plans,  along  their  old  road — the  worst  one — by 
Krasnoe  and  Orsha,  along  their  beaten  track. 

Expecting  the  enemy  in  their  rear  and  not  in  front,  the  French  ran, 
straggling  out,  and  getting  separated  as  far  as  twenty-four  hours’  march 
from  one  another.  In  front  of  all  fled  the  Emperor,  then  the  kings,  then 
the  dukes.  The  Russian  army,  supposing  Napoleon  would  take  the  road 
to  the  right  beyond  the  Dnieper — the  only  sensible  course — turned  also 
to  the  right,  and  came  out  on  the  high  road  at  Krasnoe.  And  here,  just  as 
in  the  game  of  blindman,  the  French  came  bearing  straight  down  on  our 
vanguard.  Seeing  the  enemy  unexpectedly,  the  French  were  thrown  into 
confusion,  stopped  short  from  the  suddenness  of  the  fright,  but  then  ran- 
on  again,  abandoning  their  own  comrades  in  their  rear.  Then  for  three 
days,  the  separate  parts  of  the  French  army  passed,  as  it  were,  through  the 
lines  of  the  Russian  army:  first  the  viceroy’s  troops,  then  Davoust’s,  and 
then  Ney’s.  They  all  abandoned  one  another,  abandoned  their  heavy 
baggage,  their  artillery,  and  half  their  men,  and  fled,  making  semicircles! 
to  the  right  to  get  round  the  Russians  by  night. 

Ney  was  the  last,  because  in  spite,  or  perhaps  in  consequence,  of  their 
miserable  position,  with  a  child’s  impulse  to  beat  the  floor  that  has  bruised 
it,  he  lingered  to  demolish  the  walls  of  Smolensk,  which  had  done  nobody 
any  harm.  Ney,  who  was  the  last  to  pass  with  his  corps  of  ten  thousand, 
reached  Napoleon  at  Orsha  with  only  a  thousand  men,  having  abandoned 
all  the  rest,  and  all  his  cannons,  and  made  his  way  by  stealth  at  night, 
under  cover  of  the  woods,  across  the  Dnieper. 

From  Orsha  they  fled  on  along  the  road  to  Vilna,  still  playing  the  same 
game  of  blindman  with  the  pursuing  army.  At  Berezina  again,  they  were 
thrown  into  confusion,  many  were  drowned,  many  surrendered,  but  those 
that  got  across  the  river,  fled  on. 

Their  chief  commander  wrapped  himself  in  a  fur  cloak,  and  getting  into 
a  sledge,  galloped  off  alone,  deserting  his  companions.  Whoever  could,  ran 
away  too,  and  those  who  could  not — surrendered  or  died. 


XVIII 

One  might  have  supposed  that  the  historians,  who  ascribe  the  actions  of 
the  masses  to  the  will  of  one  man,  would  have  found  it  impossible  to  ex¬ 
plain  the  retreat  of  the  French  on  their  theory,  considering  that  they  did 
everything  possible  during  this  period  of  the  campaign  to  bring  about  their 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1007 

A'n  ruin,  and  that  not  a  single  movement  of  that  rabble  of  men,  from 
leir  turning  into  the  Kaluga  road  up  to  the  flight  of  the  commander  from 
s  army,  showed  the  slightest  trace  of  design. 

But  no!  Mountains  of  volumes  have  been  written  by  historians  upon 
lis  campaign,  and  in  all  of  them  we  find  accounts  of  Napoleon’s  masterly 
-rangements  and  deeply  considered  plans;  of  the  strategy  with  which  the 
ildiers  were  led,  and  the  military  genius  showed  by  the  marshals. 

The  retreat  from  Maley  Yaroslavets,  when  nothing  hindered  Napoleon 
oni  passing  through  a  country  abundantly  furnished  with  supplies,  and 
le  parallel  road  was  open  to  him,  along  which  Kutuzov  afterwards  pur- 
jed  him — this  wholly  unnecessary  return  by  a  road  through  devastated 
buntry  is  explained  to  us  as  due  to  various  sagacious  considerations, 
imilar  reasons  are  given  us  for  Napoleon’s  retreat  from  Smolensk  to 
'rsha.  Then  we  have  a  description  of  his  heroism  at  Krasnoe,  when  he 
reported  to  have  prepared  to  give  battle,  and  to  take  the  command,  and 
oming  forward  with  a  birch  stick  in  his  hand,  to  have  said; 

‘Long  enough  I  have  been  an  emperor,  it  is  time  now  to  be  a  general!  ’ 
Yet  in  spite  of  this,  he  runs  away  immediately  afterwards,  abandoning 
le  divided  army  in  the.  rear  to  the  hazards  of  destiny. 

Then  we  have  descriptions  of  the  greatness  of  some  of  the  marshals, 
specially  of  Ney — a  greatness  of  soul  that  culminated  in  his  taking  a 
ircuitous  route  by  the  forests  across  the  Dnieper,  and  fleeing  without 
is  flags,  his  artillery,  and  nine-tenths  of  his  men  into  Orsha. 

And  lastly,  the  final  departure  of  the  great  Emperor  from  his  heroic 
rmy  is  represented  by  the  historians  as  something  great — a  stroke  of 
-emus. 

Even  that  final  act  of  running  away— which  in  homely  language  would 
e  described  as  the  lowest  depth  of  baseness,  such  as  every  child  is  taught 
0  feel  ashamed  of — even  that  act  finds  justification  in  the  language  of 
re  historians. 

When  it  is  impossible  to  stretch  the  elastic  thread  of  historical  argu- 
lent  further,  when  an  action  is  plainly  opposed  to  what  all  humanity  is 
greed  in  calling  right  and  justice,  the  historians  take  refuge  in  the  con- 
eption  of  greatness.  Greatness  would  appear  to  exclude  all  possibility  of 
pplying  standards  of  right  and  wrong.  For  the  great  man — nothing  is 
•rong.  There  is  no  atrocity  which  could  be  made  a  ground  for  blaming 
great  man. 

‘C’est  grand!’  cry  the  historians;  and  at  that  word  good  and  bad  have 
eased  to  be,  and  there  are  only  ‘grand’  and  not  ‘grand.’  ‘Grand’  is  equiva- 
mt  to  good,  and  not  ‘grand’  to  bad.  To  be  grand  is  to  their  notions  the 
haracteristic  of  certain  exceptional  creatures,  called  by  them  heroes, 
md  Napoleon,  wrapping  himself  in  his  warm  fur  cloak  and  hurrying 
ome  away  from  men,  who  were  not  only  his  comrades,  but  (in  his  belief ) 
rought  there  by  his  doing,  feels  que  c’est  grand;  and  his  soul  is  content. 
‘Du  sublime  au  ridicule  il  n’y  a  qu’un  pas,’  he  says  (he  sees  something 
rand  in  himself).  And  the  whole  world  has  gone  on  for  fifty  years  re¬ 
eating:  Sublime!  Grand!  Napoleon  the  Great. 


iooS 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Du  sublime  au  ridicule  il  n’y  a  qu’un  pas’ 

And  it  never  enters  any  one’s  head  that  to  admit  a  greatness,  immeasui 
able  by  the  rule  of  right  and  wrong,  is  but  to  accept  one’s  own  nothingnes 
and  immeasurable  littleness. 

For  us,  with  the  rule  of  right  and  wrong  given  us  by  Christ,  there  i 
nothing  for  which  we  have  no  standard.  And  there  is  no  greatness  wher 
there  is  not  simplicity,  goodness,  and  truth. 


XIX 

What  Russian  reader  has  not  known  an  irksome  feeling  of  annoyanct 
dissatisfaction,  and  perplexity,  when  he  reads  the  accounts  of  the  latte 
period  of  the  campaign  of  1812?  Who  has  not  asked  himself:  How  wasi 
all  the  French  were  not  captured  or  cut  to  pieces,  when  all  the  three  Rue 
sian  armies  were  surrounding  them  in  superior  numbers,  when  the  Frenc: 
were  a  disorderly,  starving,  and  freezing  rabble,  and  the  whole  aim  of  th 
Russians  (so  history  tells  us)  was  to  check,  to  cut  off,  and  to  capture  al 
the  French? 

How  was  it  that  the  Russian  army,  that  with  inferior  numbers  ha< 
fought  the  battle  of  Borodino,  failed  in  its  aim  of  capturing  the  French 
when  the  latter  were  surrounded  on  three  sides?  Can  the  French  be  si 
immensely  superior  to  us  that  we  are  not  equal  to  beating  them,  when  w 
have  surrounded  them  with  forces  numerically  superior?  How  could  tha 
have  come  to  pass?  History  (what  passes  by  that  name)  answers  thes 
questions  by  saying  that  that  came  to  pass  because  Kutuzov,  and  Tor 
masov,  and  Tchitchagov,  and  this  general  and  that  failed  to  carry  ou 
certain  manoeuvres. 

But  why  did  they  fail  to  carry  them  out?  And  how  was  it,  if  they  reall; 
were  responsible  for  not  attaining  the  aim  set  before  them,  that  they  wer. 
not  tried  and  punished  for  their  shortcomings?  But  even  if  we  admit  tha 
Kutuzov  and  Tchitchagov  and  the  others  were  responsible  for  the  non 
success  of  the  Russians,  it  is  still  impossible  to  understand  why,  in  tbi 
position  the  Russian  troops  were  in  at  Krasnoe  and  the  Berezina,  on  botl 
occasions  with  numerically  superior  forces,  the  French  army  and  marshal 
were  not  taken  prisoners,  if  that  really  was  the  aim  of  the  Russians. 

The  explanation  of  this  phenomenon  given  by  the  Russian  military  his 
torians — that  Kutuzov  hindered  the  attack — is  insufficient,  because  w. 
know  that  Kutuzov  was  not  able  to  restrain  the  troops  from  attacking  a 
Vyazma  and  Tarutino.  Why  was  it  that  the  Russian  army,  that  witl 
inferior  forces  gained  a  victory  at  Borodino  over  the  enemy  in  ful 
strength,  was  unsuccessful  at  Krasnoe  and  the  Berezina,  when  fighting  ii 
superior  numbers  against  the  undisciplined  crowds  of  the  French? 

If  the  aim  of  the  Russians  really  was  to  cut  off  Napoleon  and  his  mar 
shals,  and  to  take  them  prisoners,  and  that  aim  was  not  only  frustrated 
but  all  attempts  at  attaining  it  were  every  time  defeated  in  the  mos 
shameful  way,  this  last  period  of  the  war  is  quite  correctly  represented  b] 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


iooq 


he  French  as  a  series  of  victories  for  them,  and  quite  incorrectly  repre¬ 
sented  by  the  Russians  as  redounding  to  our  glory. 

The  Russian  military  historians,  so  far  as  they  recognise  the  claims  of 
ogic,  are  forced  to  this  conclusion,  and  in  spite  of  their  lyric  eulogies  of 
Russian  gallantry  and  devotion,  and  all  the  rest  of  it,  they  are  reluctantly 
Obliged  to  admit  that  the  retreat  of  the  French  from  Moscow  was  a  series 
if  victories  for  Napoleon  and  of  defeats  for  Kutuzov. 

But  putting  patriotic  vanity  entirely  aside,  one  cannot  but  feel  that 
here  is  an  inherent  discrepancy  in  this  conclusion,  seeing  that  the  series 
f  French  victories  led  to  their  complete  annihilation,  while  the  series  of 
Russian  defeats  was  followed  by  the  destruction  of  their  enemy,  and  the 
leliverance  of  their  country. 

The  source  of  this  discrepancy  lies  in  the  fact  that  historians,  studying 
vents  in  the  light  of  the  letters  of  the  sovereigns  and  of  generals,  of  narra- 
ives,  reports,  projects,  and  so  on,  have  assumed  quite  falsely  that  the  plan 
if  that  period  of  the  campaign  of  1812  was  to  cut  off  and  capture  Na¬ 
poleon  and  his  marshals  and  his  army. 

Such  a  plan  never  was,  and  could  not  have  been,  the  aim  of  the  Russian 
irmy,  because  it  had  no  meaning,  and  its  attainment  was  utterly  out  of 
i;he  question. 

There  was  no  object  in  such  a  plan.  In  the  first  place,  because  Na- 
ooleon’s  army  was  flying  in  disorder  at  its  utmost  possible  speed  out  of 
Russia;  that  is  to  say,  doing  the  very  thing  that  every  Russian  most  de¬ 
sired.  What  object  was  there  in  conducting  all  sorts  of  operations  against 
the  French  when  they  were  running  away  as  fast  as  they  could  already? 
Secondly,  it  would  have  been  idle  to  stop  men  on  the  road,  whose  whole 
energies  were  bent  on  flight.  Thirdly,  it  would  have  been  absurd  to  lose 
men  in  destroying  the  French  army  when  it  was  already,  without  external 
interference,  perishing  at  such  a  rate  that,  without  any  obstruction  of  their 
road,  not  more  than  one  hundredth  of  its  original  number  succeeded  in 
crossing  the  frontier  in  December. 

Fourthly,  it  was  absurd  to  desire  to  take  prisoners  the  Emperor,  kings, 
and  dukes,  since  the  possession  of  such  prisoners  would  have  greatly  en¬ 
hanced  the  difficulty  of  the  Russian  position,  as  was  recognised  by  the 
most  clear-sighted  diplomatists  of  the  time  (J.  Maistre  and  others).  Still 
more  absurd  would  have  been  the  desire  to  capture  the  French  army  when 
it  had  dwindled  to  one-half  before  reaching  Krasnoe,  and  a  division  of 
convoys  had  to  be  given  up  to  guard  a  corps  of  prisoners,  while  the  Rus¬ 
sian  soldiers  themselves  had  not  always  full  rations,  and  the  prisoners 
they  did  take  died  of  hunger. 

Any  plan  of  cutting  off  and  capturing  Napoleon  and  his  army,  however 
carefully  thought  out,  would  have  been  like  the  action  of  a  gardener  who, 
after  driving  out  a  herd  of  cattle  that  had  been  trampling  his  beds,  should 
run  out  to  belabour  the  cattle  about  the  head.  The  only  thing  that  could 
be  said  in  justification  of  his  proceeding  would  be  that  he  was  greatly 
incensed.  But  the  authors  of  this  supposed  plan  cannot  plead  even  this 
excuse,  since  theirs  were  not  the  gardens  that  had  been  trampled. 


ICIO 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

And,  besides  being  absurd,  to  cut  off  the  retreat  of  Napoleon’s  army 
was  also  impossible. 

It  was  impossible,  in  the  first  place,  because,  since  experience  shows  that 
the  movement  of  columns  in  a  single  battlefield  at  five  versts’  distance 
never  coincides  with  the  plan  of  their  movements,  tjre  probability  that 
Tchitchagov,  Kutuzov,  and  Wittgenstein  would  all  reach  an  appointed 
spot  in  time  was  so  remote  that  it  practically  amounted  to  impossibility. 
As  Kutuzov  in  fact  regarded  it  when  he  said  that  manoeuvres  planned  at 
great  distances  do  not  produce  the  results  expected  of  them. 

Secondly,  it  was  impossible,  because  to  paralyse  the  force  of  inertia 
with  which  Napoleon’s  army  was  rebounding  back  along  its  track,  in¬ 
comparably  greater  forces  were  needed  than  those  the  Russians  had  at 
their  command. 

Thirdly',  it  was  impossible,  because  the  military  expression,  to  cut  off, 
has  really  no  meaning.  One  may  cut  off  a  slice  of  bread,  but  not  an  army. 
To  cut  off  an  army — that  is,  to  bar  its  road — is  impossible,  because  there 
are  always  many  places  by  which  the  men  can  make  a  circuit  to  get  out, 
and  there  is  always  the  night,  during  which  nothing  can  be  done ;  a  fact  of 
which  the  military  strategists  might  have  been  convinced  by  the  examples 
of  Krasnoe  and  Berezina.  One  can  never  take  a  prisoner  unless  he  agrees 
to  be  taken,  just  as  one  can  never  catch  a  swallow,  though  of  course  it  is 
possible  if  it  settles  on  one’s  hand.  One  can  take  a  prisoner  who  will  sur¬ 
render,  as  the  Germans  did,  in  accordance  with  the  rules  of  strategy  and 
tactics.  But  the  French  soldiers  very  wisely  did  not  feel  it  incumbent  on 
them  to  do  so,  since  death  from  cold  and  hunger  awaited  them  as  much 
if  taken  prisoner,  as  if  persisting  in  their  flight. 

The  fourth  and  chief  reason  why  it  was  impossible  is  that  war  wras 
waged  in  1812  under  conditions  more  terrible  than  ever  since  the  world 
has  existed;  and  the  Russian  troops  strained  every'  nerve  in  the  pursuit  of 
the  French,  and  could  not  have  done  more  without  perishing  themselves. 

The  Prussian  army  lost  in  its  march  from  Tarutino  to  Krasnoe  fifty 
thousand  sick  or  stragglers,  that  is,  a  number  equal  to  the  population  of 
a  large  provincial  town.  Half  of  the  army  was  lost  without  a  battle. 

At  this  period  of  the  campaign  the  soldiers  were  without  boots  or  fur- 
lined  coats,  on  half  rations,  without  vodka,  camping  out  at  night  for 
months  in  the  snow  with  fifteen  degrees  of  frost;  while  there  were  only 
seven  or  eight  hours  of  daylight,  and  the  rest  was  night ;  where  discipline 
could  not  exert  the  same  influence,  and  men  were  put  in  peril  of  death,  not 
for  a  few  hours,  as  on  the  field  of  battle,  but  for  whole  months  together 
were  keeping  up  a  struggle  every  moment  with  death  from  cold  and  hun¬ 
ger.  And  of  this  period  of  the  campaign,  when  half  the  army  perished  in 
one  month,  the  historians  tell  us  that  Miloradovitch  ought  to  have  made 
an  oblique  march  in  one  direction,  and  Tormasov  in  another,  and  Tchi¬ 
tchagov  ought  to  have  advanced  to  this  point  (the  men  advancing  knee- 
deep  in  the  snow),  and  that  so  and  so  pushed  through  and  cut  the  French 
off,  and  so  on,  and  so  on. 

The  Russian  soldiers  did  all  that  could  or  ought  to  have  been  done 


1011 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

o  attain  an  end  worthy  of  the  people,  and  half  of  them  died  in  doing  it. 
They  are  not  to  blame  because  other  Russians,  sitting  in  warm  rooms  at 
lome,  proposed  that  they  should  do  the  impossible. 

All  this  strange  discrepancy  between  the  facts  and  the  accounts  of 
listorians,  so  difficult  to  understand  to-day,  arises  simply  from  this,  that 
he  historians  wrote  the  history  of  the  noble  sentiments  and  fine  speeches 
>f  various  generals,  and  not  the  history  of  the  events  themselves. 

They  attach  great  consequence  to  the  words  of  Miloradovitch,  to  the 
lonours  bestowed  on  this  general  or  that,  and  the  proposal  made  bv  them. 
3ut  the  question  of  the  fifty  thousand  men  who  lay  in  the  hospitals  and 
graveyards  does  not  even  interest  them,  for  it  does  not  come  within  the 
scope  of  their  researches. 

And  yet  we  have  but  to  turn  away  from  researches  among  the  reports 
ind  plans  of  the  generals,  and  to  look  into  the  movements  of  those  hun- 
Ired  thousand  men  who  took  direct  immediate  part  in  the  events;  and 
ill  the  questions  that  seemed  insoluble  before  can  be  readily  and  cer- 
ainly  explained  with  extraordinary  ease  and  simplicity. 

The  plan  of  cutting  off  Napoleon  and  his  army  never  existed  save  in 
he  imagination  of  some  dozen  men.  It  could  not  have  existed  because  it 
vas  absurd  and  could  not  be  carried  out. 

The  people  had  a  single  aim:  to  clear  their  country  of  the  invaders. 
That  aim  was  effected  primarily  of  itself,  since  the  French  were  flying, 
md  all  that  was  necessary  was  not  to  check  their  flight.  It  was  promoted, 
oo,  by  the  irregular  warfare  kept  up  by  the  people  destroying  the  French 
irmy  piecemeal ;  and  thirdly,  by  the  great  Russian  army  following  in  the 
ear  of  the  French,  ready  to  use  force  in  case  there  were  any  pause  in 
:heir  retreat. 

The  Russian  army  had  to  act  as  a  whip  urging  on  a  fleeing  animal. 
\nd  the  experienced  driver  knew  that  it  was  better  to  keep  the  whip 
•aised  as  a  menace  than  to  bring  it  down  on  the  creature’s  back. 


PART  XV 


I 

When  a  man  sees  an  animal  dying,  a  horror  comes  over  him.  What  he  i 
himself — his  essence,  visibly  before  his  eyes,  perishes — ceases  to  exist 
But  when  the  dying  creature  is  a  man  and  a  man  dearly  loved,  then 
besides  the  horror  at  the  extinction  of  life,  what  is  felt  is  a  rending  o 
the  soul,  a  spiritual  wound,  which,  like  a  physical  wound,  is  sometime 
mortal,  sometimes  healed,  but  always  aches  and  shrinks  from  contact  witl 
the  outer  world,  that  sets  it  smarting. 

After  Prince  Andrey’s  death,  Natasha  and  Princess  Marya  both  alike 
felt  this.  Crushed  in  spirit,  they  closed  their  eyes  under  the  menacin' 
cloud  of  death  that  hovered  about  them,  and  dared  not  look  life  in  thi 
face.  Carefully  they  guarded  their  open  wounds  from  every  rough  am 
painful  touch.  Everything — the  carriage  driving  along  the  street,  the  sum 
mons  to  dinner,  the  maid  asking  which  dress  to  get  out;  worse  still- 
words  of  faint,  feigned  sympathy — set  the  wound  smarting,  seemed  ai 
insult  to  it,  and  jarred  on  that  needful  silence  in  which  both  were  trying 
to  listen  to  the  stern,  terrible  litany  that  had  not  yet  died  away  in  theii I 
ears,  and  to  gaze  into  the  mysterious,  endless  vistas  that  seemed  for  i 
moment  to  have  been  unveiled  before  them. 

Only  alone  together  were  they  safe  from  such  outrage  and  pain.  The\ 
said  little  to  one  another.  When  they  did  speak,  it  was  about  the  mos 
trivial  subjects.  And  both  equally  avoided  all  mention  of  anything  con 
nected  with  the  future. 

To  admit  the  possibility  of  a  future  seemed  to  them  an  insult  to  hi; 
memory.  Still  more  circumspectly  did  they  avoid  in  their  talk  all  tha 
could  be  connected  with  the  dead  man.  It  seemed  to  them  that  what  thej 
had  felt  and  gone  through  could  not  be  expressed  in  words.  It  seemed  tq 
them  that  every  allusion  in  words  to  the  details  of  his  life  was  an  outrage 
on  the  grandeur  and  holiness  of  the  mystery  that  had  been  accomplishec 
before  their  eyes. 

The  constant  restraint  of  speech  and  studious  avoidance  of  everything 
that  might  lead  to  words  about  him,  these  barriers,  fencing  off  on  all  side: 
what  could  not  be  spoken  of,  brought  what  they  were  feeling  even  mor<' 
clearly  and  vividly  before  their  minds. 

But  pure  and  perfect  sorrow  is  as  impossible  as  pure  and  perfect  joyi 
From  the  isolation  of  her  position,  as  the  guardian  and  foster-mother  o 
her  nephew,  and  independent  mistress  of  her  own  destinies,  Princes:' 
Marya  was  the  first  to  be  called  back  to  life  from  that  world  of  mourning 
in  which  she  lived  for  the  first  fortnight.  She  received  letters  from  he 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1013 

ilations  which  had  to  be  answered;  the  room  in  which  Nikolushka  had 
ten  put  was  damp,  and  he  had  begun  to  cough.  Alpatitch  came  to  Yaro- 
uvl  with  accounts.  He  had  suggestions  to  make,  and  advised  Princess 
;  arya  to  move  to  Moscow  to  the  house  in  Vozdvizhenka,  which  was  unin- 
red,  and  only  needed  some  trifling  repairs.  Life  would  not  stand  still, 
ad  she  had  to  live.  Painful  as  it  was  for  Princess  Marya  to  come  out  of 
’at  world  of  solitary  contemplation,  in  which  she  had  been  living  till 
ien,  and  sorry,  and,  as  it  were,  conscience-stricken,  as  she  felt  at  leaving 
Natasha  alone,  the  duties  of  daily  life  claimed  her  attention,  and  against 
j:r  own  will  she  had  to  give  herself  up  to  them.  She  went  through  the 
;  counts  with  Alpatitch,  consulted  Dessalle  about  her  little  nephew,  and 
-gan  to  make  preparations  for  moving  to  Moscow. 

Natasha  was  left  alone,  and  from  the  time  that  Princess  Marya  began 
busy  herself  with  preparations  for  her  journey,  she  held  aloof  from  her 
0. 

Princess  Marya  asked  the  countess  to  let  Natasha  come  to  stay  with  her 
:  Moscow;  and  both  mother  and  father  eagerly  agreed  to  her  suggestion, 
r  they  saw  their  daughter’s  physical  strength  failing  every  day,  and  they 
>ped  that  change  of  scene  and  the  advice  of  Moscow  doctors  might  do 
tx  good. 

‘I  am  not  going  anywhere,’  answered  Natasha,  when  the  suggestion 
as  made  to  her;  ‘all  I  ask  is,  please  let  me  alone,’  she  said,  and  she  ran 
it  of  the  room,  hardly  able  to  restrain  tears  more  of  vexation  and  anger 
,tan  of  sorrow. 

Since  she  felt  herself  deserted  by  Princess  Marya,  and  alone  in  her 
ief,  Natasha  had  spent  most  of  her  time  alone  in  her  room,  huddled  up 
a  corner  of  her  sofa.  While  her  slender,  nervous  fingers  were  busy 
listing  or  tearing  something,  she  kept  her  eyes  fixed  in  a  set  stare  on  the 
’•st  object  that  met  them.  This  solitude  exhausted  and  tortured  her;  but 
was  what  she  needed.  As  soon  as  any  one  went  in  to  her,  she  got  up 
jickly,  changed  her  attitude  and  expression,  and  picked  up  a  book  or 
ime  needlework,  obviously  waiting  with  impatience  for  the  intruder  to 
ave  her. 

It  seemed  to  her  continually  that  she  was  on  the  very  verge  of  under- 
anding,  of  penetrating  to  the  mystery  on  which  her  spiritual  vision  was 
istened  with  a  question  too  terrible  for  her  to  bear. 

One  day  towards  the  end  of  December,  Natasha,  thin  and  pale  in  a 
ack  woollen  gown,  with  her  hair  fastened  up  in  a  careless  coil,  sat  perched 
p  in  the  corner  of  her  sofa,  her  fingers  nervously  crumpling  and  smooth- 
ig  out  the  ends  of  her  sash,  while  she  gazed  at  the  corner  of  the  door. 

She  was  inwardly  gazing  whither  he  had  gone,  to  that  further  shore, 
nd  that  shore,  of  which  she  had  never  thought  in  old  days,  which  had 
'emed  to  her  so  far  away,  so  incredible,  vras  now  closer  to  her,  and  more 
;r  own,  more  comprehensible  than  this  side  of  life,  in  which  all  was  2mpti- 
;ss  and  desolation  or  suffering  and  humiliation. 

She  was  gazing  into  that  world  where  she  knew  he  was.  But  she  could 


1014  WAR  AND  PEACE 

not  see  him,  except  as  he  had  been  here  on  earth.  She  was  seeing  him  agai 
as  he  had  been  at  Mytishtchy,  at  Troitsa,  at  Yaroslavl. 

She  was  seeing  his  face,  hearing  his  voice,  and  repeating  his  words,  an 
words  of  her  own  that  she  had  put  into  his  mouth ;  and  sometimes  imagir 
ing  fresh  phrases  for  herself  and  him  which  could  only  have  been  uttere 
in  the  past. 

Now  she  saw  him  as  he  had  once  been,  lying  on  a  low  chair  in  his  velve 
fur-lined  cloak,  his  head  propped  on  his  thin,  pale  hand.  His  chest  looke 
fearfully  hollow,  and  his  shoulders  high.  His  lips  were  firmly  closed,  hi 
eyes  shining,  and  there  was  a  line  on  his  white  brow  that  came  and  var 
ished  again.  There  was  a  rapid  tremor  just  perceptible  in  one  foot.  Natash 
knew  he  was  struggling  to  bear  horrible  pain.  ‘What  was  that  pain  like 
Why  was  it  there?  What  was  he  feeling?  How  did  it  hurt?’  Natasha  ha 
wondered.  He  had  noticed  her  attention,  raised  his  eyes,  and,  withoi 
smiling,  began  to  speak. 

‘One  thing  would  be  awful,’  he  said:  ‘to  bind  oneself  for  ever  to 
suffering  invalid.  It  would  be  an  everlasting  torture.’  And  he  had  looke 
with  searching  eyes  at  her.  Natasha,  as  she  always  did,  had  answere 
without  giving  herself  time  to  think;  she  had  said:  ‘It  can’t  go  on  like  thi: 
it  won’t  be  so,  you  will  get  well — quite  well.’ 

She  was  seeing  him  now  as  though  it  were  the  first  time,  and  goin 
through  all  she  had  felt  at  that  time.  She  recalled  the  long,  mournful,  ster 
gaze  he  had  given  her  at  those  words,  and  she  understood  all  the  reproac 
and  the  despair  in  that  prolonged  gaze. 

‘I  agreed,’  Natasha  said  to  herself  now,  ‘that  it  would  be  awful  if  h 
were  to  remain  always  suffering.  I  said  that  then  only  because  it  would  b 
so  awful  for  him,  but  he  did  not  understand  it  so.  He  thought  that  ij 
would  be  awful  for  me.  Then  he  still  wanted  to  live,  and  was  afraid  c 
death.  And  I  said  it  so  clumsily,  so  stupidly.  I  was  not  thinking  that, 
was  thinking  something  quite  different.  If  I  had  said  what  I  was  thinking 
I  should  have  said:  “Let  him  be  dying,  dying  all  the  time  before  my  eyes 
and  I  should  be  happy  in  comparison  with  what  I  am  now.”  Now  .  . 
there  is  nothing,  no  one.  Did  he  know  that?  No.  He  did  not  know,  an' 
never  will  know  it.  And  now  it  can  never,  never  be  made  up  for.’ 

And  again  he  was  saying  the  same  words;  but  this  time  Natasha  in  he 
imagination  made  him  a  different  answer.  She  stopped  him,  and  said 
‘Awful  for  you,  but  not  for  me.  You  know  that  I  have  nothing  in  life  bu 
you,  and  to  suffer  with  you  is  the  greatest  happiness  possible  for  me.’  An 
he  took  her  hand  and  pressed  it,  just  as  he  had  pressed  it  on  that  terribl 
evening  four  days  before  his  death.  And  in  her  imagination  she  said  t 
him  other  words  of  tenderness  and  love,  which  she  might  have  said  ther 
whicii  she  only  said  now.  ...  ‘I  love  thee!  .  .  .  thee  ...  I  love,  lovi 
thee  .  .  .’  she  said,  wringing  her  hands  convulsively,  and  setting  he 
teeth  with  bitter  violence  .  .  . 

And  a  sweeter  mood  of  sorrow  was  coming  over  her,  and  tears  wer 
starting  into  her  eyes ;  but  all  at  once  she  asked  herself :  ‘To  whom  was  sb 
saying  that?  Where  is  he,  and  what  is  he  now?’ 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1015 

And  again  everything  was  shrouded  in  chill,  cruel  doubt,  and  again, 
rowning  nervously,  she  tried  to  gaze  into  that  world  where  he  was.  And 
iow,  now,  she  thought,  she  was  just  penetrating  the  mystery  .  .  .  But  at 
hat  instant,  when  the  incomprehensible,  it  seemed,  was  being  unveiled 
tefore  her  eyes,  a  loud  rattle  at  the  door  handle  broke  with  a  painful  shock 
in  her  hearing.  Her  maid,  Dunyasha,  rushed  quickly  and  abruptly  into 
he  room  with  frightened  eyes,  that  took  no  heed  of  her. 

‘Come  to  your  papa,  make  haste,’  Dunyasha  said,  with  a  strange, 
bccited  expression.  ‘A  misfortune  .  .  .  Pyotr  Ilyitch  ...  a  letter,’  she 
;asped  out,  sobbing. 

II 

The  feeling  of  aloofness  from  all  the  world,  that  Natasha  experienced  at 
his  time,  she  felt  in  an  even  more  marked  degree  with  the  members  of 
ler  own  family.  All  her  own  family,  her  father  and  mother  and  Sonya, 
iyere  so  near  her,  so  everyday  and  ordinary  that  every  word  they  uttered, 
’:very  feeling  they  expressed,  was  jarring  in  the  world  in  which  she  had 
ived  of  late.  She  felt  more  than  indifference,  positive  hostility  to  them. 
She  heard  Dunyasha’s  words  of  Pyotr  Ilyitch,  of  a  misfortune,  but  she 
lid  not  understand  them. 

‘What  misfortune  could  they  have,  what  misfortune  is  possible  to 
them?  Everything  goes  on  in  its  old,  regular,  easy  way  with  them,’ 
Natasha  was  saying  inwardly. 

As  she  went  into  the  drawing-room,  her  father  came  quickly  out  of  the 
:ountess’s  room.  His  face  was  puckered  up  and  wet  with  tears.  He  had 
evidently  run  out  of  the  room  to  give  vent  to  the  sobs  that  were  choking 
him.  Seeing  Natasha,  he  waved  his  arms  in  despair,  and  went  off  into 
violent,  miserable  sobs,  that  convulsed  his  soft,  round  face. 

‘Pet  .  .  .  Petya  .  .  .  Go,  go  in,  she’s  calling  .  .  .’  And  sobbing  like  a 
child,  he  tottered  with  feeble  legs  to  a  chair,  and  almost  dropped  on  to  it, 
hiding  his  face  in  his  hands. 

An  electric  shock  seemed  to  run  all  through  Natasha.  Some  fearful 
pain  seemed  to  stab  her  to  the  heart.  She  felt  a  poignant  anguish;  it 
seemed  to  her  that  something  was  being  rent  within  her,  and  she  was 
dying.  But  with  the  pain  she  felt  an  instant  release  from  the  seal  that  shut 
her  out  of  life.  At  the  sight  of  her  father,  and  the  sound  of  a  fearful,  husky 
scream  from  her  mother  through  the  door,  she  instantly  forgot  herself  and 
her  own  sorrow. 

She  ran  up  to  her  father,  but  he  feebly  motioned  her  towards  her 
mother’s  door.  Princess  Marya,  with  a  white  face  and  quivering  lower 
jaw,  came  out  and  took  Natasha’s  hand,  saying  something  to  her. 
Natasha  neither  saw  nor  heard  her.  With  swift  steps  she  went  towards  the 
door,  stopped  for  an  instant  as  though  struggling  with  herself,  and  ran  in 
to  her  mother. 

The  countess  was  lying  down  on  a  low  chair  in  a  strange  awkward 


10x6 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

attitude;  she  was  beating  her  head  against  the  wall.  Sonya  ana  some 
maid-servants  were  holding  her  by  the  arms. 

‘Natasha,  Natasha!  .  .  .’  the  countess  was  screaming.  ‘It’s  not  true, 
not  true  .  .  .  it’s  false  .  .  .  Natasha!  ’  she  screamed,  pushing  the  maids 
away. ‘All  you  go  away,  it’s  not  true!  Killed!  .  .  .  ha,  ha,  ha!  ...  not 
true!  .  .  .’ 

Natasha  knelt  down  on  the  low  chair,  bent  over  her  mother,  embraced 
her,  with  surprising  strength  lifted  her  up,  turned  her  face  to  her,  and 
pressed  close  to  her. 

‘Mamma!  .  .  .  darling!  ...  I’m  here,  dearest  mamma,’  she  whis¬ 
pered  to  her,  never  ceasing  for  a  second. 

She  would  not  let  her  mother  go ;  she  struggled  tenderly  with  her,  asked 
for  pillows  and  water,  unbuttoned  and  tore  open  her  mother’s  dress. 
‘Dearest  .  .  .  my  darling  .  .  .  mamma  .  .  .  my  precious,’  she  whis¬ 
pered  without  pausing,  kissing  her  head,  her  hands,  her  face,  and  feeling 
the  tears  streaming  in  irrepressible  floods  over  her  nose  and  cheeks. 

The  countess  squeezed  her  daughter’s  hand,  closed  her  eyes,  and  was 
quieter  for  a  moment.  All  at  once  she  sat  up  with  unnatural  swiftness, 
looked  vacantly  round,  and  seeing  Natasha,  began  hugging  her  head  to 
her  with  all  her  might.  Natasha’s  face  involuntarily  worked  with  the 
pain,  as  her  mother  turned  it  toward  her,  and  gazed  a  long  while  into  it. 
‘Natasha,  you  love  me,’  she  said,  in  a  soft,  confiding  whisper.  ‘Natasha, 
you  won’t  deceive  me?  You  will  tell  me  the  whole  truth?’ 

Natasha  looked  at  her  with  eyes  swimming  with  tears,  and  in  her  face 
seemed  only  imploring  her  love  and  forgiveness. 

‘Mamma  .  .  .  darling,’  she  kept  repeating,  putting  forth  all  the 
strength  of  her  love  to  try  somehow  to  take  a  little  of  the  crushing  load  of 
sorrow  off  her  mother  on  to  herself. 

And  again  in  the  helpless  struggle  with  reality,  the  mother,  refusing  to 
believe  that  she  could  live  while  her  adored  boy,  just  blossoming  into  life, 
was  dead,  took  refuge  from  reality  in  the  world  of  delirium. 

Natasha  had  no  recollection  of  how  she  spent  that  day  and  that  night, 
and  the  following  day  and  the  following  night.  She  did  not  sleep,  and  did 
not  leave  her  mother’s  side.  Natasha’s  love,  patient  and  persistent, 
seemed  to  enfold  the  countess  on  all  sides  every  second,  offering  no  ex¬ 
planation,  no  consolation,  simply  beckoning  her  back  to  life. 

On  the  third  night  the  countess  was  quiet  for  a  few  minutes,  and 
Natasha  closed  her  eyes,  her  head  propped  on  the  arm  of  the  chair.  The 
bedstead  creaked;'  Natasha  opened  her  eyes.  The  countess  was  sitting  up 
in  bed,  and  talking  softly. 

‘How  glad  I  am  you  have  come  home.  You  are  tired,  won’t  you  have 
tea?’  Natasha  went  up  to  her.  ‘You  have  grown  so  handsome  and  manly,’ 
the  countess  went  on,  taking  her  daughter’s  hand. 

‘Mamma,  what  are  you  saying  .  .  .  ?’ 

‘Natasha,  he  is  gone,  he  is  no  more.’  And  embracing  her  daughter,  the 
countess  for  the  first  time  began  to  weep. 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


1017 


III 

Princess  Marya  put  off  her  departure.  Sonya  and  the  count  tried  to 
ake  Natasha’s  place,  but  they  could  not.  They  saw  that  she  was  the  only 
ine  who  could  keep  the  mother  from  the  frenzy  of  despair.  For  three 
weeks  Natasha  never  left  her  mother’s  side,  slept  on  a  lounge  in  her  room, 
nade  her  drink  and  eat,  and  without  pause  talked  to  her,  talked  because 
per  tender,  loving  voice  was  the  only  thing  that  soothed  the  countess. 

The  wound  in  the  mother’s  heart  could  never  be  healed.  Petya’s  death 
had  torn  away  half  of  her  life.  When  the  news  of  Petya’s  death  reached 
her,  she  was  a  fresh-looking,  vigorous  woman  of  fifty;  a  month  later  she 
:ame  out  of  her  room  an  old  woman,  half  dead  and  with  no  more  interest  in 
life.  But  the  wound  that  half  killed  the  countess,  that  fresh  wound, 
brought  Natasha  back  to  life. 

A  spiritual  wound  that  comes  from  a  rending  of  the  spirit  is  like  a 
physical  wound,  and  after  it  has  healed  externally,  and  the  torn  edges  are 
scarred  over,  yet,  strange  to  say,  like  a  deep  physical  injury,  it  only  heals 
inwardly  by  the  force  of  life  pushing  up  from  within. 

So  Natasha’s  wound  healed.  She  believed  that  her  life  was  over.  But 
suddenly  her  love  for  her  mother  showed  her  that  the  essence  of  her  life — 
love — was  still  alive  within  her.  Love  was  awakened,  and  life  waked 
with  it. 

The  last  days  of  Prince  Andrey  had  been  a  close  bond  between  Natasha 
and  Princess  Marya.  This  fresh  trouble  brought  them  even  closer  to¬ 
gether.  Princess  Marya  put  off  her  departure,  and  for  the  last  three  weeks 
she  had  been  looking  after  Natasha,  as  though  she  were  a  sick  child. 
Those  weeks  spent  by  Natasha  in  her  mother’s  room  had  completely 
broken  down  her  health. 

One  day  Princess  Marya  noticed  that  Natasha  was  shivering  with  a 
feverish  chill,  and  brought  her  away  to  her  own  room,  and  tucked  her  up 
in  bed  in  the  middle  of  the  day.  Natasha  lay  down,  but  when  Princess 
Marya,  having  let  down  the  blinds,  was  about  to  leave  the  room,  Natasha 
called  her  to  her. 

‘I’m  not  sleepy,  Marie;  stay  with  me.’ 

‘You  are  tired;  try  and  go  to  sleep.’ 

‘No,  no.  Why  did  you  bring  me  away?  She  will  ask  for  me.’ 

‘She  is  much  better.  She  was  talking  much  more  like  herself  to-day,’ 
said  Princess  Marya. 

Natasha  lay  on  the  bed,  and  in  the  half-dark  room  she  tried  to  make 
out  Princess  Marya’s  face. 

‘Is  she  like  him?’  Natasha  wondered.  ‘Yes;  like  and  unlike.  But  she  is 
original,  different,  a  quite  new,  unknown  person.  And  she  likes  me.  What 
is  there  in  her  heart?  Everything  good.  But  what  is  it  like?  What  are  her 
thoughts  like?  How  does  she  look  on  me?  Yes;  she  is  nice!’ 

‘Masha,’  she  said,  shyly  drawing  her  hand  towards  her.  ‘Masha,  you 
mustn't  think  I'm  horrid.  No?  Masha,  darling!  How  I  love  you!  Let  us 


ioiS 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

be  quite,  quite  friends.’  And  embracing  her,  Natasha  fell  to  kissing  her 
hands  and  face. 

Princess  Marya  was  abashed  and  overjoyed  at  this  demonstration  ol 
feeling. 

From  that  day  there  sprang  up  between  Princess  Marya  and  Natasha 
one  of  those  tender  and  passionate  friendships  which  can  only  exist  be¬ 
tween  women.  They  were  continually  kissing  each  other  and  saying  tendei 
things  to  one  another,  and  they  spent  the  greater  part  of  their  time  to¬ 
gether.  If  one  went  away,  the  other  was  uneasy  and  hastened  to  join  her. 
They  felt  more  harmony  together  with  each  other  than  apart,  each  with 
herself.  There  sprang  up  between  them  a  feeling  stronger  than  friend¬ 
ship;  that  was  the  feeling  of  life  being  only  possible  in  each  other’s  com¬ 
pany. 

Sometimes  they  did  not  speak  for  hours  together.  Sometimes,  as  they 
lay  in  their  beds,  they  would  begin  to  talk,  and  talked  till  morning.  They 
talked,  for  the  most  part,  of  their  own  remote  past.  Princess  Marya  told 
her  of  her  childhood,  of  her  mother,  of  her  father,  of  her  dreams.  And; 
Natasha,  who  had  in  the  past  turned  away  with  calm  acceptance  of  her 
non-comprehension  of  that  life  of  devotion  and  resignation,  of  the  idealism 
of  Christian  self-sacrifice,  grew  to  love  Princess  Marya’s  past,  and  to 
understand  that  side  of  life  of  which  she  had  had  no  conception  before. 
She  had  no  thought  of  imitating  that  resignation  and  self-sacrifice  in  her 
own  life,  because  she  was  accustomed  to  look  for  other  joys  in  life;  but 
she  understood  and  loved  in  another  that  virtue  that  had  been  till  now. 
beyond  her  ken.  Princess  Marya,  too,  as  she  listened  to  Natasha’s  stories 
of  her  childhood  and  early  girlhood,  had  a  glimpse  of  a  side  of  life  she 
had  known  nothing  of,  of  faith  in  life  and  in  the  enjoyment  of  life. 

They  still  refrained  from  talking  of  him,  that  they  might  not,  as  it 
seemed  to  them,  desecrate  the  exalted  feeling  in  their  hearts;  but  this 
reticence  led  them,  though  they  would  not  have  believed  it,  into  gradually 
forgetting  him. 

Natasha  had  grown  thin  and  pale,  and  was  physically  so  weak  that 
every  one  was  continually  talking  about  her  health,  and  she  was  glad  it 
was  so.  Yet  sometimes  she  was  suddenly  seized,  not  simply  by  a  dread  of 
death,  but  by  a  dread  of  sickness,  of  ill-health,  of  losing  her  good  looks; 
and  sometimes  she  unconsciously  examined  her  bare  arm,  marvelling  at 
its  thinness,  or  peeped  in  the  looking-glass  in  the  morning  at  her  pinched 
face,  and  was  touched  by  its  piteous  look.  It  seemed  to  her  that  this  was 
as  it  should  be,  and  yet  she  felt  afraid  and  mournful  at  it. 

One  day  she  ran  upstairs  quickly,  and  was  painfully  short  of  breath. 
Immediately  she  made  some  pretext  for  going  down  again,  and  ran  up¬ 
stairs  again,  to  try  her  strength  and  put  herself  to  the  test. 

Another  day  she  called  Dunyasha,  and  her  voice  broke.  She  called  her 
once  more,  though  she  heard  her  coming — called  her  in  the  deep  chest¬ 
voice  with  which  she  used  to  sing,  and  listened  to  the  sound. 

She  knew  it  not,  and  would  not  have  believed  it;  yet  though  the  layer 
of  mould  under  which  she  fancied  that  her  soul  was  buried  seemed  un- 


ioi9 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

roken,  the  delicate,  tender,  young  blades  of  grass  were  already  pushing 
irough  it,  and  were  destined  to  take  root,  and  so  to  hide  the  grief  that  had 
ushcd  her  under  their  living  shoots  that  it  would  soon  be  unseen  and 
>rgotten.  The  wound  was  healing  from  within. 

Towards  the  end  of  January  Princess  Marya  set  off  for  Moscow,  and  the 
junt  insisted  on  Natasha  going  with  her  to  consult  the  doctors. 


IV 

fter  the  engagement  at  Vyazma,  where  Kutuzov  could  not  restrain  his 
oops  in  their  desire  to  break  through,  to  cut  off  and  all  the  rest  of  it, 
le  further  march  of  the  flying  French,  and  of  the  Russians  flying  after 
lem,  continued  as  far  as  Krasnoe  without  a  battle.  The  flight  was  so 
ipid  that  the  Russian  army  racing  after  the  French  could  not  catch  them 
p;  the  horses  of  the  cavalry  and  artillery  broke  down,  and  information  as 
)  the  movements  of  the  French  was  always  very  uncertain. 

The  Russian  soldiers  were  so  exhausted  by  this  unbroken  march  at 
le  rate  of  forty  versts  a  day  that  they  were  unable  to  quicken  their  pace. 
To  form  an  idea  of  the  degree  of  exhaustion  of  the  Russian  army,  one 
eed  only  grasp  clearly  what  is  meant  by  the  fact  that  while  losing  no 
lore  than  five  thousand  killed  and  wounded,  and  not  a  hundred  prison¬ 
's,  the  Russian  army,  which  had  left  Tarutino  a  hundred  thousand  strong, 
umbered  only  fifty  thousand  on  reaching  Krasnoe. 

The  rapidity  of  the  Russian  pursuit  had  as  disintegrating  an  effect  on 
le  Russian  army  as  the  flight  of  the  French  had  on  their  army.  The  only 
ifference  was  that  the  Russian  army  moved  at  its  own  will,  free  from  the 
lenace  of  annihilation  that  hung  over  the  French,  and  that  the  sick  and 
:ragglers  of  the  French  were  left  in  the  hands  of  their  enemy,  while  Rus- 
an  stragglers  were  at  home  among  their  own  people.  The  chief  cause  of 
re  wasting  of  Napoleon’s  army  was  the  rapidity  of  its  movements,  and  an 
ldubitable’proof  of  that  is  to  be  seen  in  the  corresponding  dwindling  of 
le  Russian  army. 

Just  as  at  Tarutino  and  at  Vyazma,  all  Kutuzov’s  energies  were  directed 
i  preventing— so  far  as  it  lay  in  his  power — any  arrest  of  the  fatal  flight 
f  the  French  from  being  checked  (as  the  Russian  generals  in  Petersburg, 
nd  also  in  the  army,  wished  it  to  be).  He  did  all  he  could  to  urge  on  the 
ight  of  the  French,  and  to  slacken  the  speed  of  his  own  army. 

In  addition  to  the  exhaustion  of  the  men,  and  the  immense  losses  due 
i  the  rapidity  of  their  movements,  Kutuzov  saw  another  reason  for  slack¬ 
ing  the  pace,  and  not  being  in  a  hurry.  The  object  of  the  Russian  army 
'as  the  pursuit  of  the  French.  The  route  of  the  French  was  uncertain,  and 
herefore  the  more  closely  our  soldiers  followed  on  the  heels  of  the  French, 
he  greater  the  distances  they  had  to  traverse.  It  was  only  by  following  at 
considerable  distance  that  they  could  take  advantage  of  short  cuts 
cross  the  zig-zags  made  by  the  French  in  their  course.  All  the  skilful 
lancet vres  suggested  by  the  generals  were  based  on  forced  marches  at 


1020 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


accelerated  speed,  while  the  only  rational  object  to  be  aimed  at  was  tj 
diminution  of  the  strain  put  on  the  men.  And  this  was  the  object 
which  all  Kutuzov’s  efforts  were  directed  during  the  whole  campaif 
from  Moscow  to  Vilna,- — not  casually,  not  fitfully,  but  so  consistent 
that  he  never  once  lost  sight  of  it. 

Not  through  reason,  not  by  science,  but  with  all  his  Russian  heart  ai 
soul,  Kutuzov  felt  and  knew,  as  every  Russian  soldier  felt  it,  that  tl 
French  were  vanquished,  that  their  foes  were  in  flight,  and  that  they  mu 
see  them  off.  But  at  the  same  time  he  felt  with  his  soldiers,  as  one  ma 
all  the  sufferings  of  that  march,  unheard  of  at  such  speed  and  in  sue 
weather. 

But  the  generals,  especially  those  not  Russian,  burning  to  distinguk 
themselves,  to  dazzle  people,  to  take  some  duke  or  king  prisoner  for  son 
incomprehensible  reason — those  generals  thought  that  then,  when  ar 
battle  was  sickening  and  meaningless,  was  the  very  time  for  fightir 
battles  and  conquering  somebody.  Kutuzov  simply  shrugged  his  short 
ders  when  they  came  to  him  one  after  another  with  projects  of  manceuvr 
with  the  ill-shod,  half-clothed,  and  half-starved  soldiers,  whose  numbe 
had  in  one  month  dwindled  to  one-half  without  a  battle,  and  who  wou 
even,  under  the  most  favourable  circumstances,  have  a  longer  distance  ; 
traverse  before  they  reached  the  frontier  than  they  had  come  already. 

This  desire  on  the  part  of  the  generals  to  distinguish  themselves,  I 
execute  manoeuvres,  to  attack,  and  to  cut  off  the  enemy,  was  particular 
conspicuous  whenever  the  Russian  army  did  come  into  contact  with  tl 
French. 

So  it  was  at  Krasnoe,  where  they  had  expected  to  find  one  of  the  thrt 
columns  of  the  French,  and  stumbled  upon  Napoleon  himself  with  sixtee: 
thousand  troops.  In  spite  of  all  Kutuzov’s  efforts  to  avoid  this  disastror 
engagement,  and  to  keep  his  men  safe  for  three  days  at  Krasnoe,  the: 
was  a  slaughter  of  the  disordered  bands  of  the  French  by  the  exhauste 
soldiers  of  the  Russian  army. 

Toll  wrote  out  a  disposition:  first  column  to  advance  to  this  spot,  ar 
so  on.  And  as  always,  what  was  done  was  not  at  all  in  accordance  wit' 
that  disposition.  Prince  Eugene  of  Wurtemberg  kept  up  a  fire  from  tl 
hills  on  the  mob  of  French  as  they  raced  by,  and  asked  for  reinforcement 
which  did  not  come.  In  the  nights  the  French  dispersed  to  get  round  tl 
Russians,  hid  themselves  in  the  woods,  and  all  that  could  struggled  c 
again. 

Miloradovitch,  who  declared  that  he  had  no  wish  to  know  anythir 
about  the  commissariat  arrangements  of  his  detachment,  who  could  neve 
be  found  when  he  was  wanted,  that  chevalier  sans  penr  et  sans  reproche,  «j 
he  called  himself,  always  eager  for  parleys  with  the  French;  sent  me 
sengers  to  demand  their  surrender,  wasted  time,  and  did  not  carry  out  tl 
orders  given  him. 

‘I  make  you  a  present  of  that  column,  lads,’  he  said  to  his  men,  poin 
ing  out  the  French  to  his  cavalry.  And  the  cavalry,  with  spur  and  sabr 
urged  their  broken-down  horses  into  a  trot,  and  with  immense  effo 


1021 


WAR  AND  PEACE 
•ached  the  column  he  had  bestowed  on  them,  that  is  to  say,  a  mob  of 
ozen,  numb,  and  starving  Frenchmen.  And  the  column  laid  down  their 
eapons  and  surrendered,  which  was  what  they  had  been  longing  to  do 
>r  weeks  past. 

At  Krasnoe  there  were  taken  twenty-six  thousand  prisoners,  a  hundred 
innons,  a  stick  of  some  sort,  which  was  promptly  dubbed  a  ‘marshal’s 
aton.’  And  the  generals  disputed  among  themselves  who  had  gained  most 
istinction  in  the  action,  and  were  delighted  at  it,  though  they  were  full  of 
?gret  at  not  having  captured  Napoleon  or  some  marshal  and  hero,  and 
lamed  one  another,  and  above  all  Kutuzov,  for  failing  to  do  so. 

These  men,  drawn  on  by  their  own  passions,  were  but  the  blind  instru- 
lents  of  the  most  melancholy  law  of  necessity;  but  they  believed  them- 
fives  heroes,  and  imagined  that  what  they  were  doing  was  the  noblest 
nd  most  honourable  achievement.  They  blamed  Kutuzov,  and  declared 
■om  the  very  beginning  of  the  campaign  he  had  prevented  them  from 
onquering  Napoleon;  that  he  thought  of  nothing  but  his  own  sensual 
ratifications,  and  would  not  advance  out  of  Polotnyany  Zavody  because 
e  was  comfortable  there;  that  he  had  checked  the  advance  at  Krasnoe; 
hat  he  had  completely  lost  his  head  when  he  heard  Napoleon  was  near; 
bat  one  might  really  suppose  he  had  a  secret  understanding  with  Napo- 
jon,  that  he  had  been  bought  over  by  him.  and  so  on  and  so  on. 

And  not  only  contemporaries,  misled  by  their  own  passions,  have  spoken 
hus.  Posterity  and  history  have  accepted  Napoleon  as  grand,  while 
breign  writers  have  called  Kutuzov  a  crafty,  dissolute,  weak,  intriguing 
Id  man;  and  Russians  have  seen  in  him  a  nondescript  being,  a  sort  of 
■uppet,  only  of  use  owing  to  his  Russian  name  .  .  . 


n  1812  and  in  1813  Kutuzov  was  openly  accused  of  blunders.  The  Tsar 
ras  dissatisfied  with  him.  And  in  a  recent  history  2  inspired  by  prompt- 
rigs  from  the  highest  quarters,  Kutuzov  is  spoken  -of  as  a  designing,  in- 
riguing  schemer,  who  was  panic-stricken  at  the  name  of  Napoleon,  and 
;uilty  through  his  blunders  at  Krasnoe  and  Berezina  of  robbing  the 
Russian  army  of  the  glory  of  complete  victory  over  the  French.  Such  is 
he  lot  of  men  not  recognized  by  Russian  intelligence  as  ‘great  men,’ 
rands  hommes ;  such  is  the  destiny  of  those  rare  and  always  solitary 
nen  who  divining  the  will  of  Providence  submit  their  personal  will  to  it. 
The  hatred  and  contempt  of  the  crowd  is  the  punishment  of  such  men  for 
heir  comprehension  of  higher  laws. 

Strange  and  terrible  to  say,  Napoleon,  the  most  insignificant  tool  of 
fistory,  who  never  even  in  exile  displayed  one  trait  of  human  dignity,  is 

1  Wilson’s  Letters. 

2  Bogdanovitch’s  History  of  the  Year  1812 :  The  character  of  Kutuzov,  and 
riticism  of  the  unsatisfactory  results  of  Kutuzov’s  battles. 


102  2 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

the  subject  of  the  admiration  and  enthusiasm  of  the  Russian  historians 
in  their  eyes  he  is  a  grand  homme. 

Kutuzov,  the  man  who  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  his  commam 
in  1812,  from  Borodino  to  Vilna,  was  never  in  one  word  or  deed  false  t( 
himself,  presents  an  example  exceptional  in  history  of  self-sacrifice  an< 
recognition  in  the  present  of  the  relative  value  of  events  in  the  future 
Kutuzov  is  conceived  of  by  the  historians  as  a  nondescript,  pitiful  sort  0 
creature,  and  whenever  they  speak  of  him  in  the  year  1812,  they  seen 
a  little  ashamed  of  him. 

And  yet  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  of  an  historical  character  whose  energy 
could  be  more  invariably  directed  to  the  same  unchanging  aim.  It  i: 
difficult  to  imagine  an  aim  more  noble  and  more  in  harmony  v/ith  thi 
will  of  a  whole  people.  Still  more  difficult  would  it  be  to  find  an  exampli 
in  history  where  the  aim  of  any  historical  personage  has  been  so  com 
pletely  attained  as  the  aim  towards  which  all  Kutuzov’s  efforts  were  de 
voted  in  1812. 

Kutuzov  never  talked  of  ‘forty  centuries  looking  down  from  the  Pyra 
mids,’  of  the  sacrifices  he  was  making  for  the  fatherland,  of  what  he  mean 
to  do  or  had  done.  He  did  not  as  a  rule  talk  about  himself,  played  no  sor 
of  part,  always  seemed  the  plainest  and  most  ordinary  man,  and  said  tht 
plainest  and  most  ordinary  things.  He  wrote  letters  to  his  daughters  anc 
to  Madame  de  Stael,  read  novels,  liked  the  company  of  pretty  women 
made  jokes  with  the  generals,  the  officers,  and  the  soldiers,  and  never 
contradicted  the  people,  who  tried  to  prove  anything  to  him.  When  Coun 
Rastoptchin  galloped  up  to  him  at  Yautsky  bridge,  and  reproached  hin 
personally  with  being  responsible  for  the  loss  of  Moscow,  and  said 
‘Didn’t  you  promise  not  to  abandon  Moscow  without  a  battle?’  Kutuzo\ 
answered:  ‘And  I  am  not  abandoning  Moscow  without  a  battle,’  althougl 
Moscow  was  in  fact  already  abandoned.  When  Araktcheev  came  to  hin 
from  the  Tsar  to  say  that  Yermolov  was  to  be  appointed  to  the  commam 
of  the  artillery,  Kutuzov  said:  ‘Yes,  I  was  just  saying  so  myself,’  thougl 
he  had  said  just  the  opposite  a  moment  before.  What  had  he,  the  om 
man  who  grasped  at  .  the  time  all  the  vast  issues  of  events,  to  do  in  th< 
midst  of  that  dull-witted  crowd?  What  did  he  care  whether  Count  Ras 
toptchin  put  down  the  disasters  of  the  capital  to  him  or  to  himself?  Stil 
less  could  he  be  concerned  by  the  question  which  man  was  appointed  tc! 
the  command  of  the  artillery. 

This  old  man,  who  through  experience  of  life  had  reached  the  convic 
tion  that  the  thoughts  and  words  that  serve  as  its  expression  are  never  th( 
motive  force  of  men,  frequently  uttered  words,  which  were  quite  meaning 
less — the  first  words  that  occurred  to  his  mind. 

But  heedless  as  he  was  of  his  words,  he  never  once  throughout  all  hi: 
career  uttered  a  single  word  which  was  inconsistent  with  the  sole  aim  foi 
the  attainment  of  which  he  was  working  all  through  the  war.  With  obviou: 
unwillingness,  with  bitter  conviction  that  he  would  not  be  understood 
he  more  than  once,  under  the  most  different  circumstances,  gave  expres 
sion  to  his  real  thought.  His  first  differed  from  all  about  him  after  th< 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1023 

attle  of  Borodino,  which  he  alone  persisted  in  calling  a  victory,  and  this 
ew  he  continued  to  assert  verbally  and  in  reports  and  to  his  dying  day. 
e  alone  said  that  the  loss  of  Moscow  is  not  the  loss  of  Russia.  In  answer 
)  the  overtures  for  peace,  his  reply  to  Lauriston  was:  There  can  he  no 
pace,  for  such  is  the  people’s  will.  He  alone  during  the  retreat  of  the 
rench  said  that  all  our  manoeuvres  are  unnecessary ;  that  everything  is 
sing  done  of  itself  better  than  we  could  desire;  that  we  must  give  the 
lemy  a  ‘golden  bridge’ ;  that  the  battles  of  Tarutino,  of  Vyazma,  and  of 
rasnoe,  were  none  of  them  necessary ;  that  we  must  keep  some  men  to 
;ach  the  frontier  with;  that  he  wouldn’t  give  one  Russian  for  ten  French- 
’ en .  And  he,  this  intriguing  courtier,  as  we  are  told,  who  lied  to  Arak¬ 
cheev  to  propitiate  the  Tsar,  he  alone  dared  to  face  the  Tsar’s  displeasure 
y  telling  him  at  Vilna  that  to  carry  the  war  beyond  the  frontier  would  be 
dschievous  and  useless. 

But  words  alone  would  be  no  proof  that  he  grasped  the  significance  of 
/ents  at  the  time.  His  actions — all  without  the  slightest  deviation — 
ere  directed  toward  the  one  threefold  aim:  first,  to  concentrate  all  his 
trees  to  strike  a  blow  at  the  French;  secondly,  to  defeat  them;  and 
tirdly,  to  drive  them  out  of  Russia,  alleviating  as  far  as  was  possible  the 
ifferings  of  the  people  and  the  soldiers  in  doing  so. 

He,  the  lingerer  Kutuzov,  whose  motto  was  always  ‘Time  and  Patience,’ 
te  sworn  opponent  of  precipitate  action,  he  fought  the  battle  of  Boro- 
[no,  and  made  all  his  preparations  for  it  with  unwonted  solemnity.  Be- 
>re  the  battle  of  Austerlitz  he  foretold  that  it  would  be  lost,  but  at 
orodino,  in  spite  of  the  conviction  of  the  generals  that  the  battle  was  a 
;feat,  in  spite  of  the  fact,  unprecedented  in  history,  of  his  army  being 
ireed  to  retreat  after  the  victory,  he  alone  declared  in  opposition  to 
1  that  it  was  a  victory,  and  persisted  in  that  opinion  to  his  dying  day. 
e  was  alone  during  the  whole  latter  part  of  the  campaign  in  insisting 
tat  there  was  no  need  of  fighting  now,  that  it  was  a  mistake  to  cross  the 
ussian  frontier  and  to  begin  a  new  war.  It  is  easy  enough  now  that  all 
le  events  with  their  consequences  lie  before  us  to  grasp  their  significance, 
only  we  refrain  from  attributing  to  the  multitude  the  aims  that  only 
fisted  in  the  brains  of  some  dozen  or  so  of  men. 

But  how  came  that  old  man,  alone  in  opposition  to  the  opinion  of  all,  to 
ruge  so  truly  the  importance  of  events  from  the  national  standard,  so 
lat  he  never  once  was  false  to  the  best  interests  of  his  country? 

The  source  of  this  extraordinary  intuition  into  the  significance  of  con  • 
mporary  events  lay  in  the  purity  and  fervour  of  patriotic  feeling  in  his 
,iart. 

It  was  their  recognition  of  this  feeling  in  him  that  led  the  people  in  such 
strange  manner  to  pick  him  out,  an  old  man  out  of  favour,  as  the  chosen 
ader  of  the  national  war,  against  the  will  of  the  Tsar.  And  this  feeling 
one  it  was  to  which  he  owed  his  exalted  position,  and  there  he  exerted 
1  his  powers  as  commander-in-chief  not  to  kill  and  maim  men,  but  to 
ve  them  and  have  mercy  on  them. 

This  simple,  modest,  and  therefore  truly  great  figure,  could  not  be  cast 


1024  WAR  AND  PEACE 

into  the  false  mould  of  the  European  hero,  the  supposed  leader  of  men 
that  history  has  invented. 

To  the  flunkey  no  man  can  be  great,  because  the  flunkey  has  his  owr 
flunkey  conception  of  greatness. 


VI 

The  5th  of  November  was  the  first  day  of  the  so-called  battle  of  Krasnoe 
Many  had  been  the  blunders  and  disputes  among  the  generals,  who  hac 
not  reached  their  proper  places,  many  the  contradictory  orders  carriec 
to  them  by  adjutants,  but  towards  evening  it  was  clear  that  the  enemy 
were  everywhere  in  flight,  and  that  there  would  not  and  could  not  be  r 
battle.  In  the  evening  Kutuzov  set  out  from  Krasnoe  towards  Dobroe,  tc 
which  place  the  headquarters  had  that  day  been  removed. 

It  had  been  a  clear,  frosty  day.  Kutuzov,  mounted  on  his  fat,  whitf 
little  horse,  was  riding  towards  Dobroe,  followed  by  an  immense  suite  o: 
generals,  whispering  their  dissatisfaction  behind  his  back.  Seven  thou 
sand  French  prisoners  had  been  taken  that  day,  and  all  along  ths 
road  they  met  parties  of  them,  crowding  to  warm  themselves  rouni 
the  camp-fires.  Not  far  from  Dobroe  they  heard  a  loud  hum  of  talk  frorr 
an  immense  crowd  of  tattered  prisoners,  bandaged  and  wrapped  up  ir 
rags  of  all  sorts,  standing  in  the  road  near  a  long  row  of  unharnessec 
French  cannons.  At  the  approach  of  the  commander-in-chief  the  buzz  o 
talk  died  away,  and  all  eyes  were  fixed  upon  Kutuzov,  who  moved  slowly 
along  the  road,  wearing  a  white  cap  with  a  red  band,  and  a  wadded  over 
coat,  that  set  in  a  hunch  on  his  round  shoulders.  One  of  the  generals  begat 
explaining  to  Kutuzov  where  the  prisoners  and  the  guns  had  been  taken 
Kutuzov  seemed  absorbed  in  anxious  thought,  and  did  not  hear  thi 
general’s  words.  He  screwed  up  his  eyes  with  an  air  of  displeasure,  anc 
gazed  intently  at  the  figures  of  the  prisoners,  who  presented  a  particularly 
pitiable  appearance.  The  majority  of  the  French  soldiers  were  disfigurec 
by  frost-bitten  cheeks  and  noses,  and  almost  all  of  them  had  red,  swollen 
and  streaming  eyes. 

One  group  of  Frenchmen  was  standing  close  by  the  road,  and  tw< 
soldiers,  one  with  his  face  covered  with  sores,  were  tearing  at  a  piece  of  rav 
meat  with  their  hands.  There  was  something  bestial  and  horrible  in  the 
cursory  glance  they  cast  on  the  approaching  generals,  and  the  frenziec 
expression  with  which  the  soldier  with  the  sore  face,  after  a  glance  a 
Kutuzov,  turned  away  and  went  on  with  what  he  was  doing. 

Kutuzov  looked  a  long  while  intently  at  those  two  soldiers;  frowning 
more  than  before,  he  half-closed  his  eyelids,  and  shook  his  head  thought 
fully.  Further  on,  he  noticed  a  Russian  soldier,  who  was  saying  something 
friendly  to  a  French  prisoner,  laughing  and  clapping  him  on  the  shoulder 
Kutuzov  shook  his  head  again  with  the  same  expression. 

‘What  do  you  say?’  he  asked  the  general,  who  was  trying  to  draw  thj 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1025 

)mmander-in-chief’s  attention  to  the  French  flags,  that  were  set  up  in 
ont  of  the  Preobrazhensky  regiment. 

‘Ah,  the  flags!’  said  Kutuzov,  rousing  himself  with  evident  difficulty 
om  the  subject  absorbing  his  thoughts.  He  looked  about  him  absently, 
housands  of  eyes  were  gazing  at  him  from  all  sides,  waiting  for  his  words. 
He  came  to  a  standstill  before  the  Preobrazhensky  regiment,  sighed 
?avily  and  closed  his  eyes.  One  of  the  suite  beckoned  to  the  soldiers 
aiding  the  flags  to  come  up  and  set  up  the  flagstaffs  around  the  com- 
ander-in-chief .  Kutuzov  was  silent  for  a  few  seconds.  Then  with  obvious 
•luctance,  yielding  to  the  obligations  of  his  position,  he  raised  his  head 
id  began  to  speak.  Crowds  of  officers  gathered  round  him.  He  scanned 
le  circle  of  officers  with  an  attentive  eye,  recognising  some  of  them. 

‘I  thank  you  all! ’  he  said,  addressing  the  soldiers,  and  then  again  turn- 
ig  to  the  officers.  In  the  deep  stillness  that  prevailed  all  round  him,  his 
owly  articulated  words  were  distinctly  audible:  ‘I  thank  you  all  for  your 
ard  and  faithful  service.  The  victory  is  complete,  and  Russia  will  not 
irget  you.  Your  glory  will  be  for  ever !  ’  He  paused,  looking  about  him. 
‘Lower;  bow  his  head  lower,’  he  said  to  the  soldier,  who  was  holding 
ie  French  eagle,  and  had  accidentally  lowered  it  before  the  Preobraz- 
ensky  standard. 

‘Lower,  lower,  that’s  it.  Hurrah,  lads!  ’  he  said,  his  chin  moving  quickly 
5  he  turned  to  the  soldiers. 

‘Hurrah-rah-rah!’  thousands  of  voices  roared. 

While  the  soldiers  were  shouting,  Kutuzov,  bending  forward  in  his 
iddle,  bowed  his  head,  and  his  eyes  gleamed  with  a  mild  and,  as  it  were, 
onical  light. 

‘And  now,  brothers  .  ..  .’  he  said,  when  the  shouts  had  died  away. 

And  all  at  once  his  face  and  expression  changed:  it  was  not  the  com- 
iiander-in-chief  speaking  now,  but  a  simple,  aged  man,  who  plainly 
anted  to  say  something  most  important  now  to  his  comrades. 

‘And  now,  brothers.  I  know  it’s  hard  for  you,  but  there’s  no  help  for  it! 
lave  a  little  patience;  it  won’t  last  much  longer.  We  will  see  our  visitors 
ff,  and  then  we  will  rest.  The  Tsar  won’t  forget  your  services.  It’s  hard 
jr  you,  but  still  you  are  at  home;  while  they — you  see  what  they  have 
)me  to,’  he  said,  pointing  to  the  prisoners.  ‘Worse  than  the  lowest  beg- 
ars.  While  they  were  strong,  we  did  not  spare  ourselves,  but  now  we  can 
/en  spare  them.  They  too  are  men.  Eh,  lads?’ 

He  looked  about  him.  And  in  the  unflinching,  respectfully  wondering 
/es  staring  persistently  at  him,  he  read  sympathy  with  his  words.  His 
ice  grew  brighter  and  brighter  with  the  gentle  smile  of  old  age,  that 
rought  clusters  of  wrinkles  at  the  corners  of  his  mouth  and  his  eyes, 
te  paused  and  dropped  his  head,  as  though  in  doubt. 

‘But  after  all  is  said  and  done,  who  asked  them  to  come  here?  It  serves 

lem  right,  the  b -  b - ,’  he  said  suddenly,  lifting  his  head.  And 

ringing  his  riding-whip,  he  rode  off  at  a  gallop,  accompanied  for  the 
rst  time  during  the  whole  campaign  by  gleeful  guffaws  and  roars  of 
urrah  from  the  men  as  they  moved  out  of  rank. 


1026 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

The  words  uttered  by  Kutuzov  were  hardly  understood  by  the  soldiers 
No  one  could  have  repeated  the  field-marshal’s  speech  at  first  of  sue! 
solemnity,  and  towards  the  end  of  such  homely  simplicity.  But  the  mean¬ 
ing  at  the  bottom  of  his  words,  they  understood  very  well,  and  the  sanu 
feeling  of  solemn  triumph  in  their  victory,  together  with  pity  for  th( 
enemy  and  the  sense  of  the  justice  of  their  cause — expressed,  too,  witl 
precisely  the  same  homely  coarseness — lay  at  the  bottom  of  every  soldier’s 
heart,  and  found  a  vent  in  delighted  shouts,  that  did  not  cease  for  a  lone 
while.  When  one  of  the  generals  addressed  the  commander-in-chief  after 
this,  asking  whether  he  desired  his  carriage,  Kutuzov  broke  into  a  sudder 
sob  in  replying.  He  was  evidently  deeply  moved. 


VII 

It  was  getting  dusk  on  the  8th  of  November,  the  last  day  of  the  battlf 
of  Krasnoe,  when  the  soldiers  reached  their  halting-place  for  the  night 
The  whole  day  had  been  still  and  frosty,  with  now  and  then  a  few  ligh 
flakes  of  snow.  Towards  evening  the  sky  began  to  grow  clearer.  Througl 
the  snowflakes  could  be  seen  a  dark,  purplish,  starlit  sky,  and  the  fros; 
was  growing  more  intense. 

A  regiment  of  musketeers,  which  had  left  Tarutino  three  thousanc 
strong,  but  had  now  dwindled  to  nine  hundred,  was  among  the  first  tc 
reach  the  halting-place,  a  village  on  the  high  road.  The  quartermasters 
on  meeting  the  regiment,  reported  that  all  the  cottages  were  full  of  sic! 
and  dead  Frenchmen,  cavalrymen,  and  staff-officers.  There  was  only  one 
cottage  left  for  the  colonel  of  the  regiment. 

The  colonel  went  on  to  his  cottage.  The  regiment  passed  through  the 
village,  and  stacked  their  guns  up  at  the  furthest  cottages  along  the  road 

Like  a  huge,  many-legged  monster,  the  regiment  set  to  work  preparing 
its  food  and  lodging  for  the  night.  One  party  of  soldiers  trudged  off 
knee-deep  in  the  snow,  into  the  birch  copse,  on  the  right  of  the  village 
and  the  ring  of  axes  and  cutlasses,  the  crash  of  breaking  branches,  anc 
the  sounds  of  merry  voices  were  immediately  heard  coming  thence.  An¬ 
other  group  were  busily  at  work  all  round  the  regimental  baggage-wag 
gons,  which  were  drav/n  up  altogether.  Some  fed  the  horses,  while  other: 
got  out  cooking-pots  and  biscuits.  A  third  section  dispersed  about  the  vil 
lage,  getting  the  cottages  ready  for  the  staff-officers,  carrying  out  the  deac 
bodies  of  the  French  lying  in  the  huts,  and  dragging  away  boards,  dr) 
wood,  and  straw  from  the  thatch  roofs,  to  furnish  fuel  for  their  fires  anc 
materials  for  the  shelters  they  rigged  up. 

Behind  the  huts  at  the  end  of  the  village  fifteen  soldiers  were  trying  . 
with  merry  shouts  to  pull  down  the  high  wattle  wall  of  a  barn  frorr 
which  they  had  already  removed  the  roof. 

Now  then,  a  strong  pull,  all  together!’  shouted  the  voices;  and  in  the 
dark  the  huge,  snow-sprinkled  boards  of  the  wall  began  to  give.  The  lowei 
stakes  of  the  wattle  cracked  more  and  more  often,  and  at  last  the  wattk 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1027 

all  heaved  over,  together  with  the  soldiers,  who  were  hanging  onto  it.  A 
ud  shout  and  the  roar  of  coarse  merriment  followed. 

‘Work  at  it  in  twos!  give  us  a  lever  here!  that’s  it.  Where  are  you 
lining  to?’ 

! ‘Now,  all  together.  .  .  .  But  wait,  lads!  .  .  .  With  a  shout!’  .  .  . 
All  were  silent,  and  a  low  voice  of  velvety  sweetness  began  singing  a 
mg.  At  the  end  of  the  third  verse,  as  the  last  note  died  away,  twenty 
!  dices  roared  out  in  chorus,  ‘O-O-O-O-O!  It’s  coming!  Pull  away!  Heave 
way,  lads!  .  .  .’ but  in  spite  of  their  united  efforts  the  wall  hardly  moved, 
nd  in  the  silence  that  followed  the  men  could  be  heard  panting  for 
reath. 

‘Hi,  you  there,  of  the  sixth  company!  You  devils,  you!  Lend  us  a  hand 
.  .  We’ll  do  you  a  good  turn  one  day!  ’ 

Twenty  men  of  the  sixth  company,  who  were  passing,  joined  them,  and 
le  wattle  wall,  thirty-five  feet  in  length,  and  seven  feet  in  breadth,  was 
ragged  along  the  village  street,  falling  over,  and  cutting  the  shoulders 
f  the  panting  soldiers. 

‘Go  on,  do.  .  .  .  Heave  away,  you  there.  .  .  .  What  are  you  stopping 
)r?  Eh,  there?’  .  .  . 

The  merry  shouts  of  unseemly  abuse  never  ceased. 

‘What  are  you  about?’  cried  a  peremptory  voice,  as  a  sergeant  ran  up 
D  the  party.  ‘There  are  gentry  here ;  the  general  himself ’s  in  the  hut  here, 
nd  you  devils,  you  curs,  you!  I’ll  teach  you!’  shouted  the  sergeant,  and 
snt  a  swinging  blow  at  the  back  of  the  first  soldier  he  could  come  across. 
Can’t  you  go  quietly?’ 

The  soldiers  were  quiet.  The  soldier  who  had  received  the  blow  began 
rumbling,  as  he  rubbed  his  bleeding  face,  which  had  been  scratched  by 
is  being  knocked  forward  against  the  wattle. 

‘Ay,  the  devil;  how  he  does  hit  a  fellow!  Why,  he  has  set  all  my  face 
feeding,’  he  said  in  a  timid  whisper,  as  the  sergeant  walked  away.  ‘And 
ou  don’t  enjoy  it,  eh?’  said  a  laughing  voice;  and  the  soldiers,  moderating 
heir  voices,  moved  on.  As  they  got  out  of  the  village,  they  began  talking 
s  loudly  again,  interspersing  their  talk  with  the  same  meaningless  oaths. 

In  the  hut  by  which  the  soldiers  had  passed  there  were  assembled  the 
hief  officers  in  command,  and  an  eager  conversation  was  going  on  over 
heir  tea  about  that  clay’s  doings  and  the  manoeuvres  proposed  for  the 
text.  The  plan  was  to  execute  a  flank  movement  to  the  left,  cut  off  and 
apture  the  viceroy. 

By  the  time  the  soldiers  had  dragged  the  fence  to  its  place  they  found 
dazing  fires,  cooking  supper  on  all  sides.  The  firewood  was  crackling,  the 
now  was  melting,  and  the  black  shadows  of  soldiers  were  flitting  to  and 
ro  all  over  the  space  between  trampled  down  in  the  snow. 

'  Axes  and  cutlasses  were  at  work  on  all  sides.  Everything  was  done 
without  a  word  of  command  being  given.  Wood  was  piled  up  for  a  supply 
if  fuel  through  the  night,  shanties  were  being  rigged  up  for  the  officers, 
'>ots  were  being  boiled,  and  arms  and  accoutrements  set  to  rights. 

!  The  wattle  wall  was  set  up  in  a  semicircle  to  give  shelter  from  the  north. 


1028 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

propped  up  by  stakes,  and  before  it  was  built  a  camp-fire.  They  beal 
the  tattoo-call,  counted  over  their  number,  had  supper,  and  settled  them¬ 
selves  round  the  fires — some  repairing  their  foot-gear,  some  smoking 
pipes,  others  stripped  naked  trying  to  steam  the  lice  out  of  their  clothes 


VIII 

One  would  naturally  have  expected  that  in  the  almost  inconceivably 
wretched  conditions  in  which  the  Russian  soldiers  were  placed  at  that 
time — without  thick  boots,  without  fur  coats,  without  a  roof  over  then 
heads  in  the  snow,  with  a  frost  of  eighteen  degrees,  often  without  ful! 
rations — they  must  have  presented  a  most  melancholy  and  depressing 
spectacle. 

It  was  quite  the  opposite.  Never  under  the  most  favourable  material 
conditions  had  the  army  worn  a  livelier  and  more  cheerful  aspect.  This 
was  due  to  the  fact  that  every  element  that  showed  signs  of  depression 
or  weakness  was  sifted  every  day  out  of  the  army.  All  the  physically  and! 
morally  weak  had  long  ago  been  left  behind.  What  was  left  was  the  pick 
of  the  army — in  strength  of  body  and  of  spirit. 

The  camp-fire  of  the  eighth  company,  screened  by  their  wattle  fence 
attracted  a  greater  crowd  than  any.  Two  sergeants  were  sitting  by  it, 
and  the  fire  was  blazing  more  brightly  than  any  of  them.  They  insisted 
on  logs  being  brought  in  return  for  the  right  of  sitting  under  the  screen, 

‘Hi,  Makyev,  hullo  .  .  .  are  you  lost,  or  have  the  wolves  eaten  you?' 
Fetch  some  wood,’  shouted  a  red-faced,  red-haired  soldier,  screwing  up 
his  eyes,  and  blinking  from  the  smoke,  but  not  moving  back  from  the  fire. 

‘You  run,  Crow,  and  fetch  some  wood,’  he  cried,  addressing  another 
soldier.  The  red-headed  man  was  not  a  non-commissioned  officer,  nor  a 
corporal,  but  he  was  a  sturdy  fellow,  and  so  he  gave  orders  to  those  who 
were  weaker  than  himself.  A  thin,  little  soldier,  with  a  sharp  nose,  who 
was  called  the  ‘Crow,’  got  up  submissively,  and  was  about  to  obey;  but 
at  that  moment  there  stepped  into  the  light  of  the  fire  the  slender,  hand- 
pome  figure  of  a  young  soldier,  carrying  a  load  of  wood. 

‘Give  it  here.  Well,  that’s  something  like!  ’ 

They  broke  up  the  v/ood  and  threw  it  on,  blew  up  the  fire  with  their 
mouths,  and  fanned  it  with  the  skirts  of  their  coats,  and  the  flame  began 
to  hiss  and  crackle.  The  soldiers  drew  nearer  the  fire  and  lighted  their 
pipes.  The  handsome  young  soldier  who  had  brought  in  the  wood  put  his 
arms  akimbo,  and  began  a  smart  and  nimble  shuffle  with  his  frozen  feet 
as  he  stood. 

‘Ah,  mother  dear,  the  dew  is  cold,  but  yet  it  is  fine,  and  a  musketeer!’ 
...  he  began  singing,  with  a  sort  of  hiccup  at  each  syllable  of  the  song. 

‘Hey,  his  soles  are  flying  off!’  cried  the  red-haired  man,  noticing  that 
the  dancer’s  soles  were  loose.  ‘He’s  a  rare  devil  for  dancing!  ’ 

The  dancer  stopped,  tore  off  the  loose  leather,  and  flung  it  in  the  fire. 

‘You’re  right  there,  brother,’  said  he,  and  sitting  down  he  took  out  of 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1029 

is  knapsack  a  strip  of  French  blue  cloth,  and  began  binding  it  round 
is  foot.  ‘It’s  the  steam  that  warps  them/  he  added,  stretching  his  feet 
.it  to  the  fire. 

‘They’ll  soon  serve  us  new  ones.  They  say  when  we  finish  them  off,  we 
-e  all  to  have  a  double  lot  of  stuff.’ 

‘I  say,  that  son  of  a  bitch,  Petrov,  has  sneaked  off,  it  seems/  said  a 
irgeant. 

‘It’s  a  long  while  since  I’ve  noticed  him/  said  the  other. 

,  ‘Oh,  well,  a  poor  sort  of  soldier  .  .  .’ 

‘And  in  the  third  company,  they  were  saying,  there  were  nine  men 
lissing  at  the  roll-call  yesterday.’ 

‘Well,  but  after  all,  when  one’s  feet  are  frozen,  how’s  one  to  walk?’ 

‘Oh,  stuff  and  nonsense!’  said  the  sergeant. 

‘Why,  do  you  want  to  do  the  same?’  said  an  old  soldier,  reproachfully 
ddressing  the  man  who  had  talked  of  frozen  feet. 

‘Well,  what  do  you  think?’  the  sharp-nosed  soldier,  called  ‘Crow/ 
aid  suddenly,  in  a  squeaking  and  quavery  voice,  turning  himself  on  one 
Ibow  behind  the  fire.  ‘If  a  man’s  sleek  and  fat,  he  just  grows  thin,  but 
hr  a  thin  man  it’s  death.  Look  at  me,  now!  I  have  no  strength  left/  he 
'aid,  with  sudden  resolution,  addressing  a  sergeant.  ‘Say  the  word  for  me 
0  be  sent  off  to  the  hospital.  I’m  one  ache  with  rheumatism,  and  one 
nly  gets  left  behind  just  the  same  .  .  .’ 

‘There,  that’s  enough;  that’s  enough,’  said  the  sergeant  calmly. 

The  soldier  was  silent,  and  the  conversation  went  on. 

‘There’s  a  rare  lot  of  these  Frenchies  have  been  taken  to-day;  but  not 
i,  pair  of  boots  on  one  of  them,  one  may  say,  worth  having;  no,  not  worth 
nentioning/  one  of  the  soldiers  began,  starting  a  new  subject. 

‘The  Cossacks  had  stripped  them  of  everything.  We  cleaned  a  hut  for 
he  colonel,  and  carried  them  out.  It  was  pitiful  to  see  them,  lads/  said 
he  dancer.  ‘We  overhauled  them.  One  was  alive,  would  you  believe  it, 
nuttering  something  in  their  lingo.’ 

‘They’re  a  clean  people,  lads/  said  the  first.  ‘White — why,  as  white  as 
1  birch-tree,  and  brave  they  are,  I  must  say,  and  gentlemen,  too.’ 

‘Well,  what  would  you  expect?  Soldiers  are  taken  from  all  classes  with 
hem.’ 

‘And  yet  they  don’t  understand  a  word  we  say/  said  the  dancer,  with 
1  wondering  smile.  ‘I  says  to  him,  “Of  what  kingdom  are  you?”  and  he 
nutters  away  his  lingo.  A  strange  people!’ 

‘I’ll  tell  you  a  wonderful  thing,  mates/  went  on  the  man  who  had  ex- 
.bressed  surprise  at  their  whiteness.  ‘The  peasants  about  Mozhaisk  were 
elling  how,  when  they  went  to  take  away  the  dead  where  the  great  battle 
was,  why,  their  bodies  had  been  lying  there  a  good  month.  Well,  they 
ay  there,  as  white  and  clean  as  paper,  and  not  a  smell  about  them.’ 
‘Why,  from  the  cold,  eh?’  asked  one. 

‘You’re  a  clever  one!  Cold,  indeed!  Why,  it  was  hot  weather.  If  it 
aad  been  from  the  cold,  our  men,  too,  wouldn’t  have  rotted.  But  they  say, 
go  up  to  one  of  ours,  and  it  would  all  be  putrified  and  maggoty.  They 


1030  WAR  AND  PEACE 

tie  handkerchiefs  round  their  noses,  and  drag  them  off,  turning  theii. 
faces  away,  so  they  say.  They  can’t  help  it.  But  they’re  white  as  paper: 
not  a  smell  about  them.’ 

There  was  a  general  silence. 

‘Must  be  from  the  feeding,’  said  the  sergeant:  ‘they  are  gorged  lik( 
gentry.’ 

No  one  replied. 

‘That  peasant  at  Mozhaisk,  where  the  battle  was,  was  saying  that  the) 
were  fetched  from  ten  villages  round,  and  at  work  there  for  twenty  days 
and  couldn’t  get  all  the  dead  away.  A  lot  of  those  wolves,  says  he  .  .  .’ 

‘That  was  something  like  a  battle,’  said  an  old  soldier.  ‘The  only  one 
worth  mentioning;  everything  since  .  .  .  it’s  simply  tormenting  folks  foi 
nothing.’ 

‘Oh,  well,  uncle,  we  did  attack  them  the  day  before  yesterday.  But1 
what’s  one  to  do?  They  won’t  let  us  get  at  them.  They  were  so  quick  a! 
laying  down  their  arms,  and  on  their  knees.  Pardon! — they  say.  And! 
that’s  only  one  example.  They  have  said  twice  that  Platov  had  taken 
Polion  himself.  He  catches  him,  and  lo!  he  turns  into  a  bird  in  his 
hands  and  flies  away  and  away.  And  as  to  killing  him,  no  manner  of  means 
of  doing  it.’ 

‘You’re  a  sturdy  liar,  Kiselov,  by  the  look  of  you!  ’ 

‘Liar,  indeed!  It’s  the  holy  truth.’ 

‘Well,  if  you  ask  me,  I’d  bury  him  in  the  earth,  if  I  caught  him.  Yes, 
with  a  good  aspen  cudgel.  The  number  of  folk  he  has  destroyed!  ’ 

‘Any  way,  we  shall  soon  make  an  end  of  him;  he  won’t  come  again,’ 
said  the  old  soldier,  yawning. 

The  conversation  died  away;  the  soldiers  began  making  themselves! 
comfortable  for  the  night. 

‘I  say,  what  a  lot  of  stars;  how  they  shine!  One  would  say  the  women 
had  been  laying  out  their  linen!  ’  said  a  soldier  admiring  the  Milky  Way. 

‘That’s  a  sign  of  a  good  harvest,  lads!’ 

‘We  shall  want  a  little  more  wood.’ 

‘One  warms  one’s  back,  and  one’s  belly  freezes.  That’s  queer.’ 

‘OLord!’ 

‘What  are  you  shoving  for — is  the  fire  only  for  you,  eh?  See  .  .  . 
there  he  sprawls.’ 

In  the  silence  that  reigned  snoring  could  be  heard  from  a  few  who 
had  gone  to  sleep.  The  rest  turned  themselves  to  get  warm  by  the  fire, 
exchanging  occasional  remarks.  From  a  fire  a  hundred  paces  away  came  a| 
chorus  of  merry  laughter. 

‘They  are  guffawing  in  the  fifth  company,’  said  a  soldier.  ‘And  what 
a  lot  of  them  there!  ’ 

A  soldier  got  up  and  went  off  to  the  fifth  company. 

‘There’s  a  bit  of  fun!  ’  he  said,  coming  back.  ‘Two  Frenchies  have  come 
One’s  quite  frozen,  but  the  other’s  a  fine  plucky  fellow!  He’s  singing 
songs.’ 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1031 

‘0-0!  must  go  and  look  .  .  .’  Several  soldiers  went  across  to  the  fifth 
3mpany. 


IX 

he  fifth  company  was  bivouacking  close  up  to  the  birch  copse.  An  im- 
lense  camp-fire  was  blazing  brightly  in  the  middle  of  the  snow,  lighting 
p  the  rime-covered  boughs  of  the  trees. 

In  the  middle  of  the  night  the  soldiers  had  heard  footsteps  and  the 
racking  of  branches  in  the  copse. 

1  ‘A  bear,  lads,’  said  one  soldier. 

All  raised  their  heads  and  listened;  and  out  of  the  copse  there  stepped 
ito  the  bright  light  of  the  fire  two  strangely  garbed  human  figures, 
linging  to  one  another.  These  were  two  Frenchmen,  who  had  been  hiding 
1  the  wood.  Hoarsely  articulating  something  in  a  tongue  incomprehen- 
ble  to  the  soldiers,  they  approached  the  fire.  One,  wearing  an  officer’s 
at,  was  rather  the  taller,  and  seemed  utterly  spent.  He  tried  to  sit 
■own  by  the  fire,  but  sank  on  to  the  ground.  The  other,  a  little,  stumpy 
lan,  with  a  kerchief  bound  round  his  cheeks,  was  stronger.  He  held  his 
ompanion  up,  and  said  something  pointing  to  his  mouth.  The  soldiers 
urrounded  the  Frenchmen,  laid  a  coat  under  the  sick  man,  and  brought 
oth  of  them  porridge  and  vodka.  The  exhausted  French  officer  was  Ram- 
alle;  the  little  man  bandaged  up  in  the  kerchief  was  his  servant,  Morel. 
When  Morel  had  drunk  some  vodka  and  eaten  a  bowl  of  porridge,  he 
uddenly  passed  into  a  state  of  morbid  hilarity,  and  kept  up  an  incessant 
abble  with  the  soldiers,  who  could  not  understand  him.  Ramballe  refused 
x>d,  and  leaning  on  one  elbow  by  the  fire,  gazed  dumbly  with  red, 
acant  eyes  at  the  Russian  soldiers.  At  intervals  he  uttered  a  prolonged 
roan  and  then  was  mute  again.  Morel,  pointing  to  his  shoulders,  gave 
he  soldiers  to  understand  that  this  was  an  officer,  and  that  he  needed 
/armth.  A  Russian  officer,  who  had  come  up  to  the  fire,  sent  to  ask  the 
olonel  whether  he  would  take  a  French  officer  into  his  warm  cottage. 
Vhen  they  came  back  and  said  that  the  colonel  bade  them  bring  the 
fficer,  they  told  Ramballe  to  go  to  him.  He  got  up  and  tried  to  walk, 
>ut  staggered,  and  would  have  fallen  had  not  a  soldier  standing  near 
aught  him. 

‘What?  You  don’t  want  to,  eh?’  said  a  soldier  addressing  Ramballe  with 
jocose  wink. 

‘Eh,  you  fool!  It’s  no  time  for  your  fooling.  A  peasant,  a  real  peasant,’ 
oices  were  heard  on  all  sides  blaming  the  jocose  soldier.  The  others  sur- 
ounded  Ramballe.  Two  of  them  held  him  up  under  the  arms  and  carried 
lim  to  the  cottage.  Ramballe  put  his  arms  round  the  soldiers’  necks,  and 
s  they  lifted  him  he  began  wailing  plaintively. 

‘0  you  good  fellows!  O  my  kind,  kind  friends.  These  are  men!  O  my 
/rave,  kind  friends’;  and  like  a  child  he  put  his  head  down  on  the  soldier’s 
boulder. 


T032  WAR  AND  PEACE 

Meanwhile  Morel  was  sitting  in  the  best  place  surrounded  by  th 
soldiers. 

Morel,  a  little,  thickset  Frenchman,  with  swollen,  streaming  eyes,  wa 
dressed  in  a  woman’s  jacket  and  had  a  woman’s  kerchief  tied  over  hi 
forage  cap.  He  was  evidently  tipsy,  and  with  one  arm  thrown  round  th 
soldier  sitting  next  him,  he  was  singing  a  French  song  in  a  husky,  brokei 
voice.  The  soldiers  simply  held  their  sides  as  they  looked  at  him. 

‘Now  then,  now  then,  teach  it  me;  how  does  it  go?  I’ll  catch  it  in  m 
time.  How  was  it?’  said  the  soldier  Morel  was  hugging,  who  was  one  o 
the  singers  and  fond  of  a  joke. 

‘Vive  Henri  Qnatre!  Vive  ce  roi  vaillant!  .  .  .’  sang  Morel,  winking 
‘Ce  diable  a  quatre  .  .  .’ 

‘Vi-va-ri-ka!  Viff-se-ru-va-ru!  Si-dya-blya-ka!  . . repeated  the  soldier 
waving  his  hand  and  catching  the  tune  correctly. 

‘Bravo!  Ho-ho-ho-ho!  ’  a  hoarse  guffaw  of  delight  rose  on  all  sides 
Morel,  wrinkling  up  his  face,  laughed  too. 

‘Come,  strike  up,  more,  more!’ 

‘Qui  ent  le  triple  talent  de  boire,  de  battre,  et  d'etre  un  vert  galant! 

‘That  sounds  well  too.  Now,  Zaletaev!  .  .  . 

‘Kyu,’  Zaletaev  articulated  with  effort.  ‘Kyu-yu-yu  .  .  .’  he  sang 
puckering  up  his  lips  elaborately;  ‘le-trip-ta-la-de-boo-de-ba-ce-detra 
va-ga-la.’ 

‘That’s  fine!  That’s  a  fine  Frenchman,  to  be  sure!  oy  .  .  .  ho-ho-ho 
Well,  do  you  want  some  more  to  eat?’ 

‘Give  him  some  porridge ;  it'll  take  him  some  time  to  satisfy  his  hunger. 

They  gave  him  more  porridge,  and  Morel,  laughing,  attacked  a  thirc 
bowlful.  There  were  gleeful  smiles  on  the  faces  of  all  the  young  soldier; 
watching  him.  The  old  soldiers,  considering  it  beneath  their  dignity  tc 
show  interest  in  such  trifles,  lay  on  the  other  side  of  the  fire,  but  now 
and  then  one  would  raise  himself  on  his  elbow  and  glance  with  a  smik 
at  Morel. 

‘They  are  men,  too,’  said  one,  rolling  himself  up  in  his  coat.  ‘Even  thf 
wormwood  has  its  roots.’ 

‘O  Lord!  What  lots  of  stars!  It’s  a  sign  of  frost  .  .  .’  And  all  sank 
into  silence. 

The  stars,  as  though  they  knew  no  one  would  see  them  now,  wen 
twinkling  brightly  in  the  black  sky.  Flaring  up  and  growing  dim  again 
and  quivering,  they  seemed  to  be  busily  signalling  some  joyful  mysterj 
to  each  other. 


X 

The  French  army  went  on  melting  away  at  a  regularly  increasing  rate 
And  the  crossing  of  the  Berezina,  of  which  so  much  has  been  written 
was  only  one  of  the  intermediate  stages  of  the  destruction  of  the  army,  anc 
by  no  means  the  decisive  episode  of  the  campaign.  The  reason  that  sc 
much  has  been  written  about  Berezina  on  the  French  side  is  that  at  the 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1033 

roken-down  bridge  of  Berezina  the  woes,  which  had  till  then  come  upon 
lem  in  a  sort  of  regular  succession,  were  suddenly  concentrated  there 
1  a  single  moment — in  one  tragic  catastrophe,  which  remained  printed 
n  the  memory  of  all.  On  the  Russian  side,  the  reason  that  so  much  has 
een  made  of  Berezina  was  simply  that  at  Petersburg,  far  away  from  the 
leatre  of  war,  a  plan  had  been  devised  (again  by  Pfuhl  of  all  people) 
)r  catching  Napoleon  in  a  strategic  snare  on  the  banks  of  the  Berezina, 
very  one  was  convinced  that  the  plan  would  come  off  exactly  as  ar- 
inged,  and  so  they  insisted  that  Berezina  had  in  any  case  been  the 
;ene  of  the  final  ruin  of  the  French.  In  reality  the  results  of  Berezina  were 
:ss  ruinous  to  the  French  in  loss  of  cannons  and  prisoners  than  was  the 
ghting  at  Krasnoe,  as  statistics  prove. 

The  sole  significance  of  the  disaster  of  Berezina  lies  in  the  fact  that 
proved  obviously  and  unmistakably  how  misleading  were  all  plans  for 
utting  off  the  enemy’s  retreat;  and  the  one  possible  course  of  action  was 
hat  which  was  supported  by  Kutuzov  and  the  mass  of  the  Russian  army 
-simply  to  follow  on  the  enemy’s  track.  The  crowd  of  French  soldiers 
ed  with  continually  accelerating  velocity,  with  all  their  energies  directed 
b  the  attainment  of  their  goal.  It  was  fleeing  like  a  wounded  beast  and 
ould  not  be  stopped  on  the  way.  This  was  proved,  not  so  much  by  the 
(instruction  of  the  crossing,  as  by  what  happened  at  the  bridges.  When 
he  bridges  were  broken  down,  unarmed  soldiers,  camp-followers  from 
doscow,  women  with  children,  who  were  with  the  French  transport,  all 
inder  the  influence  of  vis  inertke,  dashed  forward  for  the  boats,  or  rushed 
nto  the  frozen  water,  instead  of  surrendering. 

Their  impulse  was  a  reasonable  one.  The  position  of  fugitives  and  of 
>ursuers  was  equally  wretched.  By  remaining  with  his  own  men,  each 
loped  for  the  help  of  comrades  in  misfortune,  for  a  definite  place  of  his 
>wn  among  them.  By  surrendering  to  the  Russians,  he  found  himself  in 
he  same  wretched  circumstances,  but  placed  on  a  lower  level  than  others 
is  regards  the  satisfaction  of  his  vital  needs.  The  French  had  no  need 
if  authentic  evidence  that  half  of  the  prisoners — whom  the  Russians  were 
inable  to  look  after,  however  much  they  desired  to  save  them — were 
lying  of  cold  and  hunger.  They  felt  that  it  could  not  but  be  so.  The  most 
lumane  Russian  officers,  even  those  naturally  warmly  disposed  to  the 
mench,  Frenchmen  in  the  Russian  service,  could  do  nothing  for  the 
msoners.  They  perished  from  the  wretched  plight  in  which  the  Russians 
vere  themselves  placed.  Bread  and  clothing  could  not  be  taken  from 
he  starving,  necessary  soldiers  to  give  it  to  Frenchmen — not  hated,  not 
ibnoxious,  nor  in  any  way  to  blame — but  simply  superfluous.  Some  did 
:ven  do  this;  but  it  was  only  an  exception. 

Behind  them  lay  certain  destruction ;  before  them  lay  hope.  Their  ships 
vere  burnt;  there  was  no  hope  of  safety  but  in  keeping  together  and  in 
light,  and  all  the  forces  of  the  French  were  bent  on  this  united  flight. 

The  more  precipitate  the  flight  of  the  French,  and  the  more  wretched 
he  plight  of  those  left  behind  (especially  after  Berezina,  on  which  great 
lopes  had  been  set,  owing  to  the  Petersburg  plan),  the  more  violent  were 


1034  WAR  AND  PEACE 

the  attacks  made  by  the  Russian  generals  on  one  another,  and  still  mor 
on  Kutuzov.  Assuming  that  the  failure  of  the  Petersburg  plan  would  b 
ascribed  to  him,  the  dissatisfaction  with  him,  contempt  of  him,  and  jeer 
ing  at  him  became  more  and  more  pronounced.  This  contempt  and  jeerin 
was  of  course  expressed  in  respectful  form — in  such  a  form  that  Kutuzo  i 
could  not  even  ask  what  he  was  accused  of.  They  did  not  talk  to  hir 
seriously;  they  submitted  their  reports  and  asked  for  his  decisions  wit 
an  air  of  performing  a  melancholy  ceremony,  while  they  winked  behini 
his  back,  and  at  every  step  tried  to  deceive  him.  It  was  accepted  as 
recognised  thing  by  all  those  men  that  it  was  useless  talking  to  the  oh 
man,  simply  because  they  could  not  understand  him.  They  took  it  fo 
granted  that  he  could  never  comprehend  the  deep  significance  of  thei 
plans,  that  he  would  answer  them  with  his  phrases  (they  fancied  the] 
were  only  meaningless  phrases)  about  a  golden  bridge,  and  about  thi 
impossibility  of  going  beyond  the  frontier  with  a  crowd  of  barefoo 
beggars.  And  everything  he  said— for  instance,  that  they  must  wait  fo> 
provisions,  or  that  the  men  had  no  boots — all  was  so  simple;  while  every 
thing  they  proposed  was  so  complicated  and  so  clever,  that  it  was  obviou: 
to  them  that  he  was  stupid  and  in  his  dotage,  while  they  were  military 
officers  of  genius,  without  authority  to  take  the  lead.  The  dissatisfactioi 
and  malicious  gossip  of  the  staff  reached  its  utmost  limits  after  the  bril 
diant  admiral,  the  favourite  hero  of  Petersburg,  Wittgenstein,  had  joinec 
the  army.  Kutuzov  saw  it,  and  simply  sighed  and  shrugged  his  shoulders 
Only  once,  after  Berezina,  he  lost  his  temper  and  wrote  to  Bennigsen 
who  was  in  private  correspondence  with  the  Tsar,  the  following  note: 

‘I  beg  your  Most  High  Excellency  on  the  receipt  of  this  letter  to  retire 
to  Kaluga,  on  account  of  your  attacks  of  ill-health,  and  there  to  await  the 
further  commands  of  His  Majesty  the  Emperor.’ 

But  this  dismissal  of  Bennigsen  was  followed  by  the  arrival  on  the 
scene  of  the  Grand  Duke  Konstantin  Pavlovitch,  who  had  received  a 
command  at  the  beginning  of  the  campaign  and  had  been  removed  from 
the  army  by  Kutuzov.  Now  the  Grand  Duke  on  rejoining  the  army  in¬ 
formed  Kutuzov  of  the  Tsar’s  dissatisfaction  at  the  poor  successes  oi 
our  troops,  and  the  slowness  of  their  progress.  The  Tsar  himself  intended 
to  be  with  the  army  in  a  few  days. 

The  old  man,  as  experienced  in  court  methods  as  in  warfare — who  in 
the  August  of  that  year  had  been  chosen  commander-in-chief  against  the 
Tsar’s  will,  who  had  dismissed  the  Grand  Duke  and  heir-apparent  from 
the  army,  and  acting  on  his  own  authority,  in  opposition  to  the  Tsar’s 
will,  had  decreed  the  abandonment  of  Moscow — understood  at  once  now 
that  his  day  was  over,  that  his  part  was  played  out,  and  that  his  supposed 
power  was  no  more.  And  not  only  from  the  attitude  of  the  court  did 
he  see  this.  On  one  side  he  saw  the  war — that  war  in  which  he  had  played 
his  part — was  over,  and  he  felt  that  his  work  was  done.  On  the  other  hand, 
at  this  very  time,  he  began  to  be  sensible  of  the  physical  weariness  of  his 
aged  frame,  and  the  necessity  of  physical  rest. 

On  the  29th  of  November,  Kutuzov  reached  Vilna — his  dear  Vilna,  as 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1035 

e  used  to  call  it.  Twice  during  his  military  career  he  had  been  governor 
f  Vilna. 

In  that  wealthy  town,  which  had  escaped  injury,  Kutuzov  found  old 
I  riends  and  old  associations,  as  well  as  the  comforts  of  which  he  had  been 
D  long  deprived.  And  at  once  turning  his  back  on  all  military  and  political 
ares,  he  plunged  into  the  quiet  routine  of  his  accustomed  life,  so  far  as 
ae  passions  raging  all  round  him  would  permit.  It  was  as  though  all  that 
'as  being  done,  and  had  still  to  be  done,  in  the  world  of  history,  was  no 
oncern  of  his  now. 

Tchitchagov  was  one  of  the  generals  most  zealous  in  advocating  at- 
ack  and  cutting  off  the  enemy’s  retreat;  he  had  at  first  suggested  making 

diversion  in  Greece  and  then  in  Warsaw,  but  was  never  willing  to  go 
/here  he  was  commanded  to  go.  Tchitchagov,  who  was  notorious  for  the 
loldness  of  his  remarks  to  the  Tsar,  considered  Kutuzov  was  under  an 
bligation  to  him,  because  when  he  had  been  sent  in  1811  to  conclude 
eace  with  Turkey  over  Kutuzov’s  head,  and  found  on  arriving  that  peace 
ad  already  been  concluded,  he  had  frankly  admitted  to  the  Tsar  that 
he  credit  of  having  concluded  peace  belonged  to  Kutuzov. 

This  Tchitchagov  was  the  first  to  meet  Kutuzov  at  Vilna,  at  the  castle 
vhere  the  latter  was  to  stay.  Wearing  a  naval  uniform  with  a  dirk,  and 
lolding  his  forage  cap  under  his  arm,  he  handed  the  commander-in-chief 
he  military  report  and  the  keys  of  the  town.  The  contemptuously  respect- 
ul  attitude  of  youth  to  old  age  in  its  dotage  was  expressed  in  the  most 
narked  manner  in  all  the  behaviour  of  Tchitchagov,  who  was  aware  of 
he  disfavour  into  which  Kutuzov  had  fallen. 

In  conversation  with  Tchitchagov,  Kutuzov  happened  to  say  that  his 
:arriages,  packed  with  china,  that  had  been  carried  off  by  the  enemy  at 
3orisovo,  had  been  recovered  unhurt,  and  would  be  restored  to  him. 

!  ‘You  mean  to  say  I  have  nothing  to  eat  out  of?  On  the  contrary,  I  can 
>rovide  everything  for  you,  even  if  you  want  to  give  dinner-parties,’ 
Fchitchagov  protested,  getting  hot.  Every  word  he  had  uttered  had  been 
vith  the  motive  of  proving  his  own  rectitude,  and  so  he  imagined  that 
vutuzov  too  was  preoccupied  with  the  same  desire.  Shrugging  his  shoul- 
lers  and  smiling  his  subtle,  penetrating  smile,  Kutuzov  answered: 

‘I  mean  to  say  to  you  what  I  do  say  to  you.  Nothing  more.’ 

In  opposition  to  the  Tsar’s  wishes,  Kutuzov  kept  the  greater  part  of 
he  troops  in  Vilna.  He  was  said  by  all  the  persons  about  him  to  be 
getting  much  weaker,  and  breaking  down  physically  during  his  stay  in 
Vilna.  He  took  no  interest  in  the  business  of  the  army,  left  everything  to 
fis  generals,  and  spent  the  time  of  waiting  for  the  Tsar  in  social  dissi¬ 
pation. 

The  Tsar,  with  his  suite — Count  Tolstoy,  Prince  Volkonsky,  Arak- 
:cheev,  and  the  rest — left  Petersburg  on  the  7th  of  December,  and  reached 
Vilna  on  the  nth,  and  drove  straight  up  to  the  castle  in  his  travelling 
sledge.  In  spite  of  the  intense  cold  there  were  some  hundred  generals 
and  staff-officers  in  full  parade  uniform,  and  a  guard  of  honour  of  the 
Semyonovsky  regiment  standing  before  the  casth. 


1036  WAR  AND  PEACE 

A  courier,  galloping  up  to  the  castle  with  steaming  horses  in  advance  of 
the  Tsar,  shouted:  ‘He  is  coming!’ 

Konovnitsyn  rushed  into  the  vestibule  to  inform  Kutuzov,  who  was 
waiting  in  the  porter’s  little  room  within. 

A  minute  later  the  big,  heavy  figure  of  the  old  man  in  full  parade 
uniform,  his  breast  covered  with  orders,  and  a  scarf  drawn  tight  about 
his  bulky  person,  walked  with  a  rolling  gait  on  to  the  steps.  He  put  his 
cocked  hat  on,  with  the  flat  side  foremost,  took  his  gloves  in  his  hand, 
and  going  sideways  with  difficulty  down  the  steps,  took  in  his  hand  the 
report,  that  had  been  prepared  to  give  the  Tsar. 

Bustle  and  hurry  and  whispering,  another  set  of  three  horses  dashing 
furiously  up,  and  all  eyes  were  turned  on  the  approaching  sledge,  in  which 
the  figures  of  the  Tsar  and  Volkonsky  could  already  be  distinguished. 

From  the  habit  of  fifty  years,  all  this  had  a  physically  agitating  effect 
on  the  old  man.  Fie  felt  himself  over  with  nervous  haste,  set  his  hat 
straight,  and  pulling  himself  together  and  standing  erect  at  the  very 
moment  when  the  Tsar  stepping  out  of  the  sledge,  turned  his  eyes  upon 
him,  he  handed  him  the  report,  and  began  speaking  in  his  measured, 
ingratiating  voice. 

The  Tsar  scanned  Kutuzov  from  head  to  foot  in  a  rapid  glance,  frowned 
for  an  instant;  but  at  once  overcoming  his  feelings,  went  up  to  him,  and 
opening  his  arms,  embraced  the  old  general.  Again,  through  old  habitual 
association  of  ideas,  arousing  some  deep  feeling  in  his  own  heart,  this 
embrace  had  its  usual  effect  on  Kutuzov:  he  gave  a  sob. 

The  Tsar  greeted  the  officers  and  the  Semyonovsky  guard  of  honour; 
and  once  more  shaking  hands  with  the  old  man,  he  went  with  him  into1 
the  castle. 

When  he  was  alone  with  the  commander-in-chief,  the  Tsar  gave  ex¬ 
pression  to  his  displeasure  at  the  slowness  of  the  pursuit  of  the  enemy, 
and  the  blunders  made  at  Krasnoe  and  the  Berezina,  and  to  his  views 
as  to  the  coming  campaign  abroad.  Kutuzov  made  no  observation  or 
explanation.  The  same  expression  of  unreasoning  submission  with  which 
seven  years  before  he  had  listened  to  the  Tsar’s  commands  on  the  field 
of  Austerlitz  remained  fixed  now  on  his  face. 

When  Kutuzov  had  left  the  room,  and  with  downcast  head  walked 
across  the  reception-hall  with  his  heavy,  waddling  step,  a  voice  stopped 
him. 

‘Your  highness,’  said  some  one. 

He  raised  his  head,  and  looked  into  the  face  of  Count  Tolstoy,  who 
stood  facing  him  with  a  small  object  on  a  silver  dish.  Kutuzov  seemed 
for  some  time  unable  to  grasp  what  was  wanted  of  him. 

All  at  once  he  seemed  to  recollect  himself;  a  faint  smile  gleamed  on 
his  pudgy  face,  and  with  a  low,  respectful  bow,  he  picked  up  the  object 
on  the  dish.  It  was  the  Order  of  St.  George  of  the  first  rank. 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


i°37 


XI 

'he  next  day  the  commander-in-chief  gave  a  dinner  and  a  ball,  which 
re  Tsar  honoured  with  his  presence. 

Kutuzov  had  received  the  Order  of  St.  George  of  the  first  rank;  the 
'sar  had  shown  him  the  highest  marks  of  respect,  but  every  one  was 
ware  that  the  Tsar  was  displeased  with  the  commander-in-chief.  The 
roprieties  were  observed,  and  the  Tsar  set  the  first  example  in  doing  so. 
iut  every  one  knew  that  the  old  man  was  in  fault,  and  had  shown  his 
acapacity.  When,  in  accordance  with  the  old  custom  of  Catherine's  time, 
lutuzov  gave  orders  for  the  captured  standards  to  be  lowered  at  the 
'sar’s  feet  on  his  entering  the  ball-room,  the  Tsar  frowned  with  vexation, 
nd  muttered  words,  which  some  heard  as:  ‘The  old  comedian.’ 

The  Tsar’s  displeasure  was  increased  at  Vilna  by  Kutuzov’s  obvious 
nwillingness  or  incapacity  to  see  the  importance  of  the  approaching 
ampaign. 

When  next  morning  the  Tsar  said  to  the  officers  gathered  about  him: 
ifou  have  not  only  saved  Russia,  you  have  saved  Europe,’  every  one 
new  at  once  that  the  war  was  not  over. 

Kutuzov  alone  refused  to  see  this,  and  frankly  gave  it  as  his  opinion 
hat  no  fresh  war  could  improve  the  position  of  Russia,  or  add  to  her 
lory;  that  it  could  but  weaken  her  position,  and  cast  her  down  from 
hat  high  pinnacle  of  glory  at  which  in  his  view  Russia  was  standing  now. 
le  tried  to  show  the  Tsar  the  impossibility  of  levying  fresh  troops,  and 
alked  of  the  hardships  the  people  were  suffering,  the  possibility  of  failure, 
nd  so  on. 

Such  being  his  attitude  on  the  subject,  the  commander-in-chief  could 
aturally  be  looked  upon  only  as  a  hindrance  and  a  drag  on  the  progress 
f  the  coming  campaign. 

To  avoid  friction  with  the  old  man,  the  obvious  resource  was — as  with 
im  at  Austerlitz  and  with  Barclay  at  the  beginning  of  the  war — to  with- 
raw  all  real  power  from  the  commander-in-chief,  without  disturbing 
im  by  any  open  explanation  on  the  matter,  and  to  transfer  it  to  the  Tsar. 
With  this  object,  the  staff  was  gradually  transformed,  and  all  the 
eal  power  of  Kutuzov’s  staff  was  removed  and  transferred  to  the  Tsar, 
'oil,  Konovnitsyn,  and  Yermolov  received  new  appointments.  Every 
ne  talked  openly  of  the  commander-in-chief’s  great  weakness  and  failing 
ealth. 

He  was  bound  to  be  in  failing  health,  so  as  to  make  way  for  his  suc- 
essor.  And  his  health  was,  in  fact,  failing. 

Just  as  naturally,  as  simply,  and  as  gradually  as  Kutuzov  had  come 
b  the  Court  of  Exchequer  at  Petersburg  out  of  Turkey  to  raise  the 
lilitia,  and  then  to  take  the  command  of  the  army  just  at  the  time  when 
e  was  needed,  did  a  new  commander  come  now  to  replace  him,  when  his 
art  was  played. 


1038  WAR  AND  PEACE 

The  war  of  1812,  in  addition  to  its  national  significance,  dear  to  ever 
Russian  heart,  was  to  take  a  new  European  character. 

The  movement  of  men  from  west  to  east  was  to  be  followed  by  a  move 
ment  from  east  to  west,  and  this  new  war  needed  a  new  representative 
with  other  aims  and  other  qualities,  and  moved  by  impulses  differen 
from  Kutuzov’s. 

For  the  movement  from  east  to  west,  and  the  establishment  of  th 
position  of  peoples,  Alexander  was  needed  just  as  Kutuzov  was  needei 
for  the  deliverance  and  the  glory  of  Russia. 

Kutuzov  did  not  see  what  was  meant  by  Europe,  the  balance  of  power 
and  Napoleon.  He  could  not  understand  all  that. 

After  the  enemy  had  been  annihilated,  Russia  had  been  delivered  am 
raised  to  the  highest  pinnacle  of  her  glory,  the  representative  of  the  Rus 
sian  people,  a  Russian  of  the  Russians,  had  no  more  left  to  do.  Nothin; 
was  left  for  the  representative  of  the  national  war  but  to  die.  And  hi 
did  die. 

XII 

As  is  generally  the  case,  Pierre  only  felt  the  full  strain  of  the  physica 
hardships  and  privations  he  had  suffered  as  a  prisoner,  when  they  wen 
over.  After  he  had  been  rescued,  he  went  to  Orel,  and  two  days  aften 
getting  there,  as  he  was  preparing  to  start  for  Kiev,  he  fell  ill  and  speni 
three  months  laid  up  at  Orel.  He  was  suffering,  so  the  doctors  said,  frorr 
a  bilious  fever.  Although  they  treated  him  by  letting  blood  and  giving 
him  drugs,  he  recovered. 

Everything  that  had  happened  to  Pierre  from  the  time  of  his  rescue 
up  to  his  illness  had  left  hardly  any  impression  on  his  mind.  He  had  onlj 
a  memory  of  dark  grey  weather,  sometimes  rainy  and  sometimes  sun¬ 
shiny,  of  internal  physical  aches,  of  pain  in  his  feet  and  his  side.  He 
remembered  a  general  impression  of  the  misery  and  suffering  of  men. 
remembered  the  worrying  curiosity  of  officers  and  generals,  who  ques¬ 
tioned  him  about  his  imprisonment,  the  trouble  he  had  to  get  horses  and 
a  conveyance;  and  more  than  all  he  remembered  his  own  dulness  of 
thought  and  of  feeling  all  that  time. 

On  the  day  of  his  rescue  he  saw  the  dead  body  of  Petya  Rostov.  The 
same  day  he  learned  that  Prince  Andrey  had  lived  for  more  than  a  month 
after  the  battle  of  Borodino,  and  had  only  a  short  time  before  died  at 
Yaroslavl  in  the  Rostovs’  house.  The  same  day  Denisov,  who  had  told 
Pierre  this  piece  of  news,  happened  to  allude  in  conversation  to  the  death 
of  Ellen,  supposing  Pierre  to  have  been  long  aware  of  it.  All  this  had  at 
the  time  seemed  to  Pierre  only  strange.  He  felt  that  he  could  not  take 
in  all  the  bearings  of  these  facts.  He  was  at  the  time  simply  in  haste  to) 
get  away  from  these  places  where  men  were  slaughtering  each  other  to 
some  quiet  refuge  where  he  might  rest  and  recover  his  faculties,  and  think 
over  all  the  new  strange  things  he  had  learned. 

But  as  soon  as  he  reached  Orel,  he  fell  ill.  On  coming  to  himself  after 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1039 

s  illness,  Pierre  saw  waiting  on  him  two  of  his  servants,  Terenty  and 
aska,  who  had  come  from  Moscow,  and  the  eldest  of  his  cousins,  who 
as  staying  at  Pierre’s  estate  in  Elets,  and  hearing  of  his  rescue  and  his 
mess  had  come  to  nurse  him. 

During  his  convalescence  Pierre  could  only  gradually  recover  from 
le  impressions  of  the  last  few  months,  which  had  become  habitual.  Only 
V  degrees  could  he  become  accustomed  to  the  idea  that  there  was  no 
le  to  drive  him  on  to-morrow,  that  no  one  would  take  his  warm  bed 
om  him,  and  that  he  was  quite  sure  of  getting  his  dinner,  and  tea,  and 
ipper.  But  for  a  long  while  afterwards  he  was  always  in  his  dreams 
irrounded  by  his  conditions  as  a  prisoner. 

And  only  in  the  same  gradual  way  did  Pierre  grasp  the  meaning  of 
le  news  he  had  heard  since  his  escape:  of  the  death  of  Prince  Andrey, 
f  the  death  of  his  wife,  and  of  the  overthrow  of  the  French. 

The  joyful  sense  of  freedom — that  full,  inalienable  freedom  inherent 
u  man,  of  which  he  had  first  had  a  consciousness  at  the  first  halting-place 
utside  Moscow — filled  Pierre’s  soul  during  his  convalescence.  He  was 
jrprised  that  this  inner  freedom,  independent  as  it  was  of  all  external 
Ircumstances,  was  now  as  it  were  decked  out  in  a  luxury,  a  superfluity 
f  external  freedom.  He  was  alone  in  a  strange  town  without  acquaint- 
nces.  No  one  made  any  demands  on  him;  no  one  sent  him  anywhere, 
le  had  all  he  wanted;  the  thought  of  his  wife,  that  had  in  old  days  been 
continual  torture  to  him,  was  no  more,  since  she  herself  was  no  more. 
‘Ah,  how  happy  I  am!  how  splendid  it  is!’  he  said  to  himself,  when  "a 
leanly  covered  table  was  moved  up  to  him,  with  savoury-smelling  broth, 
r  when  he  got  into  his  soft,  clean  bed  at  night,  or  when  the  thought 
truck  him  that  his  wife  and  the  French  were  no  more.  ‘Ah,  how  good  it 
how  splendid!’  And  from  old  habit  he  asked  himself  the  question, 
'.Veil,  and  what  tfren?  what  am  I  going  to  do?’  And  at  once  he  answered 
imself :  ‘I  am  going  to  live.  Ah,  how  splendid  it  is!’ 

What  had  worried  him  in  old  days,  what  he  had  always  been  seeking 
0  solve,  the  question  of  the  object  of  life,  did  not  exist  for  him  now. 
'hat  seeking  for  an  object  in  life  was  over  for  him  now;  and  it  was  not 
ortuitously  or  temporarily  that  it  was  over.  He  felt  that  there  was  no 
uch  object,  and  could  not  be.  And  it  was  just  the  absence  of  an  object 
hat  gave  him  that  complete  and  joyful  sense  of  freedom  that  at  this 
ime  made  his  happiness. 

He  could  seek  no  object  in  life  now,  because  now  he  had  faith — not 
aith  in  any  sort  of  principles,  or  words,  or  ideas,  but  faith  in  a  living, 
ver  palpable  God.  In  old  days  he  had  sought  Him  in  the  aims  he  set 
iefore  himself.  That  search  for  an  object  in  life  had  been  only  a  seeking 
fter  God;  and  all  at  once  in  his  captivity  he  had  come  to  know,  not 
hrough  words  or  arguments,  but  by  his  own  immediate  feeling,  what 
iis old  nurse  had  told  him  long  before;  that  God  is  here,  and  everywhere, 
n  his  captivity  he  had  come  to  see  that  the  God  in  Karataev  was  grander, 
nore  infinite,  and  more  unfathomable  than  the  Architect  of  the  Universe 
ecognised  by  the  masons.  He  felt  like  a  man  who  finds  what  he  has 


:o4o  WAR  AND  PEACE 

sought  at  his  feet,  when  he  has  been  straining  his  eyes  to  seek  it  in  the, 
distance.  All  his  life  he  had  been  looking  far  away  over  the  heads  of  all 
around  him,  while  he  need  not  have  strained  his  eyes,  but  had  only  tc 
look  in  front  of  him. 

In  old  days  he  had  been  unable  to  see  the  great,  the  unfathomable 
and  the  infinite  in  anything.  He  had  only  felt  that  it  must  be  somewhere 
and  had  been  seeking  it.  In  everything  near  and  comprehensible,  he  had 
seen  only  what  was  limited,  petty,  everyday,  and  meaningless.  He  had 
armed  himself  with  the  telescope  of  intellect,  and  gazed  far  away  into  the 
distance,  where  that  petty,  everyday  world,  hidden  in  the  mists  of  dis¬ 
tance,  had  seemed  to  him  great  and  infinite,  simply  because  it  was  not 
clearly  seen.  Such  had  been  European  life,  politics,  freemasonry,  phi¬ 
losophy,  and  philanthropy  in  his  eyes.  But  even  then,  in  moments  which 
he  had  looked  on  as  times  of  weakness,  his  thought  had  penetrated  even 
to  these  remote  objects,  and  then  he  had  seen  in  them  the  same  pettiness, 
the  same  ordinariness  and  meaninglessness. 

Now  he  had  learnt  to  see  the  great,  the  eternal,  and  the  infinite  in 
everything;  and  naturally  therefore,  in  order  to  see  it,  to  revel  in  its 
contemplation,  he  flung  aside  the  telescope  through  which  he  had  hithertoj 
been  gazing  over  men’s  heads,  and  looked  joyfully  at  the  ever-changing, 
ever  grand,  unfathomable,  and  infinite  life  around  him.  And  the  closer1 
he  looked  at  it,  the  calmer  and  happier  he  was.  The  terrible  question 
that  had  shattered  all  his  intellectual  edifices  in  old  days,  the  question: 
What  for?  had  no  existence  for  him  now.  To  that  question,  What  for? 
he  had  now  always  ready  in  his  soul  the  simple  answer:  Because  there 
is  a  God,  that  God  without  whom  not  one  hair  of  a  man’s  head  falls. 


XIII 

Pierre  was  hardly  changed  in  his  external  habits.  In  appearance  he  was 
just  the  same  as  before.  He  was,  as  he  had  always  been,  absent-minded,! 
and  seemed  preoccupied  with  something  of  his  own,  something  apart 
from  what  was  before  his  eyes.  The  difference  was  that  in  old  days,  when 
he  was  unconscious  of  what  was  before  his  eyes,  or  what  was  being  said| 
to  him,  he  would  seem  with  painfully  knitted  brows  to  be  striving  unsuc¬ 
cessfully  to  discern  something  far  away  from  him.  He  was  just  as  uncon¬ 
scious  now  of  what  was  said  to  him,  or  of  what  was  before  him.  But  now 
with  a  faint,  apparently  ironical  smile,  he  gazed  at  what  was  before  him, 
or  listened  to  what  was  said,  though  he  was  obviously  seeing  and  hearing 
something  quite  different.  In  old  days  he  had  seemed  a  good-hearted  man, 
but  unhappy.  And  so  people  had  unconsciously  held  a  little  aloof  from 
him.  Now  a  smile  of  joy  in  life  was  continually  playing  about  his  mouth, 
and  his  eyes  were  bright  with  sympathy  for  others,  and  the  question: 
Were  they  all  as  happy  as  he?  And  people  felt  at  ease  in  his  presence. 

In  old  days  he  had  talked  a  great  deal,  and  had  got  hot  when  he  talked,! 
and  he  had  listened  very  little.  Now  he  was  rarely  carried  away  in  con- 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


1041 

■rsation,  and  knew  how  to  listen,  so  that  people  were  very  ready  to  tell 
m  the  inmost  secrets  of  their  hearts. 

The  princess,  who  had  never  liked  Pierre,  and  had  cherished  a  particu- 
rly  hostile  feeling  towards  him,  since  after  the  old  count’s  death  she 
id  felt  herself  under  obligation  to  him,  had  come  to  Orel  with  the  inten¬ 
on  of  proving  to  him  that  in  spite  of  his  ingratitude  she  felt  it  her  duty 
1  nurse  him,  but  after  a  short  time  she  felt,  to  her  own  surprise  and 
moyance,  that  she  was  growing  fond  of  him.  Pierre  did  nothing  to  try 
id  win  his  cousin’s  favour;  he  simply  looked  at  her  with  curiosity.  In 
d  days  she  had  felt  that  there  was  mockery  and  indifference  in  his  eyes, 
id  she  had  shrunk  into  herself  before  him,  as  she  did  before  other  people, 
id  had  shown  him  only  her  aggressive  side.  Now  she  felt  on  the  con- 
ary  as  though  he  were  delving  into  the  most  secret  recesses  of  her  life. 
:  was  at  first  mistrustfully,  and  then  with  gratitude,  that  she  let  him  see 
aw  the  latent  good  side  of  her  character. 

The  most  artful  person  could  not  have  stolen  into  the  princess’s  confi- 
ence  more  cunningly,  by  arousing  her  recollections  of  the  best  time  of 
er  youth,  and  showing  sympathy  with  them.  And  yet  all  Pierre’s  artful- 
ess  consisted  in  seeking  to  please  himself  by  drawing  out  human  qualities 
1  the  bitter,  hard,  and,  in  her  own  way,  proud  princess. 

‘Yes,  he  is  a  very,  very  good-hearted  fellow  when  he  is  not  under  bad 
lfluence,  but  under  the  influence  of  people  like  me,’  thought  the  princess. 
The  change  that  had  taken  place  in  Pierre  was  noticed  in  their  own 
'ay  by  his  servants  too — Terenty  and  Vaska.  They  considered  that  he 
ad  grown  much  more  good-natured.  Often  after  undressing  his  master, 
nd  wishing  him  good  night,  Terenty  would  linger  with  his  boots  and  his 
lothes  in  his  hand,  in  the  hope  that  his  master  would  begin  a  conversa- 
ion  with  him.  And  as  a  rule  Pierre  kept  Terenty,  seeing  he  was  longing 
or  a  chat. 

‘Come,  tell  me,  then  .  .  .  how  did  you  manage  to  get  anything  to  eat?’ 
■e  would  ask.  And  Terenty  would  begin  his  tales  of  the  destruction  of 
loscow  and  of  the  late  count,  and  would  stand  a  long  while  with  the 
lothes,  talking  away  or  listening  to  Pierre;  and  it  was  with  a  pleasant 
ense  of  his  master’s  close  intimacy  with  him  and  affection  for  him  that 
e  finally  withdrew. 

The  doctor,  who  was  attending  Pierre,  and  came  to  see  him  every  day. 
hough  he  thought  it  his  duty  as  a  doctor  to  pose  as  a  man  every  minute 
f  whose  time  is  of  value  for  suffering  humanity,  used  to  sit  on  with  him 
jor  hours  together,  repeating  his  favourite  anecdotes  and  observations 
n  the  peculiarities  of  patients  in  general,  and  of  ladies  in  particular. 

;  ‘Yes,  it’s  a  pleasure  to  talk  to  a  man  like  that;  it’s  not  what  we  are 
sed  to  in  the  provinces,’  he  would  say. 

In  Orel  there  happened  to  be  several  French  prisoners,  and  the  doctor 
nought  one  of  them,  a  young  Italian  officer,  to  see  Pierre. 

This  officer  became  a  frequent  visitor,  and  the  princess  used  to  laugh 
t  the  tender  feelings  the  Italian  expressed  for  Pierre. 

It  was  obvious  that  the  Italian  was  never  happy  but  when  he  could 


1042  WAR  AND  PEACE 

see  Pierre,  and  talk  to  him,  and  tell  him  all  about  his  own  past,  his  horn 
life,  and  his  love,  and  pour  out  his  indignation  against  the  French,  an< 
especially  against  Napoleon.  * 

‘If  all  Russians  are  the  least  bit  like  you,’  he  used  to  say  to  Pierre,  ‘it  i 
sacrilege  to  make  war  on  a  people  like  yours.  You  who  have  suffered  si 
much  at  the  hands  of  the  French,  have  not  even  a  grudge  against  them. 

And  Pierre  had  won  the  Italian’s  passionate  devotion  simply  by  draw 
ing  out  what  was  best  in  his  soul  and  admiring  it. 

During  the  latter  part  of  Pierre’s  stay  in  Orel,  he  received  a  visit  fron 
an  old  acquaintance,  Count  Villarsky,  the  freemason,  who  had  introduce! 
him  to  the  lodge  in  1807.  Villarsky  had  married  a  Russian  heiress,  wh< 
had  great  estates  in  the  Orel  province,  and  he  was  filling  a  temporary  pos 
in  the  commissariat  department  in  the  town. 

Though  Villarsky  had  never  been  very  intimately  acquainted  witl 
Bezuhov,  on  hearing  that  he  was  in  Orel,  he  called  upon  him  with  thosi 
demonstrations  of  friendliness  and  intimacy  that  men  commonly  display 
on  meeting  one  another  in  the  desert.  Villarsky  was  dull  in  Orel,  and  wa; 
delighted  to  meet  a  man  of  his  own  circle,  who  had,  as  he  supposed,  thi 
same  interests  as  he  had. 

But  to  his  surprise,  Villarsky  noticed  soon  that  Pierre  had  quite  droppec 
behind  the  times,  and  had,  as  he  defined  it  himself  to  Pierre,  sunk  inti 
apathy  and  egoism. 

‘You  are  stagnating,’  he  said  to  him. 

But  in  spite  of  that,  Villarsky  felt  much  more  at  home  with  Pierre 
now  than  he  had  done  in  the  past,  arid  came  every  day  to  see  him.  A:! 
Pierre  watched  Villarsky,  and  listened  to  him  now,  it  seemed  strange1 
and  incredible  to  him  to  think  that  he  had  very  lately  been  the  same  sor 
of  person  himself. 

Villarsky  was  a  married  man  with  a  family,  whose  time  was  taker 
up  in  managing  his  wife’s  property,  in  performing  his  official  duties,  anc 
in  looking  after  his  family.  He  regarded  all  these  duties  as  a  drawbacl* 
in  his  life,  and  looked  on  them  all  with  contempt,  because  they  were  al 
directed  to  securing  his  own  personal  welfare  and  that  of  his  family 
Military,  administrative,  political,  and  masonic  questions  were  continu¬ 
ally  engrossing  his  attention.  And  without  criticising  this  view  or  at¬ 
tempting  to  change  it,  Pierre  watched  this  phenomenon — so  strange,  yei 
so  familiar  to  him — with  the  smile  of  gentle,  delighted  irony  that  was 
now  habitual  with  him. 

In  Pierre’s  relations  with  Villarsky,  with  his  cousin,  with  the  doctor 
and  with  all  the  people  he  met  now,  there  was  a  new  feature  that  gainec 
him  the  good-will  of  all.  This  was  the  recognition  of  the  freedom  of  ever) 
man  to  think,  to  feel,  and  to  look  at  things  in  his  own  way;  tire  recog¬ 
nition  of  the  impossibility  of  altering  a  man’s  conviction  by  words.  This 
legitimate  individuality  of  every  man’s  views,  which  had  in  old  days 
troubled  and  irritated  Pierre,  now  formed  the  basis  of  the  sympathetic 
interest  he  felt  in  people.  The  inconsistency,  sometimes  the  complete 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1043 

itagonism  of  men’s  views  with  their  own  life  or  with  one  another,  de- 
-  ghted  Pierre,  and  drew  from  him  a  gentle  and  mocking  smile. 

In  practical  affairs  Pierre  suddenly  felt  now  that  he  had  the  centre 
f  gravity  that  he  had  lacked  in  fonher  days.  In  the  past  every  money 
uestion,  especially  requests  for  money,  to  which  as  a  very  wealthy  man 
2  was  particularly  liable,  had  reduced  him  to  a  state  of  helpless  agita- 
on  and  perplexity.  ‘Ought  I  to  give  or  not  to  give?’  he  used  to  ask  him- 
■lf .  ‘I  have  money  and  he  needs  it.  But  some  one  else  needs  it  more, 
/ho  needs  it  more?  And  perhaps  both  are  impostors?’  And  of  all  these 
oppositions  he  had  in  old  days  found  no  satisfactory  solution,  and  gave 
0  all  as  long  as  he  had  anything  to  give.  In  old  days  he  had  been  in  the 
ime  perplexity  over  every  question  relating  to  his  property  when  one 
erson  told  him  he  ought  to  act  in  one  way  and  another  advised  some- 
hing  else. 

Now  to  his  own  surprise  he  found  that  he  had  no  more  doubt  or  hesi¬ 
tation  on  all  such  questions.  Now  there  was  a  judge  within  him  settling 
/hat  he  must  do  and  what  he  must  not,  by  some  laws  of  which  he  was 
imself  unaware. 

Pie  was  just  as  unconcerned  about  money  matters  as  before;  but  now 
ie  unhesitatingly  knew  what  he  ought  to  do  and  what  he  ought  not  to  do. 
fhe  first  application  of  that  new  power  within  him  was  in  the  case  of  a 
risoner,  a  P'rench  colonel,  who  called  on  him,  talked  very  freely  of  his 
iwn  great  exploits,  and  finally  delivered  himself  of  a  request  that  was 
nore  like  a  demand,  that  he  should  give  him  four  thousand  francs  to 
end  to  his  wife  and  children.  Pierre  refused  to  do  so  without  the  slightest 
lifficulty  or  effort,  and  wondered  himself  afterwards  that  it  had  been 
0  easy  and  simple  to  do  what  had  in  old  days  seemed  so  hopelessly  diffi- 
ult.  At  the  same  time  as  he  refused  the  French  colonel,  he  made  up  his 
nind  that  he  must  certainly  resort  to  some  stratagem  when  he  left  Orel 
0  induce  the  Italian  officer  to  accept  assistance,  of  which  he  stood  in 
•vident  need.  A  fresh  proof  to  Pierre  of  his  greater  certainty  in  regard 
0  practical  matters  was  the  settlement  of  the  question  of  his  wife’s  debts, 
md  of  the  rebuilding  of  his  Moscow  house  and  villas  in  the  suburbs. 

His  head  steward  came  to  him  in  Orel,  and  with  him  Pierre  went  into 
1  general  review  of  his  financial  position.  The  fire  of  Moscow  had  cost 
’ierre,  by  the  steward’s  account,  about  two  millions. 

The  chief  steward  to  console  him  for  these  losses  presented  a  calcula- 
ion  he  had  made,  that  Pierre’s  income,  far  from  being  diminished,  would 
)e  positively  increased  if  he  were  to  refuse  to  pay  the  debts  left  by  the 
tountess — which  he  could  not  be  forced  to  pay — and  if  he  were  not  to 
•estore  his  Moscow  houses  and  the  villa  near  Moscow,  which  had  cost 
nm  eight  thousand  to  keep  up,  and  brought  in  nothing, 
i  ‘Yes,  yes,  that’s  true,’  said  Pierre,  with  a  beaming  smile, 
i  ‘Yes,  yes,  I  don’t  need  any  of  them.  I  have  been  made  much  richer 
by  the  destruction  of  the  city.’ 

But  in  January  Savelitch  came  from  Moscow,  talked  to  him  of  the 
position  of  the  city,  of  the  estimate  the  architect  had  sent  in  for  restoring 


1044  WAR  AND  PEACE 

the  house,  and  the  villa  in  the  suburbs,  speaking  of  it  as  a  settled  matter. 
At  the  same  time  Pierre  received  letters  from  Prince  Vassily  and  other 
acquaintances  in  Petersburg,  in  which  his  wife’s  debts  were  mentioned. 
And  Pierre  decided  that  the  steward’s  plan  that  he  had  liked  so  much 
was  not  the  right  one,  and  that  he  must  go  to  Petersburg  to  wind  up 
his  wife’s  affairs,  and  must  rebuild  in  Moscow.  Why  he  ought  to  do  so, 
he  could  not  have  said;  but  he  was  convinced  that  he  ought.  His  income 
was  diminished  by  one-fourth  owing  to  this  decision.  But  it  had  to  be 
so;  he  felt  that. 

Villarsky  was  going  to  Moscow,  and  they  agreed  to  make  the  journey 
together. 

During  the  whole  period  of  his  convalescence  in  Orel,  Pierre  had  en¬ 
joyed  the  feeling  of  joyful  freedom  and  life.  But  when  he  found  himself 
on  this  journey  on  the  open  road,  and  saw  hundreds  of  new  faces,  that 
feeling  was  intensified,  During  the  journey  he  felt  like  a  schoolboy  in 
the  holidays.  All  the  people  he  saw — the  driver,  the  overseer  of  the  post¬ 
ing  station,  the  peasants  on  the  road,  or  in  the  village — all  had  a  new 
significance  for  him.  The  presence  and  the  observations  of  Villarsky, 
who  was  continually  deploring  the  poverty  and  the  ignorance  and  the 
backwardness  of  Russia,  compared  with  Europe,  only  heightened  Pierre’s 
pleasure  in  it.  Where  Villarsky  saw  deadness,  Pierre  saw  the  extraordi¬ 
nary  mighty  force  of  vitality,  the  force  which  sustained  the  life  of  that 
homogeneous,  original,  and  unique  people  over  that  immense  expanse 
of  snow.  He  did  not  contest  Villarsky’s  opinions,  and  smiled  gleefully,  as 
he  listened,  appearing  to  agree  with  him  as  the  easiest  means  of  avoiding 
arguments  which  could  lead  to  nothing. 


XIV 

Just  as  it  is  difficult  to  explain  why  the  ants  hurry  back  to  a  scattered 
ant-hill,  some  dragging  away  from  it  bits  of  refuse,  eggs,  and  corpses,  while 
others  run  back  again,  and  what  is  their  object  in  crowding  together, 
overtaking  one  another,  fighting  with  each  other,  so  it  would  be  hard  to 
give  the  reasons  that  induced  the  Russians,  after  the  departure  of  the 
French,  to  flock  back  to  the  place  which  had  been  known  as  Moscow.  But 
just  as  looking  at  the  ants  hurrying  about  a  ruined  ant-heap,  one  can 
see  by  the  tenacity,  the  energy,  and  the  multitude  of  the  busy  insects 
that  though  all  else  is  utterly  destroyed,  there  is  left  something  inde¬ 
structible  and  immaterial  that  was  the  whole  strength  of  the  colony, 
so  too  Moscow  in  the  month  of  October,  though  without  its  governing 
authorities,  without  its  churches,  without  its  holy  things,  without  its 
wealth  and  its  houses,  was  still  the  same  Moscow  as  it  had  been  in 
August.  Everything  was  shattered  except  something  immaterial,  but 
mighty  and  indestructible. 

The  motives  of  the  people,  who  rushed  from  all  parts  to  Moscow  after 
it  was  evacuated  by  the  enemy,  were  of  the  most  varied  and  personal 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


1045 

kind,  and  at  first  mostly  savage  and  brutal  impulses.  Only  one  impulse 
was  common  to  all — the  attraction  to  the  place  which  had  been  called 
1  Moscow  in  order  to  set  their  energies  to  work  there. 

W:thin  a  week  there  were  fifteen  thousand  persons  in  Moscow,  within 
a  fortnight  twenty-five  thousand;  and  so  it  went  on.  The  number  went  on 
mounting  and  mounting  till  by  the  autumn  of  1813  it  had  reached  a 
figure  exceeding  the  population  of  the  city  in  1812. 

The  first  Russians  to  enter  Moscow  were  the  Cossacks  of  Wintzen- 
gerode’s  detachment,  the  peasants  from  the  nearest  villages  and  the  resi¬ 
dents  who  had  fled  from  Moscow  and  concealed  themselves  in  the  en¬ 
virons.  On  entering  the  ruined  city,  and  finding  it  pillaged,  the  Russians 
fell  to  pillaging  it  too.  They  continued  the  work  begun  by  the  French, 
i  Trains  of  peasants’  waggons  drove  into  Moscow  to  carry  away  to  the 
villages  all  that  had  been  abandoned  in  the  ruined  Moscow  houses  and 
1  streets.  The  Cossacks  carried  off  what  they  could  to  their  tents;  the 
householders  collected  all  they  could  out  of  other  houses,  and  removed 
it  to  their  own  under  the  pretence  that  it  was  their  property. 

But  the  first  pillaging  parties  were  followed  by  others;  and  every  day 
as  the  numbers  pillaging  increased,  the  work  of  plunder  became  more 
difficult  and  assumed  more  definite  forms. 

The  French  had  found  Moscow  deserted  but  with  all  the  forms  of  an 
organically  normal  town  life  still  existent,  with  various  branches  of 
trades  and  crafts,  of  luxury,  and  political  government  and  religion.  These 
forms  were  lifeless  but  they  still  existed.  There  were  markets,  shops, 
stores,  corn-exchanges,  and  bazaars — most  of  them  stocked  with  goods. 
There  were  factories  and  trading  establishments.  There  were  palaces 
and  wealthy  houses  filled  with  articles  of  luxury.  There  were  hospitals, 
prisons,  courts,  churches,  and  cathedrals.  The  longer  the  French  re¬ 
mained,  the  more  these  forms  of  town  life  perished,  and  at  the  end  all 
was  lost  in  one  indistinguishable,  lifeless  scene  of  pillage. 

The  longer  the  pillaging  of  the  French  lasted,  the  more  complete  was 
the  destruction  of  the  wealth  of  Moscow  and  of  the  forces  of  the  pillagers. 
The  longer  the  pillaging  lasted  that  was  carried  on  by  the  Russians  on 
their  first  return  to  the  capital,  and  the  more  there  were  taking  part  in 
it,  the  more  rapidly  was  the  wealth  of  Moscow  and  the  normal  life  of 
the  town  re-established. 

Apart  from  those  who  came  for  plunder,  people  of  all  sorts,  drawn 
thither,  some  by  curiosity,  some  by  the  duties  of  office,  some  by  self- 
interests — householders,  priests,  officials,  high  and  low,  traders,  artisans, 
and  peasants — flowed  back  to  Moscow  from  all  sides,  as  the  blood  flows 
to  the  heart. 

Within  a  week  the  peasants  who  had  come  with  empty  carts  to  carry 
off  goods  were  detained  by  the  authorities,  and  compelled  to  carry  dead 
bodies  out  of  the  town.  Other  peasants,  who  had  heard  of  their  com¬ 
panions’  discomfiture,  drove  into  the  town  with  wheat,  and  oats,  and  hay, 
knocking  down  each  others’  prices  to  a  figure  lower  than  it  had  been  in 
former  days.  Gangs  of  carpenters,  hoping  for  high  wages,  were  arriving 


1046  WAR  AND  PEACE 

in  Moscow  every  day ;  and  on  all  sides  there  were  new  houses  being  buil 
or  old  half-burnt  ones  being  repaired.  Tradesmen  carried  on  their  busine: 
in  booths.  Cook-shops  and  taverns  were  opened  in  fire-blackened  house 
The  clergy  held  services  in  many  churches  that  had  escaped  the  fir 
Church  goods  that  had  been  plundered  were  restored  as  offerings.  Goven 
ment  clerks  set  up  their  baize-covered  tables  and  pigeon-holes  of  papei 
in  little  rooms.  The  higher  authorities  and  the  police  organised  a  distr 
bution  of  the  goods  left  by  the  French.  The  owners  of  houses  in  which 
great  many  of  the  goods  plundered  from  other  houses  had  been  le 
complained  of  the  injustice  of  all-  goods  being  taken  to  the  Polygon; 
Palace.  Others  maintained  that  the  French  had  collected  all  the  thing 
from  different  houses  to  one  spot,  and  that  it  was  therefore  unfair  t 
restore  to  the  master  of  the  house  the  things  found  in  it.  The  police  wei 
abused  and  were  bribed;  estimates  for  government  buildings  that  ha 
been  burnt  were  reckoned  at  ten  times  their  value;  and  appeals  for  hel 
were  made.  Count  Rastoptchin  wrote  his  posters  again. 

XV 

At  the  end  of  January  Pierre  arrived  in  Moscow  and  settled  in  the  lodg 
of  his  mansion,  as  that  had  escaped  the  fire.  He  called  on  Count  Rastopt 
chin  and  several  acquaintances,  and  was  intending  in  three  days  to  se 
off  to  Petersburg.  Every  one  was  triumphant  at  victory;  the  ruined  and 
reviving  city  was  bubbling  over  with  life.  Every  one  was  glad  to  se> 
Pierre;  everybody  was  eager  to  see  him,  and  to  ask  him  about  all  hi 
had  seen.  Pierre  had  a  particularly  friendly  feeling  towards  every  ont 
he  met.  But  unconsciously  he  was  a  little  on  his  guard  with  people  t< 
avoid  fettering  his  freedom  in  any  way.  To  all  the  questions  put  to  hin 
— important  or  trivial — whether  they  asked  him  where  he  meant  to  live 
whether  he  were  going  to  build,  when  he  was  starting  for  Petersburg,  01 
whether  he  could  take  a  parcel  there  for  some  one,  he  answered,  ‘Yes 
very  possibly,’  ‘I  dare  say  I  may,’  and  so  on. 

He  heard  that  the  Rostovs  were  in  Kostroma,  and  the  thought  ol 
Natasha  rarely  came  to  his  mind,  and  when  it  did  occur  to  him  it  was  a5 
a  pleasant  memory  of  time  long  past.  He  felt  himself  set  free,  not  only 
from  the  cares  of  daily  life,  but  also  from  that  feeling  which,  it  seemed 
to  him,  he  had  voluntarily  brought  upon  himself. 

The  third  day  after  his  arrival  in  Moscow  he  learnt  from  the  Drubet-; 
skoys  that  Princess  Marya  was  in  Moscow.  The  death,  the  sufferings,1 
and  the  last  days  of  Prince  Andrey  had  often  engaged  Pierre’s  thoughts, 
and  now  recurred  to  him  with  fresh  vividness.  He  heard  at  dinner  that 
Princess  Marya  was  in  Moscow,  and  living  in  her  own  house  in  Vosdviz- 
henka,  which  had  escaped  the  fire,  and  he  went  to  call  upon  her  the 
same  evening. 

On  the  way  to  Princess  Marya ’s  Pierre’s  mind  was  full  of  Prince  An- 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1047 

.ey,  of  his  friendship  for  him,  of  the  different  occasions  when  they  had 
;:et,  and  especially  of  their  last  interview  at  Borodino. 

‘Can  he  possibly  have  died  in  the  bitter  mood  he  was  in  then?  Was  not 
ie  meaning  of  life  revealed  to  him  before  death?’  Pierre  vrondered.  He 
nought  of  Karataev,  of  his  death,  and  unconsciously  compared  those 
vo  men,  so  different,  and  yet  alike,  in  the  love  he  had  felt  for  both,  and 
that  both  had  lived,  and  both  were  dead. 

In  the  most  serious  frame  of  mind  Pierre  drove  up  to  the  old  prince’s 
puse.  The  house  had  remained  entire.  There  were  traces  to  be  seen  of 
ie  havoc  wrought  in  it,  but  the  character  of  the  house  was  unchanged, 
he  old  footman  met  Pierre  with  a  stern  face,  that  seemed  to  wish  to 
ake  the  guest  feel  that  the  absence  of  the  old  prince  did  make  no  differ- 
ice  in  the  severe  routine  of  the  household,  and  said  that  the  princess 
id  retired  to  her  own  apartments,  and  received  on  Sundays. 

‘Take  my  name  to  her;  perhaps  she  will  see  me,’  said  Pierre. 

‘Yes,  your  excellency,’  answered  the  footman;  ‘kindly  walk  into  the 
ortrait-gallery.’ 

A  few  minutes  later  the  footman  returned  accompanied  by  Dessalle. 
'esalle  brought  a  message  from  the  princess  that  she  would  be  very  glad 
)  see  Pierre,  and  begged  him,  if  he  would  excuse  the  lack  of  ceremony, 
)  come  upstairs  to  her  apartment. 

In  a  low-pitched  room,  lighted  by  a  single  candle,  he  found  the  princess, 
nd  some  one  with  her  in  a  black  dress.  Pierre  recollected  that  the  prin- 
2ss  had  always  had  lady-companions  of  some  sort  with  her,  but  who 
lose  companions  were,  and  what  they  were  like,  he  did  not  remember. 
That  is  one  of  her  companions,’  he  thought,  glancing  at  the  lady  in  the 
lack  dress. 

The  princess  rose  swiftly  to  meet  him,  and  held  out  her  hand. 

,  ‘Yes,’  she  said,  scrutinising  his  altered  face,  after  he  had  kissed  her 
and ;  ‘so  this  is  how  we  meet  again.  He  often  talked  of  you  at  the  last,’ 
he  said,  turning  her  eyes  from  Pierre  to  the  companion  with  a  sort  of 
ashfulness  'that  struck  him. 

‘I  was  so  glad  to  hear  of  your  safety.  It  was  the  only  piece  of  good 
ews  we  had  had  for  a  long  time.’ 

Again  the  princess  glanced  still  more  uneasily  at  the  companion,  and 
'ould  have  spoken;  but  Pierre  interrupted  her. 

‘Only  imagine,  I  knew  nothing  about  him,’  he  said.  ‘I  believed  he  had 
een  killed.  All  I  have  heard  has  been  through  others,  at  third-hand.  I 
nly  know  that  he  fell  in  with  the  Rostovs.  .  .  .  What  a  strange  stroke 
f  destiny! ’ 

Pierre  talked  rapidly,  eagerly.  He  glanced  once  at  the  companion’s  face, 
aw  attentively  friendly,  inquiring  eyes  fixed  upon  him;  and  as  often 
appens,  while  talking,  he  vaguely  felt  that  this  lady-companion  in  the 
lack  dress  was  a  good,  kind,  friendly  creature,  who  need  be  no  hindrance 
Id  his  talking  freely  to  Princess  Marya. 

But  as  he  uttered  the  last  words  about  the  Rostovs,  the  embarrassment 
1  Princess  Marya’s  face  became  even  more  marked.  Again  her  eyes 


io4S  WAR  AND  PEACE 

shifted  from  Pierre’s  face  to  the  face  of  the  lady  in  the  black  dress,  an 
she  said: 

‘You  don’t  recognise  her?’ 

Pierre  glanced  once  more  at  the  pale,  thin  face  of  her  companion,  wit 
its  black  eyes  and  strange  mouth.  Something  very  near  to  him,  long  foi 
gotten,  and  more  than  sweet,  gazed  at  him  out  of  those  intent  eyes. 

‘But  no,  it  cannot  be,’  he  thought.  ‘That  stern,  thin,  pale  face  tha 
looks  so  much  older?  It  cannot  be  she.  It  is  only  a  reminder  of  it.’ 

But  at  that  moment  Princess  Marya  said,  ‘Natasha!’ 

And  the  face  with  the  intent  eyes — painfully,  with  effort,  like  a  rust’ 
door  opening — smiled,  and  through  that  opened  door  there  floated  t> 
Pierre  a  sudden,  overwhelming  rush  of  long-forgotten  bliss,  of  which 
especially  now,  he  had  no  thought.  It  breathed  upon  him,  overwhelmei 
him,  and  swallowed  him  up  entirely.  When  she  smiled,  there  could  be  n< 
doubt.  It  was  Natasha,  and  he  loved  her. 

In  that  first  minute  Pierre  unwittingly  betrayed  to  her  and  to  Princes: 
Marya,  and  most  of  all  to  himself,  the  secret  of  which  he  had  been  himsel 
unaware.  He  flushed  joyfully,  and  with  agonising  distress.  He  tried  t( 
conceal  his  emotion.  But  the  more  he  tried  to  conceal  it,  the  more  clearlj 
— more  clearly  than  if  he  had  uttered  the  most  definite  words — he  be 
trayed  to  himself,  and  to  her,  and  to  Princess  Marya,  that  he  loved  her 

‘No,  it  is  nothing;  it’s  the  sudden  surprise,’  Pierre  thought.  But  a: 
soon  as  he  tried  to  go  on  with  the  conversation  with  Princess  Marya,  he 
glanced  again  at  Natasha,  and  a  still  deeper  flush  spread  over  his  face 
and  a  still  more  violent  wave  of  rapture  and  terror  flooded  his  heart.  He 
stammered  in  his  speech,  and  stopped  short  in  the  middle  of  a  sentence. 

Pierre  had  not  noticed  Natasha  because  he  had  never  expected  to  see 
her  here;  but  he  had  not  recognised  her  because  the  change  that  had 
taken  place  in  her  since  he  had  seen  her  was  immense.  She  had  grown 
thin  and  pale.  But  it  was  not  that  that  made  her  unrecognisable.  No  one 
would  have  recognised  her  at  the  moment  when  he  entered,  because  when 
he  first  glanced  at  her  there  was  no  trace  of  a  smile  in  the  eyes  that  in 
old  days  had  always  beamed  with  a  suppressed  smile  of  the  joy  of  life. 
They  were  intent,  kindly  eyes,  full  of  mournful  inquiry,  and  nothing 
more. 

Pierre’s  embarrassment  was  not  reflected  in  a  corresponding  embarrass¬ 
ment  in  Natasha,  but  only  in  a  look  of  pleasure,  that  faintly  lighted  up 
her  whole  face. 


XVI 

‘She  has  come  to  stay  with  me,’  said  Princess  Marya.  ‘The  count  and  the 
countess  will  be  here  in  a  few  days.  The  countess  is  in  a  terrible  state. 
But  Natasha  herself  had  to  see  the  doctors.  They  made  her  come  away 
with  me.’ 

‘Yes.  Is  there  a  family  without  its  own  sorrow?’  said  Pierre,  turning 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


1040 

t  Natasha.  ‘You  know  it  happened  the  very  day  we  were  rescued.  I 
sw  him.  What  a  splendid  boy  he  was!’ 

Natasha  looked  at  him,  and,  in  answer  to  his  words,  her  eyes  only 
cened  wider  and  grew  brighter. 

‘W'hat  can  one  say,  or  think,  to  give  comfort?’  said  Pierre.  ‘Nothing. 
Thy  had  he  to  die,  such  a  noble  boy,  so  full  of  life?’ 

‘Yes;  in  these  days  it  would  be  hard  to  live  without  faith  .  .  .’  said 
lincess  Marya. 

.  ‘Yes,  yes.  That  is  true,  indeed,’  Pierre  put  in  hurriedly. 

‘How  so?’  Natasha  asked,  looking  intently  into  Pierre’s  eyes. 

‘How  so?’  said  Princess  Marya.  ‘Why,  only  the  thought  of  what 
traits  .  .  .’ 

Natasha,  not  heeding  Princess  Marya’s  words,  looked  again  inquiringly 
||  Pierre. 

‘And  because,’  Pierre  went  on,  ‘only  one  who  believes  that  there  is  a 
Mod  guiding  our  lives  can  bear  such  a  loss  as  hers,  and  .  .  .  yours,’  said 
erre. 

Natasha  opened  her  mouth,  as  though  she  would  say  something,  but 
j,ie  suddenly  stopped. 

Pierre  made  haste  to  turn  away  from  her,  and  to  address  Princess 
farya  again  with  a  question  about  the  last  days  of  his  friend’s  life, 
ferre’s  embarrassment  had  by  now  almost  disappeared,  but  at  the  same 
me  he  felt  that  all  his  former  freedom  had  vanished  too.  He  felt  that 
lere  was  now  a  judge  criticising  every  word,  every  action  of  his;  a 
ldge  whose  verdict  was  of  greater  consequence  to  him  than  the  verdict 
■!:  all  the  people  in  the  world.  As  he  talked  now  he  was  considering  the 
apression  his  words  were  making  on  Natasha  as  he  uttered  them.  He  did 
at  intentionally  say  what  might  please  her;  but  whatever  he  said,  he 
ioked  at  himself  from  her  point  of  view. 

With  the  unwillingness  usual  in  such  cases,  Princess  Marya  began 
filing  Pierre  of  the  position  in  which  she  had  found  her  brother.  But 
ierre’s  questions,  his  eagerly  restless  glance,  his  face  quivering  with 
notion,  gradually  induced  her  to  go  into  details  which  she  shrank,  for 
er  own  sake,  from  recalling  to  her  imagination. 

‘Yes,  yes,  .  .  .’  said  Pierre,  bending  forward  over  Princess  Marya, 
nd  eagerly  drinking  in  her  words.  ‘Yes,  yes.  So  he  found  peace?  He  was 
jftened?  He  was  always  striving  with  his  whole  soul  for  one  thing  only: 
)  be  entirely  good,  so  that  he  could  not  dread  death.  The  defects  that 
'ere  in  him — if  he  had  any — did  not  come  from  himself.  So  he  was 
)ftened?”  he  said. 

:  ‘What  a  happy  thing  that  he  saw  you  again,’  he  said  to  Natasha, 
jrning  suddenly  to  her,  and  looking  at  her  with  eyes  full  of  tears. 

*  Natasha’s  face  quivered.  She  frowned,  and  for  an  instant  dropped  her 
yes.  For  a  moment  she  hesitated  whether  to  speak  or  not  to  speak, 
i  ‘Yes,  it  was  a  great  happiness,’  she  said  in  a  low,  deep  voice;  ‘for  me 
:  was  certainly  a  great  happiness.’  She  paused.  ‘And  he  ...  he  ...  he 
old  me  he  was  longing  for  it  the  very  moment  I  went  in  to  him  .  .  .’ 


1050  WAR  AND  PEACE 

Natasha’s  voice  broke.  She  flushed,  squeezed  her  hands  against  her  kne 
and  suddenly,  with  an  evident  effort  to  control  herself,  she  lifted  her  he; 
and  began  speaking  rapidly: 

‘We  knew  nothing  about  it  when  we  were  leaving  Moscow.  I  did  n 
dare  ask  about  him.  And  all  at  once  Sonya  told  me  he  was  with  us. 
could  think  of  nothing,  I  had  no  conception  in  what  state  he  was;  all 
wanted  was  to  see  him — to  be  with  him,’  she  said,  trembling  and  break 
less.  And  not  letting  them  interrupt  her,  she  told  all  that  she  had  nev 
spoken  of  to  any  one  before;  all  she  had  gone  through  in  those  thri 
weeks  of  their  journey  and  their  stay  in  Yaroslavl. 

Pierre  heard  her  with  parted  lips  and  eyes  full  of  tears  fastened  upc 
her.  As  he  listened  to  her,  he  was  not  thinking  of  Prince  Andrey,  nor  < 
death,  nor  of  what  she  was  saying.  He  heard  her  voice  and  only  pitie 
her  for  the  anguish  she  was  feeling  now  in  telling  him. 

The  princess,  frowning  in  the  effort  to  restrain  her  tears,  sat  by  N; 
tasha’s  side  and  heard  for  the  first  time  the  story  of  those  last  days  of  ht 
brother’s  and  Natasha’s  love. 

To  speak  of  that  agonising  and  joyous  time  was  evidently  necessar 
to  Natasha. 

She  talked  on,  mingling  up  the  most  insignificant  details  with  the  mo. 
secret  feelings  of  her  heart,  and  it  seemed  as  though  she  could  neve 
finish.  Several  times  she  said  the  same  thing  twice. 

Dessalle’s  voice  was  heard  at  We  door  asking  whether  Nikolushk 
might  come  into  say  good-night.  ‘And  that  is  all,  all  .  .  .’  said  Natash; 
She  got  up  quickly  at  the  moment  Nikolushka  was  coming  in,  and  almos 
running  to  the  door,  knocked  her  head  against  it  as  it  was  hidden  by  th 
portiere,  and  with  a  moan,  half  of  pain,  half  of  sorrow,  she  rushed  out  c 
the  room. 

Pierre  gazed  at  the  door  by  which  she  had  gone  out,  and  wondered  wh 
he  felt  suddenly  alone  in  the  wide  world. 

Princess  Marya  roused  him  from  his  abstraction,  calling  his  attentio 
to  her  nephew  who  had  just  come  into  the  room. 

The  face  of  Nikolushka,  so  like  his  father,  had  such  an  effect  on  Pierr 
at  this  moment  of  emotional  tension,  that,  after  kissing  the  child,  he  go 
up  himself,  and  taking  out  his  handkerchief,  walked  away  to  the  window 
He  would  have  taken  leave,  but  Princess  Marya  would  not  let  him  go. 

‘No,  Natasha  and  I  often  do  not  go  to  bed  till  past  two,  please  stay 
little  longer.  We  will  have  supper.  Go  downstairs,  we  will  come  in 
moment.’ 

Before  Pierre  went  down,  the  princess  said  to  him:  ‘It  is  the  first  tim 
she  has  talked  of  him  like  this.’ 


XVII 

Pierre  was  conducted  into  the  big,  lighted-up  dining-room.  In  a  fei 
minutes  he  heard  footsteps  and  the  princess  and  Natasha  came  into  th 


WAR  AND  PEACE  105! 

10m.  Natasha  was  calm,  though  the  stern,  unsmiling  expression  had 
ime  back  again  now  into  her  face.  Princess  Marya,  Natasha,  and  Pierre 
;1  equally  experienced  that  feeling  of  awkwardness  which  usually  fol- 
Iws  when  a  serious  and  deeply  felt  conversation  is  over.  To  continue  on 
le  same  subject  is  impossible;  to  speak  o(  trivial  matters  seems  desecra- 
nn,  and  to  be  silent  is  unpleasant,  because  one  wants  to  talk,  and  this 
:ence  seems  a  sort  ol  affectation.  In  silence  they  came  to  the  table.  The 
lotmen  drew  back  and  pushed  up  the  chairs.  Pierre  unfolded  his  cold 
mner  napkin,  and  making  up  his  mind  to  break  the  silence  he  glanced  at 
latasha  and  at  Princess  Marya.  Both  had  plainly  reached  the  same  de- 
r,ion  at  the  same  moment;  in  the  eyes  of  both  there  gleamed  a  satisfac- 
nn  with  life,  and  an  admission  that  there  was  gladness  in  it  as  well  as 
;rrow. 

‘Do  you  drink  vodka?’  said  Princess  Marya,  and  those  words  at  once 
(spelled  the  shadows  of  the  past. 

‘Tell  us  about  yourself,’  said  Princess  Marya;  ‘such  incredibly  marvel- 
las  stories  are  being  told  about  you.’ 

‘Yes,’  answered  Pierre,  with  the  gentle  smile  of  irony  that  had  now 
lcome  habitual  with  him.  ‘I  myself  am  told  of  marvels  that  I  never 
(earned  of.  Marya  Abramovna  invited  me  to  come  and  see  her  and  kept 
1  ling  me  what  had  happened  to  me,  or  ought  to  have  happened.  Stepan 
lepanovitch  too  instructed  me  how  I  was  to  tell  my  story.  Altogether  I 
1  ve  noticed  that  to  be  an  interesting  person  is  a  very  easy  position 
1  am  now  an  interesting  person) ;  people  invite  me  and  then  tell  me  all 
£  out  it.’ 

Natasha  smiled  and  was  about  to  say  something. 

‘We  have  been  told  that  you  lost  two  millions  in  Moscow.  Is  that  true?’ 
‘Oh,  I  am  three  times  as  rich,’  said  Pierre.  In  spite  of  the  strain  on  his 
irtune,  of  his  wife’s  debts,  and  the  necessity  of  rebuilding,  Pierre  still 
ad  that  he  had  become  three  times  as  rich. 

‘What  I  have  undoubtedly  gained,’  he  said,  ‘is  freedom  .  .  .’  he  was 
1  ginning  seriously;  but  on  second  thoughts  he  did  not  continue,  feeling 
tit  it  was  too  egoistic  a  subject. 

|j‘And  you  are  building?’ 

/es,  such  are  Savelitch’s  orders.’ 

‘Tell  me,  you  had  not  heard  of  the  countess’s  death  when  you  stayed 
(  in  Moscow?’  said  Princess  Marya;  and  she  Hushed  crimson  at  once, 
(ascious  that  in  putting  this  question  to  him  after  his  mention  of  ‘free- 
cm,’  she  was  ascribing  a  significance  to  his  words  which  was  possibly 
i't  intended. 

‘No,’  answered  Pierre,  obviously  unconscious  of  any  awkwardness  in 
t;  interpretation  Princess  Marya  had  put  on  his  allusion  to  his  freedom. 
‘  heard  of  it  in  Orel,  and  you  cannot  imagine  how  it  affected  me.  We 
vre  not  an  exemplary  couple,’  he  said  quickly,  glancing  at  Natasha  and 
(tecting  in  her  face  curiosity  as  to  how  he  would  speak  of  his  wife, 
‘ut  her  death  affected  me  greatly.  When  two  people  quarrel,  both  are 
ivays  in  fault.  And  one  becomes  terribly  aware  of  one’s  shortcomings 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


1052 

towards  any  one  who  is  no  more.  And  then  such  a  death  .  .  .  apart  frc 
friends  and  consolation.  I  felt  very  sorry  for  her,’  he  concluded,  a: 
noticed  with  satisfaction  a  glad  look  of  approval  on  Natasha’s  face. 

‘And  so  you  are  once  more  an  eligible  parti,''  said  Princess  Marya. 

Pierre  flushed  suddenly  crimson;  and  for  a  long  while  he  tried  not 
look  at  Natasha.  When  he  did  venture  to  glance  at  her,  her  face  was  cc 
and  severe,  even,  he  fancied,  disdainful. 

‘But  did  you  really  see  and  talk  to  Napoleon,  as  we  have  been  tok 
said  Princess  Marya. 

Pierre  laughed. 

‘Not  once,  never.  Every  one  always  imagines  that  to  be  a  prisoner 
equivalent  to  being  on  a  visit  to  Napoleon.  I  never  saw,  never  even  hea 
anything  about  him.  I  was  in  much  lower  company.’ 

Supper  was  over,  and  Pierre,  who  had  at  first  refused  to  talk  about  ]| 
captivity,  was  gradually  drawn  into  telling  them  about  it. 

‘But  it  is  true  that  you  stayed  behind  to  kill  Napoleon?’  Natasha  ask: 
him  with  a  slight  smile.  ‘I  guessed  that  at  the  time  when  we  met  you  ' 
the  Suharev  Tower:  do  you  remember?’ 

Pierre  owned  that  it  was  so;  and  from  that  question  was  led  on  1 
Princess  Marya’s,  and  still  more  by  Natasha’s,  questions  to  give  a  <• 
tailed  account  of  his  adventures. 

At  first  he  told  his  story  with  that  tone  of  gentle  irony  that  he  alwci 
had  now  towards  men  and  especially  towards  himself.  But  as  he  came) 
describe  the  horrors  and  sufferings  he  had  seen,  he  was  drawn  on  unawar , 
and  began 'to  speak  with  the  suppressed  emotion  of  a  man  living  again  1 
imagination  through  the  intense  impressions  of  the  past. 

Princess  Marya  looked  from  Pierre  to  Natasha  with  a  gentle  smile.  1 
all  he  told  them  she  saw  only  Pierre  and  his  goodness.  Natasha,  her  hel 
supported  in  her  hand,  and  her  face  changing  continually  with  the  sto . 
watched  Pierre,  never  taking  her  eyes  off  him,  and  was  in  imaginat  i 
passing  through  all  he  told  her  with  him.  Not  only  her  eyes,  but  her  - 
clamations  and  the  brief  questions  she  put  showed  Pierre  that  she  und- 
stood  from  his  words  just  what  he  was  trying  to  convey  by  them.  It  vs 
evident  that  she  understood,  not  only  what  he  said,  but  also  what  e 
would  have  liked  to  say  and  could  not  express  in  words.  The  episode  f 
the  child  and  of  the  woman  in  whose  defence  he  was  taken  prison, 
Pierre  described  in  this  way.  ‘It  was  an  awful  scene,  children  abandon!, 
some  in  the  midst  of  the  fire  .  .  .  Children  were  dragged  out  before  7 
eyes  .  .  .  and  women,  who  had  their  things  pulled  off  them,  earriis 
torn  off  .  .  .’ 

Pierre  flushed  and  hesitated.  ‘Then  a  patrol  came  up  and  all  who  we 
not  pillaging,  all  the  men,  that  is,  they  took  prisoner.  And  me  with  the.’ 

‘I  am  sure  you  are  not  telling  us  all;  I  am  sure  you  did  somethii,’ 
said  Natasha,  and  after  a  moment’s  pause,  ‘something  good.’ 

Pierre  went  on  with  his  story.  When  he  came  to  the  execution,  he  wod 
have  passed  over  the  horrible  details  of  it,  but  Natasha  insisted  on  ;s 
leaving  nothing  out. 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


i°5.3 

Pierre  was  beginning  to  tell  them  about  Karataev;  he  had  risen  from  the 
ble  and  was  walking  up  and  down,  Natasha  following  him  with  her 
res. 

‘No/  he  said,  stopping  short  in  his  story,  ‘you  cannot  understand  what 
learned  from  that  illiterate  man — that  simple  creature.’ 

‘No,  no,  tell  us/  said  Natasha.  ‘Where  is  he  now?’ 

‘He  was  killed  almost  before  my  eyes.’ 

And  Pierre  began  to  describe  the  latter  part  of  their  retreat,  Karataev’s 
ness  (his  voice  shook  continually)  and  then  his  death. 

Pierre  told  the  tale  of  his  adventures  as  he  had  never  thought  of  them 
>fore.  He  saw  now  as  it  were  a  new  significance  in  all  he  had  been 
rough.  He  experienced  now  in  telling  it  all  to  Natasha  that  rare  happi- 
;ss  given  to  men  by  women  when  they  listen  to  them — not  by  clever 
omen,  who,  as  they  listen,  are  either  trying  to  remember  what  they  are 
Id  to  enrich  their  intellect  and  on  occasion  to  repeat  it,  or  to  adapt  what 
told  them  to  their  own  ideas  and  to  bring  out  in  haste  the  clever  com- 
ents  elaborated  in  their  little  mental  factory.  This  rare  happiness  is 
ven  only  by  those  real  women,  gifted  with  a  faculty  for  picking  out  and 
.similating  all  that  is  best  in  what  a  man  shows  them.  Natasha,  though 
>rself  unconscious  of  it,  was  all  rapt  attention ;  she  did  not  lose  one  word, 
le  quaver  of  the  voice,  one  glance,  one  twitching  in  the  facial  muscles, 
ie  gesture  of  Pierre’s.  She  caught  the  word  before  it  was  uttered  and  bore 
straight  to  her  open  heart,  divining  the  secret  import  of  all  Pierre’s 
dritual  travail. 

Princess  Marya  understood  his  story  and  sympathised  with  him,  but  she 
as  seeing  now  something  else  that  absorbed  all  her  attention.  She  saw 
e  possibility  of  love  and  happiness  between  Natasha  and  Pierre.  And 
iis  idea,  which  struck  her  now  for  the  first  time,  filled  her  heart  with 
adness. 

It  was  three  o’clock  in  the  night.  The  footmen,  with  melancholy  and 
were  faces,  came  in  with  fresh  candles,  but  no  one  noticed  them. 

Pierre  finished  his  story.  With  shining,  eager  eyes  Natasha  still  gazed 
tently  and  persistently  at  him,  as  though  she  longed  to  understand 
mething  more,  that  perhaps  he  had  left  unsaid.  In  shamefaced  and 
ippy  confusion,  Pierre  glanced  at  her  now  and  then,  and  was  thinking 
iat  to  say  now  to  change  the  subject.  Princess  Marya  was  mute.  It  did 
>t  strike  any  of  them  that  it  was  three  o’clock  in  the  night,  and  time  to 
in  bed. 

‘They  say:  sufferings  are  misfortunes/  said  Pierre.  ‘But  if  at  once,  this 
;inute,  I  was  asked,  would  I  remain  what  I  was  before  I  was  taken 
]isoner,  or  go  through  it  all  again,  I  should  say,  for  God’s  sake  let  me 
ither  be  a  prisoner  and  eat  horseflesh  again.  We  imagine  that  as  soon  as 
.  are  torn  out  of  our  habitual  path  all  is  over,  but  it  is  only  the  begin- 
Ug  of  something  new  and  good.  As  long  as  there  is  life,  there  is  happi- 
|ss.  There  is  a  great  deal,  a  great  deal  before  us.  That  I  say  to  you/  he 
:id,  turning  to  Natasha. 


ic>54  WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Yes,  yes,’  she  said,  answering  something  altogether  different,  ‘and 
too  would  ask  for  nothing  better  than  to  go  through  it  all  again.’ 

Pierre  looked  intently  at  her. 

‘Yes,  and  nothing  more,’  Natasha  declared. 

‘Not  true,  not  true,’  cried  Pierre.  ‘I  am  not  to  blame  for  being  alive  ai 
wanting  to  live;  and  you  the  same.’ 

All  at  once  Natasha  let  her  head  drop  into  her  hands,  and  burst  in 
tears. 

‘What  is  it,  Natasha?’  said  Princess  Marya. 

‘Nothing,  nothing.’  She  smiled  through  her  tears  to  Pierre.  ‘Good-nigl 
it’s  bedtime.’ 

Pierre  got  up,  and  took  leave. 

Natasha,  as  she  always  did,  went  with  Princess  Marya  into  her  be 
room.  They  talked  of  what  Pierre  had  told  them.  Princess  Marya  did  n 
give  her  opinion  of  Pierre.  Natasha,  too,  did  not  talk  of  him. 

‘Well,  good-night,  Marie,’  said  Natasha.  ‘Do  you  know  I  am  oft 
afraid  that  we  don’t  talk  of  him’  (she  meant  Prince  Andrey),  ‘as  thou; 
we  were  afraid  of  desecrating  our  feelings,  and  so  we  forget  him.’ 

Princess  Marya  sighed  heavily,  and  by  this  sigh  acknowledged  t 
justice  of  Natasha’s  words;  but  she  did  not  in  words  agree  with  her. 

‘Is  it  possible  to  forget?’  she  said. 

‘I  was  so  glad  to  tell  all  about  it  to-day;  it  was  hard  and  painful,  ai 
yet  I  was  glad  to  .  .  .  very  glad,’  said  Natasha;  T  am  sure  that  he  real' 
loved  him.  That  was  why  I  told  him  .  .  .  it  didn’t  matter  my  telling  hin 
she  asked  suddenly,  blushing. 

‘Pierre?  Oh,  no!  How  good  he  is,’  said  Princess  Marya. 

‘Do  you  know,  Marie,’  said  Natasha,  suddenly,  with  a  mischievoi 
smile,  such  as  Princess  Marya  had  not  seen  for  a  long  while  on  her  far 
‘He  has  become  so  clean  and  smooth  and  fresh;  as  though  he  had  jit; 
come  out  of  a  bath;  do  you  understand?  Out  of  a  moral  bath.  Isn’t  it  sc’ 

‘Yes,’  said  Princess  Marya.  ‘He  has  gained  a  great  deal.’ 

‘And  his  short  jacket,  and  his  cropped  hair;  exactly  as  though  he  hi 
just  come  out  of  a  bath  .  .  .  papa  used  sometimes  .  .  .’ 

‘I  can  understand  how  /ze’  (Prince  Andrey)  ‘cared  for  no  one  else  ; 
he  did  for  him,’  said  Princess  Marya. 

‘Yes,  and  he  is  so  different  from  him.  They  say  men  are  better  frier; 
when  they  are  utterly  different.  That  must  be  true;  he  is  not  a  bit  like  hi 
in  anything,  is  he?’ 

‘Yes,  and  he  is  such  a  splendid  fellow.’ 

‘Well,  good-night,’  answered  Natasha.  And  the  same  mischievous  sm; 
lingered  a  long  while  as  though  forgotten  on  her  face. 

XVIII 

For  a  long  while  Pierre  could  not  sleep  that  night.  He  walked  up  ai 
down  his  room,  at  one  moment  frowning,  deep  in  some  difficult  train  f 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1055 

lought,  at  the  next  shrugging  his  shoulders  and  shaking  himself,  and  at 
le  next  smiling  blissfully. 

He  thought  of  Prince  Andrey,  of  Natasha,  of  their  love,  and  at  one 
loment  was  jealous  of  her  past,  and  at  the  next  reproached  himself,  and 
len  forgave  himself  for  the  feeling.  It  was  six  o’clock  in  the  morning, 
nd  still  he  paced  the  room. 

‘Well,  what  is  one  to  do,  if  there’s  no  escaping  it?  What  is  one  to  do? 
t  must  be  the  right  thing,  then,’  he  said  to  himself;  and  hurriedly  un- 
ressing,  he  got  into  bed,  happy  and  agitated,  but  free  from  doubt  and 
hesitation. 

‘However  strange,  however  impossible  such  happiness,  I  must  do  every- 
hing  that  we  may  be  man  and  wife,’  he  said  to  himself. 

Several  days  previously  Pierre  had  fixed  on  the  following  Friday  as 
he  date  on  which  he  would  set  off  to  Petersburg.  When  he  waked  up 
ext  day  it  was  Thursday,  and  Savelitch  came  to  him  for  orders  about 
acking  the  things  for  the  journey. 

I  ‘To  Petersburg?  What  is  Petersburg?  Who  is  in  Petersburg?’  he  un- 
onsciously  asked,  though  only  of  himself.  ‘Yes,  some  long  while  ago,  be- 
ire  this  happened,  I  was  meaning  for  some  reason  to  go  to  Petersburg,’  he 
ecalled.  ‘Why  was  it?  And  I  shall  go,  perhaps.  How  kind  he  is,  and  how 
ttentive,  how  he  remembers  everything!’  he  thought,  looking  at  Savel- 
ch’s  old  face.  ‘And  what  a  pleasant  smile!’  he  thought. 

‘Well,  and  do  you  stiil  not  want  your  freedom,  Savelitch?’  asked  Pierre. 
‘What  should  I  want  my  freedom  for,  your  excellency?  With  the  late 
punt — the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  to  him — we  got  on  very  well,  and  under 
ou,  we  have  never  known  any  unkindness.’ 

‘Well,  but  your  children?’ 

f  ‘My  children  too  will  do  very  well,  your  excellency;  under  such  mas¬ 
ers  one  can  get  all  right.’ 

‘Well,  but  my  heirs?’  said  Pierre.  ‘All  of  a  sudden  I  shall  get  married 
.  .  It  might  happen,  you  know,’  he  added,  with  an  involuntary  smile. 
‘And  I  make  bold  to  say,  a  good  thing  too,  your  excellency.’ 

‘How  easy  he  thinks  it,’  thought  Pierre.  ‘He  does  not  know  how  terrible 
is,  how  perilous.  Too  late  or  too  early  ...  It  is  terrible!  ’ 

‘What  are  your  orders?  Will  you  be  pleased  to  go  to-morrow?’  asked 
avelitch. 

‘No;  I  will  put  it  off  a  little.  I  will  tell  you  later.  You  must  excuse  the 
•ouble  I  give  you,’  said  Pierre,  and  watching  Savelitch ’s  smile,  he  thought 
ow  strange  it  was,  though,  that  he  should  not  know  there  was  no  such 
ling  as  Petersburg,  and  that  that  must  be  settled  before  everything. 

?  ‘He  really  does  know,  though,’  he  thought;  ‘he  is  only  pretending.  Shall 
tell  him?  What  does  he  think  about  it?  No,  another  time.’ 

At  breakfast,  Pierre  told  his  cousin  that  he  had  been  the  previous 
vening  at  Princess  Marya’s,  and  had  found  there — could  she  fancy 
horn — Natasha  Rostov. 

I  The  princess  looked  as  though  she  saw  nothing  more  extraordinary  in 
pat  fact  than  if  Pierre  had  seen  some  Anna  Semyonovna. 


ios6  WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘You  know  her?’  asked  Pierre. 

‘I  have  seen  the  princess,'  she  answered,  ‘and  I  had  heard  they  wer  j 
making  a  match  between  her  and  young  Rostov.  That  would  be  a  ver  | 
fine  thing  for  the  Rostovs;  I  am  told  they  are  utterly  ruined.’ 

‘No,  I  meant,  do  you  know  Natasha  Rostov?’ 

‘I  heard  at  the  time  all  about  that  story.  Very  sad.’ 

‘She  does  not  understand,  or  she  is  pretending,’  thought  Pierre.  ‘Bette 
not  tell  her  either.’ 

The  princess,  too,  had  prepared  provisions  for  Pierre’s  journey. 

‘How  kind  they  all  are,’  thought  Pierre,  ‘to  trouble  about  all  thi 
now,  when  it  certainly  can  be  of  no  interest  to  them.  And  all  for  nr 
sake;  that  is  what’s  so  marvellous.’ 

The  same  day  a  police  officer  came  to  see  Pierre,  with  an  offer  to  sen< 
a  trusty  agent  to  the  Polygonal  Palace  to  receive  the  things  that  wer 
to-day  to  be  restored  among  the  owners. 

‘And  this  man  too,’  thought  Pierre,  looking  into  the  police  officer’i 
face,  ‘what  a  nice,  good-looking  officer,  and  how  good-natured!  To  trou 
ble  about  such  trifles  now.  And  yet  they  say  he  is  not  honest,  and  take 
bribes.  What  nonsense!  though  after  ail  why  shouldn’t  he  take  bribes 
He  has  been  brought  up  in  that  way.  They  all  do  it.  But  such  a  pleasant 
good-humoured  face,  and  he  smiles  when  he  looks  at  me.’ 

Pierre  went  to  Princess  Marya’s  to  dinner.  As  he  drove  through  th 
streets  between  the  charred  wrecks  of  houses,  he  admired  the  beaut; 
of  those  ruins.  The  chimneys  of  stoves,  and  the  tumbledown  walls  o 
houses  stretched  in  long  rows,  hiding  one  another,  all  through  the  burn 
quarters  of  the  town,  and  recalled  to  him  the  picturesque  ruins  of  th 
Rhine  and  of  the  Colosseum.  The  sledge-drivers  and  men  on  horseback 
the  carpenters  at  work  on  the  frames  of  the  houses,  the  hawkers  am 
shopkeepers  all  looked  at  Pierre  with  cheerful,  beaming  faces,  and  seemei 
to  him  to  say:  ‘Oh,  here  he  is!  We  shall  see  what  comes  of  it.’ 

On  reaching  Princess  Marya’s  house,  Pierre  was  beset  by  a  suddei 
doubt  whether  it  were  true  that  he  had  been  there  the  day  before,  anr 
had  really  seen  Natasha  and  talked  to  her.  ‘Perhaps  it  was  all  my  owr 
invention,  perhaps  I  shall  go  in  and  see  no  one.’  But  no  sooner  had  h 
entered  the  room  than  in  his  whole  being,  from  his  instantaneous  loS' 
of  freedom,  he  was  aware  of  her  presence.  She  was  wearing  the  sam 
black  dress,  that  hung  in  soft  folds,  and  had  her  hair  arranged  in  th 
same  way,  but  she  was  utterly  different.  Had  she  looked  like  this  whei 
he  came  in  yesterday,  he  could  not  have  failed  to  recognise  her. 

She  was  just  as  he  had  known  her  almost  as  a  child,  and  later  whej 
betrothed  to  Prince  Andrey.  A  bright,  questioning  light  gleamed  in  he 
eyes;  there  was  a  friendly  and  strangely  mischievous  expression  in  he 
face. 

Pierre  dined,  and  would  have  spent  the  whole  evening  with  them;  bu 
Princess  Marya  was  going  to  vespers,  and  Pierre  went  with  them. 

Next  day  Pierre  arrived  early,  dined  with  them,  and  stayed  the  whol 
evening.  Although  Princess  Marya  and  Natasha  were  obviously  glad  t 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1057 

:e  their  visitor,  and  although  the  whole  interest  of  Pierre’s  life  was 
ow  centred  in  that  house,  by  the  evening  they  had  said  all  they  had 
1  say,  and  the  conversation  passed  continually  from  one  trivial  subject 
1  another  and  often  broke  off  altogether.  Pierre  stayed  so  late  that 
fening  that  Princess  Marya  and  Natasha  exchanged  glances,  plainly 
ondering  whether  he  would  not  soon  go.  Pierre  saw  that,  but  he  could 
)t  go  away.  He  began  to  feel  it  irksome  and  awkward,  but  still  he  sat 
1  because  he  could,  not  get  up  and  go. 

Princess  Marya,  foreseeing  no  end  to  it,  was  the  first  to  get  up,  and 
implaining  of  a  sick  headache,  she  began  saying  good-night. 

'So  you  are  going  to-morrow  to  Petersburg?’  she  said. 

;  'No,  I  am  not  going,’  said  Pierre  hurriedly,  with  surprise  and  a  sort 
'  resentment  in  his  tone.  'No  .  .  .  yes,  to  Petersburg.  To-morrow,  per- 
;ips;  but  I  won’t  say  good-bye.  I  shall  come  to  see  if  you  have  any  com- 
issions  to  give  me,’  he  added,  standing  before  Princess  Marya,  turning 
try  red,  and  not  taking  leave. 

;  Natasha  gave  him  her  hand  and  retired.  Princess  Marya,  on  the  con- 
lary,  instead  of  going  away,  sank  into  an  armchair,  and  with  her  lumi- 
|)us,  deep  eyes  looked  sternly  and  intently  at  Pierre.  The  weariness  she 
ad  unmistakably  betrayed  just  before  had  now  quite  passed  off.  She 
:-ew  a  deep,  prolonged  sigh,  as  though  preparing  for  a  long  conversation. 
I  As  soon  as  Natasha  had  gone,  all  Pierre’s  confusion  and  awkwardness 
stantly  vanished,  and  were  replaced  by  excited  eagerness. 

He  rapidly  moved  a  chair  close  up  to  Princess  Marya.  ‘Yes,  I  wanted 
1  tell  you,’  he  said,  replying  to  her  look  as  though  to  words.  ‘Princess, 
felp  me.  What  am  I  to  do?  Can  I  hope?  Princess,  my  dear  friend,  listen 
j  me.  I  know  all  about  it.  I  know  I  am  not  worthy  of  her;  I  know  that  it 

[impossible  to  talk  of  it  now.  But  I  want  to  be  a  brother  to  her.  No, 
it  that,  I  don’t,  I  can’t  .  .  .’  He  paused  and  passed  his  hands  over  his 
ce  and  eyes.  ‘It’s  like  this,’  he  went  on,  making  an  evident  effort  to 
eak  coherently.  ‘I  don’t  know  since  when  I  have  loved  her.  But  I  have 
ved  her  alone,  only  her,  all  my  life,  and  I  love  her  so  that  I  cannot 
nagine  life  without  her.  I  cannot  bring  myself  to  ask  for  her  hand  now; 
jt  the  thought  that,  perhaps,  she  might  be  my  wife  and  my  letting 
lip  this  opportunity  .  .  .  opportunity  ...  is  awful.  Tell  me,  can  I 
ppe?  Tell  me,  what  am  I  to  do?  Dear  princess,’  he  said,  after  a  brief 
jiuse,  touching  her  hand  as  she  did  not  answer. 

‘I  am  thinking  of  what  you  have  just  told  me,’  answered  Princess  Marya. 
"his  is  what  I  think.  You  are  right  that  to  speak  to  her  of  love  now  .  .  .’ 
he  princess  paused.  She  had  meant  to  say  that  to  speak  to  her  of  love 
m  was  impossible;  but  she  stopped,  because  she  had  seen  during  the 
1st  three  days  by  the  sudden  change  in  Natasha  that  she  would  by  no 
eans  be  offended  if  Pierre  were  to  avow  his  love,  that,  in  fact,  it  was  the 
he  thing  she  desired. 

‘To  speak  to  her  now  ...  is  out  of  the  question,’  she  nevertheless 

iid. 

‘But  what  am  I  to  do?’ 


1058  WAR  AND  PEACE 

‘Trust  the  matter  to  me,’  said  Princess  Marya.  ‘I  know  .  . 

Pierre  looked  into  her  eyes. 

‘Well,  well  .  .  he  said. 

‘I  know  that  she  loves  .  .  .  that  she  will  love  you,’  Princess  Mary 
corrected  herself. 

She  had  hardly  uttered  the  words,  when  Pierre  leaped  up,  and  with 
face  of  consternation  clutched  at  Princess  Marya’s  hand. 

‘What  makes  you  think  so?  You  think  I  may  hope?  You  thin 
so?  .  .  .’ 

‘Yes,  I  think  so,’  said  Princess  Marya,  smiling.  ‘Write  to  her  parents 
And  leave  it  to  me.  I  will  tell  her  when  it  is  possible.  I  desire  it  to  com 
to  pass.  And  I  have  a  feeling  in  my  heart  that  it  will  be  so.’ 

‘No,  it  cannot  be!  How  happy  I  am!  But  it  cannot  be!  ...  Ho^ 
happy  I  am!  No,  it  cannot  be!’  Pierre  kept  saying,  kissing  Princes 
Marya’s  hands. 

‘You  should  go  to  Petersburg;  it  will  be  better.  And  I  will  write  to  you 
she  said. 

‘To  Petersburg?  I  am  to  go?  Yes,  very  well,  I  will  go.  But  I  can  com 
and  see  you  to-morrow?’ 

Next  day  Pierre  came  to  say  good-bye.  Natasha  was  less  animated  tha 
on  the  preceding  days;  but  sometimes  that  day,  looking  into  her  eyes 
Pierre  felt  that  he  was  vanishing  away,  that  he  and  she  were  no  more 
that  there  was  nothing  but  happiness.  ‘Is  it  possible?  No,  it  cannot  be 
he  said  to  himself  at  every  glance  she  gave,  every  gesture,  every  wore 
that  filled  his  soul  with  gladness. 

When,  on  saying  good-bye,  he  took  her  thin,  delicate  hand  he  uncon 
sciously  held  it  somewhat  longer  in  his  own. 

‘Is  it  possible  that  that  hand,  that  face,  those  eyes,  all  that  treasur 
of  womanly  charm,  so  far  removed  from  me,  is  it  possible  it  may  all  on! 
day  be  my  own  for  ever,  as  close  and  intimate  as  I  am  to  myself?  No,  it' 
surely  impossible?  .  .  .’ 

‘Good-bye,  count,’  she  said  to  him  aloud.  ‘I  shall  so  look  forward  t 
seeing  you  again,’  she  added  in  a  whisper. 

And  those  simple  words,  and  the  look  in  the  eyes  and  the  face,  tha 
accompanied  them,  formed  the  subject  of  inexhaustible  reminiscences! 
interpretations,  and  happy  dreams  for  Pierre  during  two  whole  month; 
‘I  shall  look  forward  to  seeing  you  again.’  ‘Yes,  yes,  how  did  she  say  it 
Yes.  “I  shall  so  look  forward  to  seeing  you  again.”  Oh,  how  happy  I  am 
How  can  it  be  that  I  am  so  happy!  ’  Pierre  said  to  himself. 


XIX 

There  was  nothing  in  Pierre’s  soul  now  like  what  had  passed  with! 
him  in  similar  circumstances  during  the  time  of  his  being  betrothed  t 
Ellen. 

He  did  not  go  over,  as  he  had  then,  with  a  sickening  sense  of  shame  thi 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1059 

ords  he  had  uttered;  he  did  not  say  to  himself:  ‘Oh,  why  did  I  not  say 
lat,  and  why,  oh  why,  did  I  say  then:  I  love  you.’  Now,  on  the  con- 
ary,  ever)/  word  of  hers  and  of  his  own,  he  went  over  in  his  imagination 
ith  every  detail  of  look  and  smile,  and  wanted  to  add  nothing,  to  take 
Dthing  away,  he  longed  only  to  hear  it  over  again.  As  for  doubts — 
hether  what  he  contemplated  doing  was  right  or  wrong — there  was 
jver  a  trace  of  them  now.  Only  one  terrible  doubt  sometimes  assailed  his 
lind.  Was  it  not  all  a  dream?  Was  not  Princess  Marya  mistaken?  Am 
not  too  conceited  and  self-confident?  I  believe  in  it;  but  all  at  once — 
id  it’s  what  is  sure  to  happen — Princess  Marya  tells  her;  and  she  smiles 
id  answers:  ‘Plow  queer!  He  has  certainly  made  a  mistake.  Doesn’t 
e  know  that  he  is  a  man,  a  mere  man,  while  I?  ...  I  am  something 
together  different,  higher.’ 

This  doubt  alone  often  beset  Pierre.  He  made  no  plans  of  any  sort 
ow.  The  happiness  before  him  seemed  to  him  so  incredible  that  the 
tily  thing  that  mattered  was  to  bring  it  to  pass,  and  nothing  could  be 
eyond.  Everything  else  was  over. 

A  joyful,  unexpected  frenzy,  of  which  Pierre  had  believed  himself 
.capable,  seized  upon  him.  The  whole  meaning  of  life,  not  for  him  only, 
ut  for  all  the  world,  seemed  to  him  centred  in  his  love  and  the  possibility 
f  her  loving  him.  Sometimes  all  men  seemed  to  him  to  be  absorbed  in 
othing  else  than  his  future  happiness.  It  seemed  to  him  sometimes  that 
ley  were  all  rejoicing  as  he  was  himself,  and  were  only  trying  to  conceal 
rnt  joy,  by  pretending  to  be  occupied  with  other  interests.  In  every  word 
ad  gesture  he  saw  an  allusion  to  his  happiness.  He  often  surprised  people 
y  his  significant  and  blissful  looks  and  smiles,  that  seemed  to  express  some 
;cret  understanding  with  them.  But  when  he  realised  that  people  could 
ot  know  of  his  happiness,  he  pitied  them  from  the  bottom  of  his  heart, 
nd  felt  an  impulse  to  try  to  make  them  somehow  understand  that  all 
lat  they  were  interested  in  was  utter  nonsense  and  trifles  not  deserving  of 
ttention. 

When  suggestions  were  made  to  him  that  he  should  take  office  under 
overnment,  or  when  criticisms  of  any  sort  on  general,  political  ques- 
ons,  or  on  the  war,  were  made  before  him,  on  the  supposition  that  one 
ourse  of  events  or  another  would  affect  the  happiness  of  all  men,  he 
stened  with  a  gentle  smile  of  commiseration,  and  astounded  the  persons 
bnversing  with  him  by  his  strange  observations.  But  both  those  persons, 
ho  seemed  to  Pierre  to  grasp  the  true  significance  of  life,  that  is,  his 
ieling,  and  those  luckless  wretches  who  obviously  had  no  notion  of  it — 
11  at  this  period  appeared  to  Pierre  in  the  radiant  light  of  his  own  glow- 
lg  feeling;  so  that  on  meeting  any  one,  he  saw  in  him  without  the  slight- 
st  effort  everything  that  was  good  and  deserving  of  love. 

As  he  looked  through  his  dead  wife’s  papers  and  belongings,  he  had  no 
eeling  towards  her  memory  but  one  of  pity  that  she  had  not  known  the 
lappiness  he  knew  now.  Prince  Vassily,  who  was  particularly  haughty 
ist  them,  having  received  a  new  post  and  a  star,  struck  him  as  a  pathetic 
nd  kind-hearted  old  man,  very  much  to  be  pitied. 


io6o 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

Often  afterwards  Pierre  recalled  that  time  of  happy  insanity.  All  thi 
judgments  he  formed  of  men  and  circumstances  during  that  period  re 
mained  for  ever  true  to  him.  Far  from  renouncing  later  on  those  view 
of  men  and  things,  on  the  contrary,  in  inner  doubts  and  contradictions 
he  flew  back  to  the  view  he  had  had  during  that  time  of  madness;  am 
that  view  always  turned  out  to  be  a  true  one. 

‘Perhaps,’  he  thought,  ‘I  did  seem  strange  and  absurd  then;  but 
was  not  so  mad  then  as  I  seemed.  On  the  contrary,  I  was  cleverer  am 
had  more  insight  then  than  at  any  time,  and  I  understood  everything 
worth  understanding  in  life,  because  ...  I  was  happy.’ 

Pierre’s  madness  showed  itself  in  his  not  waiting,  as  in  old  days,  fo 
those  personal  grounds,  which  he  had  called  good  qualities  in  people,  ii 
order  to  love  them ;  but  as  love  was  brimming  over  in  his  heart  he  love< 
men  without  cause,  and  so  never  failed  to  discover  incontestable  reason: 
that  made  them  worth  loving. 


XX 

From  that  first  evening,  when  Natasha  had  said  to  Princess  Marya 
with  a  gaily  mocking  smile,  that  he  looked  exactly,  yes,  exactly,  as  i 
he  had  come  out  of  a  bath  with  his  short  jacket  and  his  cropped  hair— 
from  that  minute  something  hidden  and  unrecognised  by  herself,  ye1 
irresistible,  awakened  in  Natasha’s  soul. 

Everything — face,  gait,  eyes,  voice — everything  was  at  once  trans- 
formed  in  her.  To  her  own  surprise,  the  force  of  life  and  hopes  of  happi¬ 
ness  floated  to  the  surface  and  demanded  satisfaction.  From  that  firsiij 
evening  Natasha  seemed  to  have  forgotten  all  that  had  happened  to  her 
From  that  time  she  never  once  complained  of  her  position;  she  said  no 
one  word  about  the  past,  and  was  not  afraid  of  already  making  light 
hearted  plans  for  the  future.  She  spoke  little  of  Pierre;  but  when  Princes; 
Marya  mentioned  him,  a  light  that  had  long  been  dim  gleamed  in  hei 
eyes,  and  her  lips  curved  in  a  strange  smile. 

The  change  that  took  place  in  Natasha  at  first  surprised  -Princess 
Marya-  but  when  she  understood  what  it  meant,  that  change  mortified 
her.  ‘Can  she  have  loved  my  brother  so  little  that  she  can  so  soon  forget 
him?’  thought  Princess  Marya,  when  she  thought  over  it  alone.  But 
when  she  was  with  Natasha  she  was  not  vexed  with  her,  and  did  not 
blame  her.  The  awakened  force  of  life  that  had  regained  possession  ot 
Natasha  was  obviously  so  irresistible  and  so  unexpected  by  herself,  that 
in  Natasha’s  presence  Princess  Marya  felt  that  she  had  no  right  to  blame 
her  even  in  her  heart. 

Natasha  gave  herself  up  with  such  completeness  and  sincerity  to  her 
new  feeling  that  she  did  not  even  attempt  to  conceal  that  she  was  not  now 
sorrowful,  but  glad  and  happy. 

When  Princess  Marya  had  returned  to  her  room  that  night  after  her 
interview  with  Pierre,  Natasha  met  her  on  the  threshold. 


io6i 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

'He  has  spoken?  Yes?  He  has  spoken?’  she  repeated.  And  a  joyful, 
nd  at  the  same  time  piteous,  expression,  that  begged  forgiveness  for  its 
>y,  was  in  Natasha’s  face.  ‘I  wanted  to  listen  at  the  door;  but  I  knew 
ou  would  tell  me.’ 

Ready  as  Princess  Marya  was  to  understand  and  to  be  touched  by  the 
xpression  with  which  Natasha  looked  at  her,  and  much  as  she  felt  for 
er  agitation,  yet  her  words  for  the  first  moment  mortified  her.  She 
rought  of  her  brother  and  his  love. 

'But  what  is  one  to  do?  She  cannot  help  it,’  thought  Princess  Marya; 
nd  with  a  sad  and  somewhat  severe  face  she  repeated  to  Natasha  all 
’ierre  had  said  to  her.  Natasha  was  stupefied  to  hear  he  was  going  to 
’etersburg.  ‘To  Petersburg!’  she  repeated,  as  though  unable  to  take 

;  in. 

But  looking  at  the  mournful  expression  of  Princess  Marya’s  face  she 
Ivined  the  cause  of  her  sadness,  and  suddenly  burst  into  tears. 

‘Marie,’  she  said,  ‘tell  me  what  I  am  to  do.  I  am  afraid  of  being  horrid. 
Vhatever  you  say,  I  will  do;  tell  me  .  .  .’ 

‘You  love  him?’ 

‘Yes!’  whispered  Natasha. 

‘What  are  you  crying  for,  then?  I  am  very  glad  for  you,’  said  Prin- 
ess  Marya,  moved  by  those  tears  to  complete  forgiveness  of  Natasha’s 

oy. 

‘It  will  not  be  soon  .  .  .  some  day.  Only  think  how  happy  it  will  be 
vhen  I  am  his  wife  and  you  marry  Nikolay!’ 

‘Natasha,  I  have  begged  you  not  to  speak  of  that.  Let  us  talk  of  you.’ 

Both  were  silent. 

‘Only  why  go  to  Petersburg?’  cried  Natasha  suddenly,  and  she  hastened 
:o  answer  herself.  ‘No,  no;  it  must  be  so  .  .  .  Yes,  Marie?  It  must 


EPILOGUE 


PART  I 

I 

Seven  years  had  passed  by.  The  storm-tossed,  historic  ocean  of  Europe 
was  subsiding  within  its  shores.  It  seemed  to  have  grown  calm;  but  the 
mysterious  forces  moving  humanity  (mysterious,  because  the  laws  con¬ 
trolling  their  action  are  unknown  to  us)  were  still  at  work. 

Although  the  surface  of  the  ocean  of  history  seemed  motionless,  the 
movement  of  humanity  was  as  uninterrupted  as  the  flow  of  time.  Various 
series  cf  groups  of  men  were  joining  together  and  separating;  the  causes 
were  being  prepared  that  would  bring  about  the  formation  and  the  disso-: 
lution  of  empires  and  the  migrations  of  peoples. 

The  ocean  of  history  was  not  now,  as  before,  tossed  violently  from  one 
shore  to  the  other;  it  was  seething  in  its  depths.  Historical  figures  were 
not  dashing  abruptly  from  one  side  to  the  other;  now  they  seemed  to 
be  rotating  on  the  same  spot-.  The  historical  figures,  that  had  in  the  pre¬ 
ceding  years  at  the  head  of  armies  reflected  the  movement  of  the  masses,' 
commanding  wars,  and  marches,  and  battles,  now  reflected  that  move¬ 
ment  in  political  and  diplomatic  combinations,  statutes,  and  treaties. 

This  tendency  on  the  part  of  the  figures  of  history,  the  historians  call 
the  reaction. 

In  describing  the  part  played  by  these  historical  personages,  the  his¬ 
torians  criticise  them  severely,  supposing  them  to  be  the  cause  of  what 
they  call  the  reaction.  All  the  celebrated  persons  of  that  period,  from 
Alexander  and  Napoleon  to  Madame  de  Stael,  Foty,  Schelling,  Fichte, 
Chateaubriand,  and  so  on,  receive  the  severest  criticism  at  their  hands, 
and  are  acquitted  or  condemned  according  as  they  worked  for  progress  or 
for  reaction. 

In  Russia,  too,  so  they  tell  us,  a  reaction  was  taking  place  at  that 
period,  and  the  person  chiefly  to  blame  for  that  reaction  was  Alexander  i. 
— the  same  Alexander  who,  by  their  own  account,  was  chiefly  responsible 
for  the  liberal  movement  at  the  beginning  of  his  reign,  and  for  the  sav¬ 
ing  of  Russia. 

In  modern  Russian  literature  there  is  no  one,  from  the  schoolboy  essay 
writer  to  the  learned  historian,  who  would  not  throw  his  stone  at  Alex¬ 
ander  for  the  unprincipled  acts  of  this  later  period  of  his  reign. 

‘He  should  have  acted  in  such  and  such  a  way.  On  that  occasion  he 
acted  well,  and  on  that  other  he  acted  ill.  He  behaved  splendidly  in  the 

1062 


WAR  AND  P  E  A  C*  E  1063 

eginning  of  his  reign  and  during  1812;  but  he  did  ill  in  giving  a  con- 
;itution  to  Poland,  in  making  the  Holy  Alliance,  in  letting  Araktcheev 
ave  power,  in  encouraging  Golitsin  and  mysticism;  and  later  on,  in  en- 
Duraging  Shishkov,  and  Foty.  He  acted  wrongly  in  interfering  with  the 
rmy  on  active  service ;  he  acted  wrongly  in  cashiering  the  Semyonovsky 
jgiment,  and  so  on.’ 

One  might  cover  ten  pages  in  enumerating  all  the  faults  found  in  him 
y  the  historians,  on  the  assumption  that  they  possess  a  knowledge  of 
rhat  is  for  the  good  of  humanity. 

What  do  these  criticisms  mean  ? 

Do  not  the  very  actions  for  which  the  historians  applaud  Alexander  1., 
uch  as  the  liberalism  of  the  early  part  of  his  reign,  the  struggle  with 
Napoleon,  the  firmness  showm  in  1812,  and  the  campaign  of  1813,  pro- 
eed  from  those  very  sources — the  circumstances  of  birth  and  breeding 
nd  life  that  made  Alexander’s  personality  what  it  was — from  which 
•roceed  also  the  acts  for  which  he  is  censured  by  the  historians,  such  as 
he  Holy  Alliance,  the  restoration  of  Poland,  the  reaction  from  1820 
inward  ? 

What  is  the  substance  of  the  charge  brought  in  these  criticisms?  It 
is  a  charge  brought  against  an  historical  personage  standing  at  the  highest 
>ossible  pinnacle  of  human  power,  as  it  were,  in  the  focus  where  all  the 
ays  of  history  concentrated  their  blinding  light  upon  him ;  a  personage 
ubjected  to  the  strongest  influences  of  intrigue,  deceit,  flattery,  and  self-- 
leception,  inseparable  from  power;  a  personage  who  felt  himself  at  every 
noment  of  his  life  responsible  for  all  that  was  being  done  in  Europe; 
md  a  personage,  not  an  invented  character,  but  a  live  creature,  like  any 
>ther  man,  with  his  own  personal  idiosyncrasies,  and  passions  and 
mpulses  towards  goodness,  beauty,  and  truth.  And  the  charge  brought 
against  this  personage  is  not  that  he  was  not  virtuous  (the  historians 
lave  no  reproach  to  make  against  him  on  this  score),  but  that  he.  living 
lfty  years  ago,  had  not  the  same  views  as  to  the  good  of  humanity  a? 
;hose  held  to-day  by  a  professor  who  has,  from  his  youth  up,  been  en¬ 
gaged  in  study,  i.e.  in  reading  books,  listening  to  lectures,  and  making 
lotes  of  those  books  and  those  lectures  in  a  note-book. 

But  even  if  we  assume  that  Alexander  1.,  fifty  years  ago,  was  mistaken 
n  his  view  of  what  was  for  the  good  of  peoples,  we  can  hardly  help  assum- 
ng  that  the  historian,  criticising  Alexander,  will,  after  a  certain  lapse  of 
time,  prove  to  be  also  incorrect  in  his  view  of  what  is  for  the  good  of 
pumanity.  It  is  the  more  natural  and  inevitable  to  assume  this  because, 
watching  the  development  of  history,  we  see  that  with  every  year,  with 
jvery  new  writer,  the  view  of  what  is  for  the  good  of  humanity  is  some¬ 
what  shifted;  so  that  what  did  seem  good,  after  ten  years,  is  regarded 
as  harmful,  and  vice  versa.  That  is  not  all.  We  even  find  in  history  the 
views  of  contemporaries  as  to  what  was  good,  and  what  was  harmful, 
utterly  opposed  to  one  another.  Some  regard  the  giving  of  a  constitution 
to  Poland,  and  the  Holy  Alliance,  as  highly  to  the  credit  of  Alexander; 
while  others  regard  the  same  actions  as  a  slur  on  his  name. 


1064  WAR  AND  PEACE 

It  is  impossible  to  say  of  the  careers  of  Alexander  and  of  Napoleoi  I 
that  they  were  beneficial  or  harmful,  seeing  that  we  cannot  say  whereii 
the  benefit  or  harm  of  humanity  lies.  If  any  one  dislikes  the  career  o 
either,  he  only  dislikes  it  from  its  incompatibility  with  his  own  limite( 
conception  of  what  is  the  good  of  humanity.  Even  though  I  regard  a: 
good  the  preservation  of  my  father’s  house  in  Moscow  in  1812,  or  thi 
glory  of  the  Russian  army,  or  the  flourishing  of  the  Petersburg  or  sotru 
other  university,  or  the  independence  of  Poland,  or  the  supremacy  0 
Russia,  or  the  balance  of  European  power,  or  a  special  branch  of  Euro 
pean  enlightenment — progress — yet  I  am  bound  to  admit  that  the  activ¬ 
ity  of  any  historical  personage  had,  apart  from  such  ends,  other  ends  mon 
general  and  beyond  my  grasp. 

But  let  us  suppose  that  so-called  science  has  the  power  of  conciliating 
all  contradictions,  and  has  an  invariable  standard  of  good  and  bad  b> 
which  to  try  historical  personages  and  events. 

Let  us  suppose  that  Alexander  could  have  acted  quite  differently. 
Let  us  assume  that,  in  accordance  with  the  prescription  of  those  who  cen¬ 
sure  him,  and  who  profess  a  knowledge  of  the  final  end  of  the  movement 
of  humanity,  he  could  have  followed  that  programme  of  nationalism, 
of  freedom,  of  equality,  and  of  progress  (there  seems  to  be  no  other) 
which  his  modern  critics  would  have  selected  for  him.  Let  us  suppose 
that  programme  could  have  been  possible,  and  had  actually  been  formu¬ 
lated  at  that  time,  and  that  Alexander  could  have  acted  in  accordance 
with  it.  What,  then,  would  have  become  of  the  activity  of  all  the  persons 
who  were  opposing  the  tendency  of  the  government  of  that  day — of  the 
activity  which,  in  the  opinion  of  the  historians,  was  good  and  beneficial? 
There  would  have  been  none  of  that  activity;  there  would  have  been  no 
life;  there  would  have  been  nothing. 

Once  admit  that  human  life  can  be  guided  by  reason,  and  all  possibility 
of  life  is  annihilated. 

II 

If  one  admits,  as  historians  do,  that  great  men  lead  humanity  to  the 
attainment  of  certain  ends,  such  as  the  aggrandisement  of  Russia  or  of 
France,  or  the  balance  of  power,  or  the  diffusion  of  the  ideas  of  the  revolu¬ 
tion,  or  of  general  progress,  or  anything  else  you  like,  it  becomes  im¬ 
possible  to  explain  the  phenomena  of  history  apart  from  the  conceptions 
of  chance  and  genius. 

If  the  object  of  the  European  wars  of  the  beginning  of  this  century 
had  been  the  aggrandisement  of  Russia,  that  object  might  have  been  at¬ 
tained  without  any  of  the  preceding  wars,  and  without  invasion  of  foreign 
territory. 

If  the  object  were  the  aggrandisement  of  France,  that  aim  might  have 
been  attained  apart  from  the  revolution  and  the  empire.  If  the  object 
were  the  diffusion  of  ideas,  the  printing  of  books  would  have  attained 
that  object  much  more  effectually  than  soldiers.  If  the  object  were  the 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1065 

rog'.ess  of  civilisation,  one  may  very  readily  assume  that  there  are  other 
lore  effectual  means  of  diffusing  civilisation  than  the  slaughter  of  men 
nd  the  destruction  of  their  property. 

Why  did  it  come  to  pass  in  this  way  and  no  other?  Because  it  happened 
0.  ‘ Chance  created  the  position;  genius  took  advantage  of  it,’  says  his- 
ory. 

But  what  is  chancel  What  is  genius ? 

The  words  chance  and  genius  mean  nothing  actually  existing,  and  so 
annot  be  defined.  These  words  merely  denote  a  certain  stage  in  the 
omprehension  of  phenomena.  I  do  not  know  how  some  phenomenon  is 
irought  about;  I  believe  that  I  cannot  know;  consequently  1  do  not 
rant  to  know  and  talk  of  chance.  I  see  a  force  producing  an  effect  out  of 
iroportion  with  the  average  effect  of  human  powers;  I  do  not  under- 
tand  how  this  is  brought  about,  and  I  talk  about  genius. 

To  a  flock  of  sheep  the  sheep  who  is  every  evening  driven  by  the 
hepherd  into  a  special  pen  to  feed,  and  becomes  twice  as  fat  as  the  rest,, 
nust  seem  to  be  a  genius.  And  the  circumstance  that  every  evening  that 
heep  does  not  come  into  the  common  fold,  but  into  a  special  pen  full  of 
>ats,  and  that  that  same  sheep  grows  fat  and  is  killed  for  mutton,  must 
iresent  itself  to  the  minds  of  the  other  sheep  as  a  singular  conjunction 
if  genius  with  a  whole  series  of  exceptional  chances. 

But  the  sheep  need  only  cease  to  assume  that  all  that  is  done  to  them 
s  with  a  view  to  the  attainment  of  their  sheepish  ends;  they  need  only 
idmit  that  the  events  that  occur  to  them  may  have  ends  beyond  their 
cen,  and  they  will  at  once  see  a  unity  and  a  coherence  in  what  happens 
tvith  the  fatted  sheep.  Even  though  they  will  not  know  for  what  end  he 
is  fattened,  at  least  they  will  know  that  all  that  happens  to  him  does  not 
happen  by  chance,  and  they  will  have  no  need  to  resort  to  the  conception 
of  chance,  nor  to  the  conception  of  genius. 

It  is  only  by  renouncing  all  claims  to  knowledge  of  an  immediate 
comprehensible  aim,  and  acknowledging  the  final  aim  to  be  beyond  our 
ken,  that  we  see  a  consistent  whole  in  the  life  of  historical  persons.  The 
cause  is  then  revealed  to  us  of  that  effect  produced  by  them  out  of  pro¬ 
portion  with  the  common  powers  of  humanity,  and  we  have  no  need  of 
the  words  chance  and  genius. 

We  have  only  to  admit  that  the  object  of  the  convulsions  of  the  Euro¬ 
pean  nations  is  beyond  our  knowledge,  and  that  we  know  only  the  facts, 
consisting  mainly  of  murders  committed  at  first  in  France,  then  in  Italy, 
then  in  Africa,  in  Prussia,  in  Austria,  in  Spain,  and  in  Russia,  and  that 
the  movements  from  west  to  east  and  from  east  to  west  constitute  the 
essence  and  end  of  those  events,  and  we  shall  not  need  to  see  something 
exceptional — genius — in  the  characters  of  Napoleon  and  of  Alexander, 
and  shall  indeed  be  unable  to  conceive  of  those  persons  as  being  in  any 
way  different  from  everybody  else.  And  far  from  having  to  explain  as 
chance  those  petty  events,  which  made  those  men  what  they  were,  it 
will  be  clear  to  us  that  all  those  petty  details  were  inevitable. 

When  we  give  up  all  claim  to  a  knowledge  of  the  final  end,  we  shall 


io66 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

clearly  perceive  that  just  as  we  cannot  invent  any  flower  or  seed  moi  : 
truly  appropriate  to  a  plant  than  those  it  produces,  so  we  cannot  imagirl } 
any  two  persons,  with  all  their  past  in  such  complete  congruity,  down  1 
the  smallest  details,  with  the  part  they  were  destined  to  play. 


Ill 

The  underlying  essentially  significant  feature  of  the  European  events  o 
the  beginning  of  the  present  century  is  the  military  movement  of  masse 
of  European  peoples  from  west  to  east,  and  again  from  east  to  wesl 
The  original  movement  was  that  from  west  to  east.  That  the  peoples  o 
the  west  might  be  able  to  accomplish  the  military  march  upon  Moscow 
which  they  did  accomplish,  it  was  essential  (i)  that  they  should  h 
combined  in  a  military  group  of  such  a  magnitude  as  to  be  able  to  with 
stand  the  resistance  of  the  military  group  of  the  east  5(2)  that  they  shouk 
have  renounced  all  their  established  traditions  and  habits;  and  (3)  tha 
they  should  have  at  their  head  a  man  able  to  justify  in  his  own  name  anc 
theirs  the  perpetration  of  all  the  deception,  robbery,  and  murder  tha 
accompany  that  movement. 

And  to  start  from  the  French  Revolution,  that  old  group  of  insufficient 
magnitude  is  broken  up;  the  old  habits  and  traditions  are  destroyed;  step 
by  step  a  group  is  elaborated  of  new  dimensions,  new  habits,  and  new  tra¬ 
ditions;  and  the  man  is  prepared,  who  is  to  stand  at  the  head  of  the  com¬ 
ing  movement,  and  to  take  upon  himself  the  whole  responsibility  of  what 
has  to  be  done. 

A  man  of  no  convictions,  no  habits,  no  traditions,  no  name,  not  even  a 
Frenchman,  by  the  strangest  freaks  of  chance,  as  it  seems,  rises  above 
the  seething  parties  of  France,  and  without  attaching  himself  to  any  one 
of  them,  advances  to  a  prominent  position. 

The  incompetence  of  his  colleagues,  the  weakness  and  insignificance 
of  his  opponents,  the  frankness  of  the  deception,  and  the  dazzling  and 
self-confident  limitation  of  the  man  raise  him  to  the  head  of  the  army. 
The  brilliant  personal  qualities  of  the  soldiers  of  the  Italian  army,  the 
disinclination  to  fight  of  his  opponents,  and  his  childish  insolence  and 
conceit  gain  him  military  glory.  Innumerable  so-called  chance  circum¬ 
stances  attend  him  everywhere.  The  disfavour  into  which  he  falls  with 
the  French  Directorate  turns  to  his  advantage.  His  efforts  to  avoid  the 
path  ordained  for  him  are  unsuccessful;  he  is  not  received  into  the 
Russian  army,  and  his  projects  in  Turkey  come  to  nothing. 

During  the  wars  in  Italy  he  was  several  times  on  the  verge  of  destruc¬ 
tion,  and  was  every  time  saved  in  an  unexpected  fashion.  The  Russian 
troops — the  very  troops  which  were  able  to  demolish  his  glory — owing 
to  various  diplomatic  considerations,  do  not  enter  Europe  until  he  is 
there. 

On  his  return  from  Italy,  he  finds  the  government  in  Paris  in  that 
process  of  dissolution  in  which  all  men  who  are  in  the  government  are 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1067 

:evitably  effaced  and  nullified.  And  an  escape  for  him  from  that  peril- 
is  position  offers  itself  in  the  shape  of  an  aimless,  groundless  expedition 
Africa.  Again  the  same  so-called  chance  circumstances  accompany 
Jm.  Malta,  the  impregnable,  surrenders  without  a  shot  being  fired;  the 
lost  ill-considered  measures  are  crowned  with  success.  The  enemy’s 
ret,  which  later  on  does  not  let  one  boat  escape  it,  now  lets  a  whole  army 
ude  it.  In  Africa  a  whole  series  of  outrages  is  perpetuated  on  the  almost 
narmed  inhabitants.  And  the  men  perpetrating  these  atrocities,  and 
reir  leader  most  of  all,  persuade  themselves  that  it  is  noble,  it  is  glory, 
tat  it  is  like  Ccesar  and  Alexander  of  Macedon,  and  that  it  is  fine. 

That  ideal  of  glory  and  of  greatness,  consisting  in  esteeming  nothing 
i  e  does  wrong,  .and  glorying  in  every  crime,  and  ascribing  to  it  an  in- 
•  mprehensible,  supernatural  value — that  ideal,  destined  to  guide  this 
an  and  those  connected  with  him,  is  elaborated  on  a  grand  scale  in 
,'rica.  Whatever  he  does  succeeds.  The  plague  does  not  touch  him.  The 
(iielty  of  murdering  his  prisoners  is  not  remembered  against  him.  His 

<  ildishly  imprudent,  groundless,  and  ignoble  departure  from  Africa, 
aandoning  his  comrades  in  misfortune,  does  him  good  service;  and  again 
1e  enemy’s  fleet  lets  him  twice  slip  through  their  hands.  At  the  moment 
men,  completely  intoxicated  by  the  success  of  his  crimes  and  ready  for  the 
1  rt  he  has  to  play,  he  arrives  in  Paris  entirely  without  any  plan,  the 
(integration  of  the  Republican  government,  which  might  have  involved 
1m  in  its  ruin  a  year  before,  has  now  reached  its  utmost  limit,  and  his 
tesence,  a  man  independent  of  parties,  can  now  only  aid  his  elevation. 

He  has  no  sort  of  plan ;  he  is  afraid  of  everything;  but  all  parties  clutch 
;  him  and  insist  on  his  support. 

He  alone — with  the  ideal  of  glory  and  greatness  he  has  acquired  in 
lily  and  Egypt,  with  his  frenzy  of  self-adoration,  with  his  insolence  in 

<  me,  and  his  frankness  in  mendacity — he  alone  can  justify  what  has  to 
1  accomplished. 

He  is  needed  for  the  place  that  awaits  him,  and  so,  almost  apart  from 
Is  own  volition,  and  in  spite  of  his  uncertainty,  the  lack  of  plan,  and 
1e  blunders  he  commits,  he  is  drawn  into  a  conspiracy  that  aims  at  seiz- 
ig  power;  and  that  conspiracy  is  crowned  with  success. 

He  is  dragged  into  the  assembly  of  the  rulers.  In  alarm  he  tries  to  flee, 
Uieving  himself  in  danger;  pretends  to  faint,  says  the  most  senseless 
tings  that  should  have  been  his  ruin.  But  the  rulers  of  France,  once 
foud  and  discerning,  now  feeling  their  part  is  over,  are  even  more  panic- 
sicken  than  he,  and  fail  to  utter  the  words  they  should  have  pronounced 
t  preserve  their  power  and  crush  him. 

Chance,  millions  of  chances,  give  him  power;  and  all  men,  as  though  in 
hgue  together,  combine  to  confirm  that  power.  Chance  circumstances 
Kate  the  characters  of  the  rulers  of  France,  who  cringe  before  him; 
lance  creates  the  character  of  Paul  1.,  who  acknowledges  his  authority; 
iance  causes  the  plot  against  him  to  strengthen  his  power  instead  of 
taking  it.  Chance  throws  the  Due  d’Enghien  into  his  hands  and  acci- 
<ntally  impels  him  to  kill  him,  thereby  convincing  the  crowd  by  the 


io6S 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

strongest  of  all  arguments  that  he  has  the  right  on  his  side  since  he  1 , 
the  might.  Chance  brings  it  to  pass  that  though  he  strains  every  ner 
to  fit  out  an  expedition  against  England,  which  would  unmistakal 
have  led  to  his  ruin,  he  never  puts  this  project  into  execution,  and  ha 
pens  to  fall  upon  Mack  with  the  Austrians,  who  surrender  without 
battle.  Chance  and  genius  give  him  the  victory  at  Austerlitz;  and 
chance  it  comes  to  pass  that  all  men,  not  only  the  French,  but  all  t 
countries  of  Europe  except  England,  which  takes  no  part  in  the  ever 
that  are  to  be  accomplished,  forget  their  old  horror  and  aversion,  for  1 
crimes,  and  now  recognise  the  power  he  has  gained  by  them,  acknowled 
the  title  he  has  bestowed  upon  himself,  and  accept  his  ideal  of  greatne 
and  glory,  which  seems  to  every  one  something  fine  and  rational. 

As  though  practising  and  preparing  themselves  for  the  great  moveme 
before  them,  the  forces  of  the  west  made  several  dashes — in  1805,  18c 
1807  and  1809 — into  the  east,  growing  stronger  and  more  numeroi 
In  18 1 1  a  group  of  men  formed  in  France  is  joined  by  an  enormous  groi, 
from  the  peoples  of  Central  Europe.  As  the  numbers  of  the  great  ma 
increase,  the  power  of  justification  of  the  man  at  the  head  of  the  mov 
ment  gathers  more  and  more  force.  During  the  ten  years  of  the  prepar 
tory  period  preceding  the  great  movement,  this  man  forms  relations  wi 
all  the  crowned  heads  of  Europe.  The  sovereigns  of  the  world,  strippi 
bare  by  him,  can  oppose  no  rational  ideal  to  the  senseless  Napoleor 
ideal  of  glory  and  greatness.  They  vie  with  one  another  in  demonstratii 
to  him  their  insignificance.  The  King  of  Prussia  sends  his  wife  to  sue  f 
the  good  graces  of  the  great  man;  the  Emperor  of  Austria  considers  it 
favour  for  this  man  to  take  the  daughter  of  the  Kaisers  to  his  bed.  T1 
Pope,  the  guardian  of  the  faith  of  the  peoples,  uses  religion  to  aid  til 
great  man’s  elevation.  Napoleon  does  not  so  much  prepare  himself  f 
the  part  he  is  to  play  as  all  around  him  lead  him  on  to  take  upon  himsf 
the  responsibility  of  what  is  being  done  and  is  to  be  done.  There  is  no  a( 
no  crime,  no  petty  deceit  which  he  would  not  commit,  and  which  wou 
not  be  at  once  represented  on  the  lips  of  those  about  him  as  a  great  dee 
The  most  suitable  fete  the  Germans  could  think  of  in  his  honour  was  tl| 
celebration  of  Jena  and  Auerstadt.  Not  only  is  he  great;  his  forefather 
his  brothers,  his  step-children,  and  his  brothers-in-law  are  great  to 
Everything  is  done  to  deprive  him  of  the  last  glimmering  of  reason,  ar 
to  prepare  him  for  his  terrible  part.  And  when  he  is  ready,  his  forces  tc 
are  in  readiness. 

The  invading  army  flows  towards  the  east  and  Reaches  its  final  goa 
Moscow.  The  ancient  city  is  taken;  the  Russian  army  suffers  greati 
losses  than  were  ever  suffered  by  the  opposing  armies  in  the  previous  waj 
from  Austerlitz  to  Wagram.  But  all  at  once,  instead  of  that  chance  ar 
genius,  which  had  so  consistently  led  him  hitherto  by  an  uninterrupta 
series  of  successes  to  his  destined  goal,  an  immense  number  of  chant 
circumstances  occur  of  an  opposite  kind  from  the  cold  caught  at  Borodir 
to  the  spark  that  fired  Moscow';  and  instead  of  genius  there  was  show 
a  folly  and  baseness  unexampled  in  history. 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1069 

The  invading  army  flees  away,  turns  back  and  flees  again;  and  all  the 
tances  now  are  consistently  not  for  but  against  him. 

Then  there  follows  the  opposing  movement  from  east  to  west,  with  a 
markable  similarity  to  the  eastward  movement  from  the  west  that  had 
feceded  it.  There  were  similar  tentative  movements  westward  as  had 
i  1805, 1807  and  1809  preceded  the  great  eastward  movement.  There  was 
tj  same  cohesion  together  of  all  into  one  group  of  immense  numbers; 
t;  same  adherence  of  the  peoples  of  Central  Europe  to  the  movement ; 
te  same  hesitation  midway,  and  the  same  increased  velocity  as  the  goal 
Vis  approached. 

Paris,  the  furthest  goal,  was  reached.  Napoleon’s  government  and 
:nies  are  shattered.  Napoleon  himself  is  of  no  further  consequence;  all 
b  actions  are  obviously  paltry  and  mean;  but  again  inexplicable  chance 
tmes  in.  The  allies  detest  Napoleon,  in  whom  they  see  the  cause  of  all 
jfeir  troubles.  Stripped  of  his  power  and  his  might,  convicted  of  frauds 
;d  villainies,  he  should  have  been  seen  by  them  as  he  had  been  ten  years 
Ifore,  and  was  a  year  later — a  brigand  outside  the  pale  of  the  law.  But  by 
me  strange  freak  of  chance  no  one  sees  it.  Plis  part  is  not  yet  played  out. 
be  man  who  ten  years  back,  and  one  year  later,  was  looked  on  as  a 
1  screant  outside  the  law,  was  sent  by  them  to  an  island  two  days’  journey 
fom  France,  given  to  him  as  his  domain,  with  guards  and  millions  of 
nney,  as  though  to  pay  him  for  some  service  he  had  done. 


IV 

he  commotion  among  the  peoples  begins  to  subside.  The  waves  of  the 
;eat  tempest  begin  to  abate,  and  eddies  begin  to  be  formed  about  the 
.lmer  surface  where  diplomatists  are  busy,  fancying  the  calm  is  their 

ork. 

But  all  at  once  the  quiet  sea  is  convulsed  again.  The  diplomatists 
iiagine  that  they,  their  disagreements,  are  the  cause  of  this  fresh  dis¬ 
tance;  they  look  for  wars  between  their  sovereigns;  the  position  seems 
■soluble.  But  the  storm  they  feel  brewing  does  not  come  from  the  quarter 
iere  they  look  for  it.  It  rises  again  from  the  same  starting  point — Paris, 
be  last  backwash  of  the  westward  movement  follows — the  backwash 
"rich  was  to  solve  the  seemingly  inextricable  diplomatic  difficulties,  and 
put  an  end  to  the  military  unrest  of  the  period. 

■  The  man  who  has  devastated  France  comes  back  to  France  alone, 

■  th  no  project,  and  no  soldiers.  Any  policeman  can  arrest  him;  but  by 
.strange  freak  of  chance  no  one  does  seize  him,  but  all  meet  with  en- 
'usiasm  the  man  they  have  been  cursing  but  a  day  before,  and  will  curse 
rain  within  a  month. 

That  man  is  needed  for  the  last  act  winding  up  the  drama. 

I  The  act  is  performed. 

The  last  part  is  played.  The  actor  is  bidden  to  undress,  and  wash  off 
s  powder  and  paint;  he  will  be  needed  no  more. 


1070  WAR  AND  PEACE 

And  for  several  years  this  man,  in  solitude  on  his  island,  plays  his  pitifu 
farce  to  himself,  intrigues  and  lies,  justifying  his  conduct  when  a  justifica 
tion  is  no  longer  needed,  and  shows  all  the  world  what  the  thing  was  me 
took  for  power  when  an  unseen  hand  guided  it. 

The  stage  manager,  when  the  drama  was  over,  and  the  puppet  strippec 
showed  him  to  us. 

‘Look  what  you  believed  in!  Here  he  is!  Do  you  see  now  that  it  wa 
not  he  but  I  that  moved  you.’ 

But  blinded  by  the  force  of  the  movement  men  for  long  could  no 
perceive  that. 

Even  more  coherence  and  inevitability  is  to  be  seen  in  the  life  of  Alex 
ander  i.,  the  personage  who  stood  at  the  head  of  the  counter-movemen 
from  east  westward. 

What  was  needed  for  the  man  who,  to  the  exclusion  of  others,  shouli 
stand  at  the  head  of  that  movement  from  the  east  westward? 

There  was  needed  a  sense  of  justice,  an  interest  in  the  affairs  of  Europe 
but  a  remote  one,  not  obscured  by  petty  interests,  a  moral  pre-eminenc 
over  his  peers — the  sovereigns  of  the  time;  there  was  needed  a  gentle  am 
■attractive  personel  character;  there  was  needed  too  a  personal  grievanc 
against  Napoleon.  And  all  that  is  to  be  seen  in  Alexander  i. ;  it  was  all  pre 
pared  beforehand  by  the  innumerable  so-called  chance  circumstance 
of  his  previous  life,  by  his  education  and  the  liberalism  of  the  beginnim 
of  his  reign,  and  the  counsellors  around,  and  Austerlitz,  and  Tilsit,  am 
Erfurt 

During  the  war  in  defence  of  the  country  this  personage  is  inactive 
he  is  not  needed.  But  as  soon  as  a  general  European  war  becomes  inevij 
table,  at  the  given  moment,  he  is  in  his  place,  and  bringing  the  Europeai 
peoples  together  he  leads  them  to  the  goal. 

The  goal  is  reached.  After  the  last  war  of  1815  Alexander  finds  himsel 
at  the  highest  possible  pinnacle  of  human  power.  How  does  he  use  it? 

While  Napolean  in  his  exile  was  drawing  up  childish  and  lying  scheme; 
of  the  blessings  he  would  have  showered  on  humanity  if  he  had  ha( 
the  power,  Alexander,  the  pacificator  of  Europe,  the  man  who,  from  hi; 
youth  up,  had  striven  for  nothing  but  the  good  of  the  people,  the  firs 
champion  of  liberal  reforms  in  his  country,  now  when  he  seemed  to  pos 
sess  the  greatest  possible  power,  and  consequent  possibility  of  doinj 
good  to  his  people,  felt  his  work  was  done,  and  God’s  hand  was  laid  upor 
him,  and  recognising  the  nothingness  of  that  semblance  of  power,  turner 
from  it,  gave  it  up  to  despicable  men,  and  men  he  despised,  and  coulr 
only  say: 

‘Not  to  us,  not  to  us,  but  to  Thy  Name!  I  too  am  a  man  like  all  of  you 
let  me  live  like  a  man,  and  think  of  my  soul  and  of  God.’ 

Just  as  the  sun  and  every  atom  of  ether  is  a  sphere  complete  in  itself 
and  at  the  same  time  is  only  a  part  of  a  whole  inconceivable  to  mar 
through  its  vastness,  so  every  individuality  bears  within  it  its  own  ends 
and  yet  bears  them  so  as  to  serve  general  ends  unfathomable  by  man. 

A  bee  settling  on  a  flower  has  stung  a  child.  And  the  child  dreads  bees 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1071 

jd  says  the  object  of  the  bee  is  to  sting  people.  A  poet  admires  the  bee, 
s>ping  honey  from  the  cup  of  the  flower,  and  says  the  object  of  the  bee 
i  to  sip  the  nectar  of  the  flower.  A  beekeeper,  noticing  that  the  bee 
others  pollen  and  brings  it  to  the  hive,  says  that  the  object  of  the  bee  is 
t  gather  honey.  Another  beekeeper,  who  has  studied  the  life  of  the 
5  arm  more  closely,  says  the  bee  gathers  honey  to  feed  the  young  ones, 
cd  to  rear  a  queen,  that  the  object  of  the  bee  is  the  perpetuation  of  its 
ice.  The  botanist  observes  that  the  bee  flying  with  the  pollen  fertilises 
te  pistil,  and  in  this  he  sees  the  object  of  the  bee.  Another,  watching  the 
1  bridisation  of  plants,  sees  that  the  bee  contributes  to  that  end  also,  and 
1  may  say  that  the  bee’s  object  is  that.  But  the  final  aim  of  the  bee  is 
it  exhausted  by  one  or  another,  or  a  third  aim,  which  the  human  intel- 
l:t  is  capable  of  discovering.  The  higher  the  human  intellect  rises  in  the 
recovery  of  such  aims,  the  more  obvious  it  becomes  that  the  final  aim  is 
lyond  its  reach. 

All  that  is  within  the  reach  of  man  is  the  observation  of  the  analogy 
(  the  life  of  the  bee  with  other  manifestations  of  life.  And  the  same  is 
Ue  with  the  final  aims  of  historical  persons  and  of  nations. 


V 

Iatasha’s  marriage  to  Bezuhov,  which  took  place  in  1813,  was  the  last 
ippy  event  in  the  family  of  the  old  Rostovs.  Count  Ilya  Andreivitch 
ced  the  same  year;  and  as  is  always  the  case,  with  the  death  of  the 
Ither  the  family  was  broken  up. 

The  events  of  the  previous  year:  the  burning  of  Moscow  and  the  flight 
bm  that  city;  the  death  of  Prince  Andrey  and  Natasha’s  despair;  the 
path  of  Petya  and  the  grief  of  the  countess  fell  like  one  blow  after  an¬ 
ther  on  the  old  count’s  head.  He  seemed  not  to  understand,  and  to  feel 
lmself  incapable  of  understanding,  the  significance  of  all  these  events, 
:d  figuratively  speaking,  bowed  his  old  head  to  the  storm,  as  though 
tpecting  and  seeking  fresh  blows  to  make  an  end  of  him.  By  turns  he 
semed  scared  and  distraught,  and  then  unnaturally  lively  and  active. 
Natasha’s  marriage  for  a  time  occupied  him  on  its  external  side.  He 
iranged  dinners  and  suppers  in  honour  of  it,  and  obviously  tried  to  be 
ieerful;  but  his  cheerfulness  was  not  infectious  as  in  old  days,  but,  on 
te  contrary,  aroused  the  commiseration  of  those  who  knew  and  liked  him. 
After  Pierre  and  his  wife  had  left,  he  collapsed  and  began  to  complain 
1  depression.  A  few  days  later  he  fell  ill  and  took  to  his  bed.  In  spite  of  the 
•Actor’s  assurances,  he  knew  from  the  first  days  of  his  illness  that  he 
ould  never  get  up  again.  For  a  whole  fortnight  the  countess  sat  in  a  low 
iair  by  his  pillow,  never  taking  off  her  clothes.  Every  time  she  gave  him 
s  medicine,  he  mutely  kissed  her  hand,  weeping.  On  the  last  day,  sob- 
ng,  he  begged  forgiveness  of  his  wife,  and  of  his  absent  son,  too,  for 
juandering  their  property,  the  chief  sin  that  lay  on  his  conscience, 
jfter  receiving  absolution  and  the  last  unction,  he  quietly  died;  and  next 


1072  WAR  AND  PEACE 

day  a  crowd  of  acquaintances,  come  to  pay  the  last  debt  of  respect  to  t 
deceased,  filled  the  Rostovs’  hired  lodgings.  All  those  acquaintances,  w 
had  so  often  dined  and  danced  in  his  house,  and  had  so  often  laughed 
his  expense,  were  saying  now  with  the  same  inward  feeling  of  contriti 
and  self-reproach,  as  though  seeking  to  justify  themselves:  ‘Yes,  wh; 
ever  he  may  have  been,  he  was  a  splendid  man.  One  doesn’t  meet  su 
men  nowadays  .  .  .  And  who  has  not  his  weaknesses?  .  .  .’ 

It  was  precisely  when  the  count’s  fortunes  were  so  irretrievably  ei 
broiled  that  he  could  not  conceive  how,  in  another  year,  it  would  ei> 
that  he  suddenly  died. 

Nikolay  was  with  the  Russian  army  in  Paris  when  the  news  of  1 
father’s  death  reached  him.  He  at  once  applied  for  his  discharge,  ai 
without  waiting  for  it,  obtained  leave  and  went  to  Moscow.  Within 
month  after  the  count’s  death  the  financial  position  had  been  made  pc 
fectly  clear,  astounding  every  one  by  the  immense  sum  of  various  pet 
debts,  the  existence  of  which  no  one  had  suspected.  The  debts  were  mo 
than  double  the  assets  of  the  estate. 

The  friends  and  relations  advised  Nikolay  to  refuse  to  accept  his  i 
heritance.  But  Nikolay  looked  on  such  a  refusal  as  a  slur  on  the  honoun 
memory  of  his  father;  and  so  he  would  not  hear  of  such  a  course,  a: 
accepted  the  inheritance  with  the  obligation  of  paying  the  debts. 

The  creditors,  who  had  so  long  been  silent,  held  in  check  during  tlj 
old  count’s  lifetime  by  the  vague  but  powerful  influence  of  his  ea: 
good-nature,  all  beset  Nikolay  at  once.  There  seemed,  as  so  often  ha 
pens,  a  sort  of  rivalry  among  them,  which  should  get  paid  first;  and  tlj 
very  people,  such  as  Mitenka  and  others,  who  held  promissory  note 
not  received  in  discharge  of  debts,  but  as  presents,  were  now  the  mo. 
importunate  of  the  creditors.  They  would  give  Nikolay  no  peace  ar 
no  respite,  and  those  who  had  shown  pity  for  the  old  man,  who  was  r 
sponsible  for  their  losses  (if  they  really  had  lost  money  by  him),  we 
now  ruthless  in  their  persecution  of  the  young  heir,  who  was  obvious] 
guiltless  as  far  as  they  were  concerned,  and  had  voluntarily  undertake 
to  pay  them. 

Not  one  of  the  plans  that  Nikolay  resorted  to  was  successful:  tl 
estate  was  sold  by  auction  at  half  its  value,  and  half  the  debts  remainc 
still  unpaid.  Nikolay  accepted  a  loan  of  thirty  thousand  roubles  offere 
him  by  his  brother-in-law  Bezuhov;  and  paid  that  portion  of  the  deb 
that  he  recognized  as  genuine  obligations.  And  to  avoid  being  thrown  ini 
prison  for  the  remainder,  as  the  creditors  threatened,  he  once  more  entere 
the  government  service. 

To  return  to  the  army,  where  at  the  next  promotion  he  would  have  bee 
colonel,  was  out  of  the  question,  because  his  mother  now  clung  to  hi 
son  as  her  one  hold  on  life.  And  so  in  spite  of  his  disinclination  to  remai 
in  Moscow,  in  the  midst  of  a  circle  of  acquaintances  who  had  know 
him  in  former  days,  in  spite  of  his  distaste  for  the  civil  serv’Te,  he  ai 
cepted  a  civilian  post  in  Moscow,  and  taking  off  his  beloved  uniforn 


VV  A  K  AND  PEACE  1073 

(tablished  himself  in  a  little  lodging  in  Sivtsevoy  Vrazhok  with  his 
Dther  and  Sonya. 

Natasha  and  Pierre  were  living  at  this  period  in  Petersburg,  and  had 
i'  very  distinct  idea  of  Nikolay’s  position.  After  having  borrowed  money 
pm  his  brother-in-law,  Nikolay  did  his  utmost  to  conceal  his  poverty- 
ricken  position  from  him.  His  situation  was  rendered  the  more  difficult, 
;  with  his  twelve  hundred  roubles  of  salary  he  had  not  only  to  keep 
Inself,  Sonya,  and  his  mother,  but  to  keep  his  mother  in  such  a  way  that 
re  would  not  be  sensible  of  their  poverty.  The  countess  could  not  con- 
(ive  of  life  being  possible  without  the  luxurious  surroundings  to  which 
se  had  been  accustomed  from  her  childhood;  and  without  any  idea  of 
:s  being  difficult  for  her  son,  she  was  continually  insisting  on  having 
;  carriage,  which  they  had  not,  to  send  for  a  friend,  or  an  expensive 
i‘licacy  for  herself,  or  wine  for  her  son,  or  money  to  buy  a  present,  as 
.surprise  for  Natasha,  for  Sonya,  or  for  Nikolay  himself. 

Sonya  kept  house,  waited  on  her  aunt,  read  aloud  to  her,  bore  with 
■r  caprices  and  her  secret  dislike,  and  helped  Nikolay  to  conceal  from 
e  old  countess  their  poverty-stricken  position.  Nikolay  felt  himself 
ider  a  debt  of  gratitude  to  Sonya  that  he  could  never  repay,  for  all  she 
d  for  his  mother;  he  admired  her  patience  and  devotion,  but  he  tried 
keep  himself  aloof  from  her. 

In  his  heart  he  seemed  to  feel  a  sort  of  grudge  against  her  for  being 
0  perfect,  and  for  there  being  no  fault  to  find  with  her.  She  had  all  the 
>od  qualities  for  which  people  are  valued,  but  little  of  what  would  have 
ade  him  love  her.  And  he  felt  that  the  more  he  valued  her  the  less  he 
ved  her.  He  had  taken  her  at  her  wrord  when  she  had  written  to  him 
ving  him  his  freedom,  and  now  he  behaved  with  her  as  though  what  had 
issed  between  them  had  been  long,  long  ago  forgotten,  and  could  never 
ider  any  circumstances  be  renewed. 

Nikolay’s  position  was  becoming  worse  and  v/orse.  His  hope  of  laying 
y  something  out  of  his  salary  proved  to  be  an  idle  dream.  Far  from  sav- 
g  anything,  he  wae  even  running  up  some  small  debts  to  satisfy  his 
other’s  exigencies.  There  seemed  no  means  of  escape  from  his  position, 
he  idea  of  marrying  a  rich  heiress,  which  his  female  relatives  suggested, 
as  repulsive  to  him.  The  only  other  solution  of  his  difficulties — the  death 
’  his  mother — never  entered  his  head.  He  desired  nothing,  and  hoped 
ir  nothing;  and  at  the  bottom  of  his  heart  he  took  a  stern  and  gloomy 
ttisfaction  in  the  unrepining  endurance  of  his  position.  He  tried  to  avoid 
s  old  acquaintances,  with  their  commiseration  and  their  mortifying 
'fers  of  assistance;  shunned  every  sort  of  entertainment  and  amusement; 
id  even  at  home  did  nothing  but  play  patience  with  his  mother,  pace 
lently  about  the  room,  and  smoke  pipe  after  pipe.  He  seemed  studiously 
>  maintain  in  himself  that  gloomy  temper,  which  alone  enabled  him  to. 
2ar  his  position. 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


1074 


VI 

At  the  beginning  of  the  winter  Princess  Marya  arrived  in  Moscow.  Froi 
the  gossip  of  the  town  she  heard  of  the  position  of  the  Rostovs,  and  ( 
how  ‘the  son  was  sacrificing  himself  for  his  mother,’  as  the  gossips  sail 
It  is  just  what  I  expected  of  him,’  Princess  Marya  said  to  herself,  findin 
in  it  a  delightful  confirmation  of  her  love  for  him.  Remembering  her  int 
mate  relations  with  the  whole  family — almost  as  one  of  themselves — sh 
thought  it  her  duty  to  call  on  them.  But  thinking  of  her  relations  wit 
Nikolay  in  Voronezh,  she  was  afraid  of  doing  so.  A  few  weeks  after  k 
arrival  in  Moscow,  she  did,  however,  make  an  effort,  and  went  to  see  th 
Rostovs. 

Nikolay  was  the  first  to  meet  her,  since  it  was  impossible  to  reach  tl 
countess’s  room  without  passing  through  his  room.  Instead  of  the  e> 
pression  of  delight  Princess  Marya  had  expected  to  see  on  his  face  e 
the  first  glance  at  her,  he  met  her  with  a  look  of  chilliness,  stiffness,  an 
pride  that  she  had  never  seen  before.  Nikolay  inquired  after  her  healtl 
conducted  her  to  his  mother,  and,  after  staying  five  minutes,  went  out  c 
the  room. 

When  Princess  Marya  left  the  countess,  Nikolay  again  met  her,  an 
with  marked  formality  and  stiffness  led  her  to  the  hall.  He  made  no  repl 
to  her  remarks  about  the  countess’s  health.  ‘What  is  it  to  you?  Leave  m! 
in  peace,’  his  expression  seemed  to  say. 

‘And  why  should  she  stroll  in  here?  What  does  she  want?  I  can’t  er 
dure  these  ladies  and  all  these  civilities!’  he  said  aloud  before  Sony;1 
obviously  unable  to  restrain  his  vexation,  after  the  princess’s  carriag 
had  rolled  away  from  the  house. 

‘Oh,  how  can  you  talk  like  that,  Nicolas’  said  Sonya,  hardly  able  t 
conceal  her  delight.  ‘She  is  so  kind,  and  maman  is  so  fond  of  her.’ 

Nikolay  made  no  reply,  and  would  have  liked  to  say  no  more  aboi 
Princess  Marya.  But  after  her  visit  the  old  countess  talked  about  he 
several  times  every  day. 

She  sang  her  praises;  insisted  that  her  son  should  go  and  see  her;  e> 
pressed  a  wish  to  see  more  of  her;  and  yet  was  always  out  of  tempe 
when  she  had  been  talking  of  her. 

Nikolay  tried  to  say  nothing  when  his  mother  talked  of  Princes 
Marya,  but  his  silence  irritated  her. 

‘She  is  a  very  good  and  conscientious  girl,’  she  would  say,  ‘and  yo 
must  go  and  call  on  her.  Anyway,  you  will  see  some  one;  and  it  is  du; 
for  you,  I  expect,  with  us.’ 

‘But  I  don’t  at  all  wish  to,  mamma.’ 

‘Why,  you  wanted  to  see  people  and  now  you  don’t  wish  it.  I  really  don: 
understand  you,  my  dear.  At  one  minute  you  are  dull,  and  the  nex 
you  suddenly  don’t  care  to  see  any  one.’ 

‘Why,  I  never  said  I  was  dull.’ 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


1075 

‘Why,  you  said  yourself  you  did  not  even  wish  to  see  her.  She  is  a  very 
pod  girl,  and  you  always  liked  her;  and  now  all  of  a  sudden  you  have 
sne  reasons  or  other.  Everything  is  kept  a  secret  from  me.’ 

‘Not  at  all,  mamma.’ 

‘If  I  were  to  beg  you  to  do  something  unpleasant,  but  as  it  is,  I  simply 
lg  you  to  drive  over  and  return  her  call.  Why,  civility  demands  it,  I 
could  suppose  ...  I  have  begged  you  to  do  so,  and  now  I  will  meddle 
1  further  since  you  have  secrets  from  your  mother.’ 

‘But  I  will  go,  if  you  wish  it.’ 

‘It’s  nothing  to  me ;  it’s  for  your  sake  I  wish  it.’ 

Nikolay  sighed,  and  bit  his  moustache,  and  dealt  the  cards,  trying  to 
(aw  his  mother’s  attention  to  another  subject. 

Next  day,  and  the  third,  and  the  fourth,  the  same  conversation  was 
ipeated  again  and  again. 

After  her  visit  to  the  Rostovs,  and  the  unexpectedly  cold  reception 
:e  had  met  with  from  Nikolay,  Princess  Marya  acknowledged  to  herself 
•,at  she  had  been  right  in  not  wanting  to  be  the  first  to  call. 

‘It  was  just  what  I  expected,’  she  said  to  herself,  summoning  her 
]  ide  to  her  aid.  ‘I  have  no  concern  with  him,  and  I  only  wanted  to  see 
e  old  lady,  who  was  always  kind  to  me,  and  to  whom  I  am  under 
oligations  for  many  things.’ 

But  she  could  not  tranquillise  herself  with  these  reflections:  a  feeling 
,:in  to  remorse  fretted  her,  when  she  thought  of  her  visit.  Although  she 
as  firmly  resolved  not  to  call  again  on  the  Rostovs,  and  to  forget  all 
aout  it,  she  was  continually  feeling  herself  in  an  undefined  position, 
nd  when  she  asked  herself  what  it  was  that  worried  her,  she  was  obliged 
admit  that  it  was  her  relation  to  Rostov.  His  cold,  ceremonious  tone 
d  not  proceed  from  his  feeling  for  her  (of  that  she  was  convinced); 
;t  that  tone  covered  something.  What  that  something  was,  she  wanted 
1  see  clearly,  and  till  then  she  felt  that  she  could  not  be  at  peace. 

In  the  middle  of  the  winter  she  was  sitting  in  the  schoolroom,  super¬ 
sing  her  nephew’s  lessons,  when  the  servant  announced  that  Rostov 
as  below.  With  the  firm  determination  not  to  betray  her  secret,  and  not 
'  manifest  any  embarrassment,  she  summoned  Mademoiselle  Bourienne, 
id  with  her  went  into  the  drawing-room. 

At  the  first  glance  at  Nikolay’s  face,  she  saw  that  he  had  come  merely 
1  perform  the  obligations  of  civility,  and  she  determined  to  keep  to  the 
>ne  he  adopted  towards  her. 

They  talked  of  the  health  of  the  countess,  of  common  acquaintances, 
”  the  latest  news  of  the  war,  and  when  the  ten  minutes  required  by 
ropriety  had  elapsed,  Nikolay  got  up  to  say  good-bye. 

With  the  aid  of  Mademoiselle  Bourienne,  Frincess  Marya  had  kept 
o  the  conversation  very  well.  But  at  the  very  last  moment,  just  when  he 
'as  getting  up,  she  was  so  weary  of  talking  of  what  did  not  interest  her, 
ad  she  was  so  absorbed  in  wondering  why  to  her  alone  so  little  joy  had 
een  vouchsafed  in  life,  that  in  a  fit  of  abstraction,  she  sat  motionless. 


1076  WAR  AND  PEACE 

gazing  straight  before  her  with  her  luminous  eyes,  and  not  noticing  th 
he  was  getting  up. 

Nikoiay  looked  at  her,  and  anxious  to  appear  not  to  notice  her  a 
straction,  he  said  a  few  words  to  Mademoiselle  Bourienne,  and  aga 
glanced  at  the  princess.  She  was  sitting  in  the  same  immovable  pose,  ai 
there  was  a  look  of  suffering  on  her  soft  face.  He  felt  suddenly  sorry  f 
her,  and  vaguely  conscious  that  he  might  be  the  cause  of  the  sadness  1 
saw  in  her  face.  He  longed  to  help  her,  to  say  something  pleasant  to  he 
but  he  could  not  think  what  to  say  to  her. 

‘Good-bye,  princess,’  he  said.  She  started,  flushed,  and  sighed  heavil 

‘Oh,  I  beg  your  pardon,’  she  said,  as  though  waking  from  sleep.  ‘Ye 
are  going  already,  count;  well,  good-bye!  Oh,  the  cushion  for  tl 
countess?’ 

‘Wait  a  minute,  I  will  fetch  it,’  said  Mademoiselle  Bourienne,  and  si 
left  the  room. 

They  were  both  silent,  glancing  at  each  other  now  and  then. 

‘Yes,  princess,’  said  Nikolay  at  last,  with  a  mournful  smile,  ‘it  seen 
not  long  ago,  but  how  much  has  happened  since  the  first  time  we  met ; 
Bogutcharovo.  We  all  seemed  in  such  trouble  then,  but  I  would  give 
great  deal  to  have  that  time  back  .  .  .  and  there’s  no  bringing  it  back 

Princess  Marya  was  looking  intently  at  him  with  her  luminous  eyes, ;! 
he  said  that.  She  seemed  trying  to  divine  the  secret  import  of  his  word 
which  would  make  clear  his  feeling  towards  her. 

‘Yes,  yes,’  she  said,  ‘but  you  have  no  need  to  regret  the  past,  coun; 
As  I  conceive  of  your  life  now,  you  will  always  think  of  it  with  sati: 
faction,  because  the  self-sacrifice  in  which  you  are  now  .  .  .’ 

‘I  cannot  accept  your  praises,’  he  interrupted  hurriedly;  ‘on  the  coi 
trary,  I  am  always  reproaching  myself;  but  it  is  an  uninteresting  an 
cheerless  subject.’ 

And  again  the  stiff  and  cold  expression  came  back  into  his  face.  Bi 
Princess  Marya  saw  in  him  again  now  the  man  she  had  known  and  lovet 
and  it  was  to  that  man  only  she  was  speaking  now. 

‘I  thought  you  would  allow  me  to  say  that,’  she  said.  ‘I  have  been  sue 
intimate  friends  with  you  .  .  .  and  with  your  family,  and  I  thought  yo 
would  not  feel  my  sympathy  intrusive;  but  I  made  a  mistake,’  she  saic 
Her  voice  suddenly  shook.  ‘I  don’t  know  why,’  she  went  on,  recoverin' 
herself,  ‘you  used  to  be  different,  and  .  .  .’ 

‘There  are  thousands  of  reasons  why’  (He  laid  special  stress  on  th 
word  why.)  ‘I  thank  you,  princess,’  he  added  softly.  ‘It  is  sometime 
hard  .  .  .’ 

‘So  that  is  why!  That  is  why!’  an  inner  voice  was  saying  in  Princes 
Marya ’s  soul.  ‘Yes,  it  was  not  only  that  gay,  kind,  and  frank  gaze,  nc 
only  that  handsome  exterior  I  loved  in  him;  I  divined  his  noble,  firir 
and  self-sacrificing  soul,’  she  said  to  herself. 

‘Yes,  he  is  poor  now,  and  I  am  rich  .  .  .  Yes,  it  is  only  that  .  . 
Yes,  if  it  were  not  for  that  .  .  .’  And  recalling  all  his  former  tenderness 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1077 

al  looking  now  at  his  kind  and  sad  face,  she  suddenly  understood  the 
r<son  of  his  coldness. 

Why,  count,  why?’  she  almost  cried  all  at  once,  involuntarily  moving 
nirer  to  him.  ‘Why,  do  tell  me.  You  must  tell  me.’  He  was  mute.  ‘I  do 
n.  know,  count,  your  why’  she  went  on.  ‘But  I  am  sad,  I  ...  I  will 
on  that  to  you.  You  mean  for  some  reason  to  deprive  me  of  our  old 
fnndship.  And  that  hurts  me.’  There  were  tears  in  her  eyes  and  in  her 
vce.  ‘I  have  had  so  little  happiness  in  my  life  that  every  loss  is  hard 
fi  me  .  .  .  Excuse  me,  good-bye,’  she  suddenly  burst  into  tears,  and 
vs  going  out  of  the  room. 

Princess!  stay,  for  God’s  sake,’  he  cried,  trying  to  stop  her.  ‘Princess!’ 

She  looked  round.  For  a  few  seconds  they  gazed  mutely  in  each  other’s 
e;s,  and  the  remote  and  impossible  became  all  at  once  close  at  hand, 
pssible  and  inevitable. 


VII 

1  the  autumn  of  1813,  Nikolay  married  Princess  Marya,  and  with  his 
\fe,  and  mother,  and  Sonya,  took  up  his  abode  at  Bleak  Hills. 

Within  four  years  he  had  paid  off  the  remainder  of  his  debts  without 
i  ling  his  wife’s  estates,  and  coming  into  a  small  legacy  on  the  death  of 
cousin,  he  repaid  the  loan  he  had  borrowed  from  Pierre  also. 

In  another  three  years,  by  1820,  Nikolay  had  so  well  managed  his 
jcuniary  affairs  that  he  was  able  to  buy  a  small  estate  adjoining  Bleak 
lills,  and  was  opening  negotiations  for  the  repurchase  of  his  ancestral 
itate  of  Otradnoe,  which  was  his  cherished  dream. 

Though  he  took  up  the  management  of  the  land  at  first  from  necessity, 
i:  soon  acquired  such  a  passion  for  agriculture,  that  it  became  his 
jtvourite  and  almost  his  exclusive  interest.  Nikolay  was  a  plain  farmer, 
no  did  not  like  innovations,  especially  English  ones,  just  then  coming 
to  vogue,  laughed  at  all  theoretical  treatises  on  agriculture,  did  not  care 
r  factories,  for  raising  expensive  produce,  or  for  expensive  imported 
ed.  He  did  not,  in  fact,  make  a  hobby  of  any  one  part  of  the  work,  but 
ipt  the  welfare  of  the  estate  as  a  whole  always  before  his  eyes.  The 
iject  most  prominent  to  his  mind  in  the  estate  was  not  the  azote  nor  the 
,:ygen  in  the  soil  or  the  atmosphere,  not  a  particular  plough  nor  manure, 
it  the  principal  agent  by  means  of  which  the  azote  and  the  oxygen  and 
e  plough  and  the  manure  were  all  made  effectual — that  is,  the  labourer, 
e  peasant.  When  Nikolay  took  up  the  management  of  the  land,  and 
:gan  to  go  into  its  different  branches,  the  peasant  attracted  his  chief 
tention.  He  looked  on  the  peasant,  not  merely  as  a  tool,  but  also  as  an 
id  in  himself,  and  as  his  critic.  At  first  he  studied  the  peasant  attentively, 
ying  to  understand  what  he  wanted,  what  he  thought  good  and  bad; 
id  he  only  made  a  pretence  of  making  arrangements  and  giving  orders, 
hile  he  was  in  reality  learning  from  the  peasants  their  methods  and 


1078  WAR  AND  PEACE 

their  language  and  their  views  of  what  was  good  and  bad.  And  it  w,  . 
only  when  he  understood  the  tastes  and  impulses  of  the  peasant,  when 
had  learned  to  speak  his  speech  and  to  grasp  the  hidden  meaning  behi 
his  words,  when  he  felt  himself  in  alliance  with  him,  that  he  began  bole 
to  direct  him — to  perform,  that  is,  towards  him  the  office  expected  ■' 
him.  And  Nikolay’s  management  produced  the  most  brilliant  resul 

On  taking  over  the  control  of  the  property,  Nikolay  had  at  once 
some  unerring  gift  of  insight  appointed  as  bailiff,  as  village  elder,  and 
delegate  the  very  men  whom  the  peasants  would  have  elected  themselvi 
had  the  choice  been  in  their  hands,  and  the  authority  once  given  the 
was  never  withdrawn.  Before  investigating  the  chemical  constituents 
manure,  or  going  into  ‘debit  and  credit’  (as  he  liked  sarcastically  to  c; 
book-keeping),  he  found  out  the  number  of  cattle  the  peasants  possesse 
and  did  his  utmost  to  increase  the  number.  He  kept  the  peasants’  famili 
together  on  a  large  scale,  and  would  not  allow  them  to  split  up  into  sep 
rate  households.  The  indolent,  the  dissolute,  and  the  feeble  he  was  equal 
hard  upon  and  tried  to  expel  them  from  the  community.  At  the  sowii 
and  the  carrying  of  the  hay  and  corn,  he  watched  over  his  own  and  ti  i 
peasants’  fields  with  absolutely  equal  care.  And  few  landowners  had  fieli 
so  early  and  so  well  sown  and  cut,  and  few  had  such  crops  as  Nikola 

He  did  not  like  to  have  anything  to  do  with  the  house-serfs,  he  calif 
them  parasites,  and  everybody  said  that  he  demoralised  and  spoiled  therl 
When  any  order  had  to  be  given  in  regard  to  a  house-serf,  especial' 
when  one  had  to  be  punished,  he  was  always  in  a  state  of  indecision  ar 
asked  advice  of  every  one  in  the  house.  But  whenever  it  was  possible  i 
send  a  house-serf  for  a  soldier  in  place  of  a  peasant,  he  did  so  withot 
the  smallest  compunction.  In  all  his  dealings  with  the  peasants,  he  nevi 
experienced  the  slightest  hesitation.  Every  order  he  gave  would,  he  kne\ 
be  approved  by  the  greater  majority  of  them. 

He  never  allowed  himself  either  to  punish  a  man  by  adding  to  h 
burdens,  or  to  reward  him  by  lightening  his  tasks  simply  at  the  promp 
ing  of  his  own  wishes.  He  could  not  have  said  what  his  standard  was  <j 
what  he  ought  and  ought  not  to  do ;  but  there  was  a  standard  firm  an 
rigid  in  his  soul. 

Often  talking  of  some  failure  or  irregularity,  he  would  complain  c 
‘our  Russian  peasantry,’  and  he  imagined  that  he  could  not  bear  tb 
peasants. 

But  with  his  whole  soul  he  did  really  love  ‘cur  Russian  peasantry,’  an 
their  ways;  and  it  was  through  that  he  had  perceived  and  adopted  tb 
only  method  of  managing  the  land  which  could  be  productive  of  goo 
results. 

Countess  Marya  was  jealous  of  this  passion  of  her  husband’s  for  agri 
culture,  and  regretted  she  could  not  share  it.  But  she  was  unable  t 
comprehend  the  joys  and  disappointments  he  met  with  in  that  world  apar 
that  was  so  alien  to  her.  She  could  not  understand  why  he  used  to  be  s 
particularly  eager  and  happy  when  after  getting  up  at  dawn  and  spendin 
the  whole  morning  in  the  fields  or  the  threshing-floor  he  came  back  t 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1079 

ti  with  her  from  the  sowing,  the  mowing,  or  the  harvest.  She  could  not 
iderstand  why  he  was  so  delighted  when  he  told  her  with  enthusiasm  of 
te  well-to-do,  thrifty  peasant  Matvey  Ermishin,  who  had  been  up  all 
right  with  his  family,  carting  his  sheaves,  and  had  all  harvested  when  no 
ce  else  had  begun  carrying.  She  could  not  understand  why,  stepping  out 
c  the  window  on  to  the  balcony,  he  smiled  under  his  moustaches  and 
inked  so  gleefully  when  a  warm,  fine  rain  began  to  fall  on  his  young  oats 
vat  were  suffering  from  the  drought,  or  why,  when  a  menacing  cloud  blew 
cer  in  mowing  or  harvest  time,  he  would  come  in  from  the  barn  red, 
snburnt,  and  perspiring,  Moth  the  smell  of  wormwood  in  his  hair,  and 
i.bbing  his  hands  joyfully  would  say:  ‘Come,  another  day  of  this  and  my 
]t,  and  the  peasants’  too,  will  all  be  in  the  barn.’ 

j  Still  less  could  she  understand  how  it  was  that  with  his  good  heart 
iid  everlasting  readiness  to  anticipate  her  wishes,  he  would  be  thrown 
anost  into  despair  when  she  brought  him  petitions  from  peasants  or 
eir  wives  who  had  appealed  to  her  to  be  let  off  tasks,  why  it  was  that 
>,  her  good-natured  Nikolay,  obstinately  refused  her,  angrily  begging 
r  not  to  meddle  in  his  business.  She  felt  that  he  had  a  world  apart, 
at  was  intensely  dear  to  him,  governed  by  laws  of  its  own  which  she  did 
)t  understand. 

Sometimes  trying  to  understand  him  she  would  talk  to  him  of  the  good 
ark  he  was  doing  in  striving  for  the  good  of  his  serfs;  but  at  this  he  was 
jigry  and  answered:  ‘Not  in  the  least;  it  never  even  entered  my  head; 
id  for  their  good  I  would  not  lift  my  little  finger.  That’s  all  romantic 
insense  and  old  wives’  cackle — all  that  doing  good  to  one’s  neighbour, 
don’t  want  our  children  to  be  beggars;  I  want  to  build  up  our  fortunes 
my  lifetime;  that  is  all.  And  to  do  that  one  must  have  discipline,  one 
ust  have  strictness  ...  So  there!’  he  would  declare,  clenching  his 
inguine  fist.  ‘And  justice  too — of  course,’  he  would  add,  ‘because  if  the 
easant  is  naked  and  hungry,  and  has  but  one  poor  horse,  he  can  do  no 
jod  for  himself  or  me.’ 

And  doubtless  because  Nikolay  did  not  allow  himself  to  entertain  the 
lea  that  he  was  doing  anything  for  the  sake  of  others,  or  for  the  sake 
i  virtue,  everything  he  did  was  fruitful.  His  fortune  rapidly  increased; 
le  neighbouring  serfs  came  to  beg  him  to  purchase  them,  and  long  after 
is  death  the  peasantry  preserved  a  reverent  memory  of  his  rule.  ‘He  was 
master  .  .  .  The  peasants’  welfare  first  and  then  his  own.  And  to  be 
ire  he  would  make  no  abatements.  A  real  good  master — that’s  what 
e  was!  ’ 


VIII 

'he  one  thing  that  sometimes  troubled  Nikolay  in  his  government  of  his 
.erfs  was  his  hasty  temper  and  his  old  habit,  acquired  in  the  hussars,  of 
oaking  free  use  of  his  fists.  At  first  he  saw  nothing  blameworthy  in  this, 
mt  in  the  second  year  of  his  married  life  his  views  on  that  form  of  cor- 
,ection  underwent  a  sudden  change. 


io8o 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

One  summer  day  he  had  sent  for  the  village  elder  who  had  taken  con¬ 
trol  at  Bogutcharovo  on  the  death  of  Dron.  The  man  was  accused  of 
various  acts  of  fraud  and  neglect.  Nikolay  went  out  to  the  steps  to  see 
him,  and  at  the  first  answers  the  village  elder  made,  shouts  and  blows 
were  heard  in  the  hall.  On  going  back  indoors  to  lunch,  Nikolay  went  up 
to  his  wife,  who  was  sitting  with  her  head  bent  low  over  her  embroidery 
frame,  and  began  telling  her,  as  he  always  did,  everything  that  had  inter¬ 
ested  him  during  the  morning,  and  among  other  things  about  the  Bogut¬ 
charovo  elder.  Countess  Marya,  turning  red  and  pale  and  setting  her  lips, 
sat  in  the  same  pose,  making  no  reply  to  her  husband. 

‘The  insolent  rascal,’  he  said,  getting  hot  at  the  mere  recollection. 
‘Well,  he  should  have  told  me  he  was  drunk,  he  did  not  see  .  .  .  Why, 
what  is  it,  Marie?’  he  asked  all  at  once. 

Countess  Marya  raised  her  head,  tried  to  say  something,  but  hurriedly 
looked  down  again,  trying  to  control  her  lips. 

‘What  is  it?  What  is  wrong,  my  darling?  .  .  .’  His  plain  wife  always 
looked  her  best  when  she  was  in  tears.  She  never  wept  for  pain  or  anger, 
but  always  from  sadness  and  pity.  And  when  she  wept  her  luminous  eyes 
gained  an  indescribable  charm. 

As  soon  as  Nikolay  took  her  by  the  hand,  she  was  unable  to  restrain 
herself,  and  burst  into  tears. 

‘Nikolay,  I  saw  .  .  .  he  was  in  fault,  but  you,  why  did  you!  Nikolay!’ 
and  she  hid  her  face  in  her  hands. 

.  Nikolay  did  not  speak ;  he  flushed  crimson,  and  walking  away  from  her, 
began  pacing  up  and  down  in  silence.  He  knew  what  she  was  crying 
about,  but  he  could  not  all  at  once  agree  with  her  in  his  heart  that  what 
he  had  been  used  to  from  childhood,  'what  he  looked  upon  as  a  matter 
of  course,  was  wrong.  ‘It’s  sentimental  nonsense,  old  wives’  cackle — or  is 
she  right?’  he  said  to  himself.  Unable  to  decide  that  question,  he  glanced 
once  more  at  her  suffering  and  loving  face,  and  all  at  once  he  felt  that  she 
was  right,  and  that  he  had  known  himself  to  be  in  fault  a  long  time 
before. 

‘Marie,’  he  said  softly,  going  up  to  her:  ‘it  shall  never  happen  again; 
I  give  you  my  word.  Never,’  he  repeated  in  a  shaking  voice  like  a  boy 
begging  for  forgiveness. 

The  tears  flowed  faster  from  his  wife’s  eyes.  She  took  his  hand  and 
kissed  it. 

‘Nikolay,  when  did  you  break  your  cameo?’  she  said  to  change  the 
•subject,  as  she  scrutinised  the  finger  on  which  he  wore  a  ring  with  a 
cameo  of  Laocoon. 

‘To-day;  it  was  all  the  same  thing.  O  Marie,  don’t  remind  me  of  it!’ 
He  flushed  again.  ‘I  give  you  my  word  of  honour  that  it  shall  never 
happen  again.  And  let  this  be  a  reminder  to  me  for  ever,’  he  said,  pointing 
to  the  broken  ring. 

From  that  time  forward,  whenever  in  interviews  with  his  village  elders 
and  foremen  he  felt  the  blood  rush  to  his  face  and  his  fists  began  to  clench, 
Nikolay  turned  the  ring  round  on  his  finger  and  dropped  his  eyes  before 


io8i 


WAR  AND  PEACE 
the  man  who  angered  him.  Twice  a  year,  however,  he  would  forget  him¬ 
self,  and  then,  going  to  his  wife,  he  confessed,  and  again  promised  that 
this  would  really  be  the  last  time. 

‘Marie,  you  must  despise  me,’  he. said  to  her.  ‘I  deserve  it.’ 

‘You  must  run  away,  make  haste  and  run  away  if  you  feel  yourself 
unable  to  control  yourself,’  his  wife  said  mournfully,  trying  to  com¬ 
fort  him. 

In  the  society  of  the  nobility  of  the  province  Nikolay  was  respected 
but  not  liked.  The  local  politics  of  the  nobility  did  not  interest  him.  And 
in  consequence  he  was  looked  upon  by  some  people  as  proud  and  by 
others  as  a  fool.  In  summer  his  whole  time  from  the  spring  sowing  to  the 
harvest  was  spent  in  looking  after  the  land.  In  the  autumn  he  gave 
himself  up  with  the  same  business-like  seriousness  to  hunting,  going  out 
for  a  month  or  two  at  a  time  with  his  huntsmen,  dogs,  and  horses  on 
hunting  expeditions.  In  the  winter  he  visited  their  other  properties  and 
spent  his  time  in  reading,  chiefly  historical  books,  on  which  he  spent  a 
certain  sum  regularly  every  year.  He  was  forming  for  himself,  as  he  used 
to  say,  a  serious  library,  and  he  made  it  a  principle  to  read  through  every 
book  he  bought.  He  would  sit  over  his  book  in  his  study  with  an  im¬ 
portant  air;  and  what  he  had  at  first  undertaken  as  a  duty  became  an 
habitual  pursuit,  which  afforded  him  a  special  sort  of  gratification  in  the 
feeling  that  he  was  engaged  in  serious  study.  Except  when  he  went  on 
business  to  visit  their  other  estates,  he  spent  the  winter  at  home  with  his 
family,  entering  into  all  the  petty  cares  and  interests  of  the  mother  and 
children.  With  his  wife  he  got  on  better  and  better,  every  day  discovering 
fresh  spiritual  treasures  in  her. 

From  the  time  of  Nikolay’s  marriage  Sonya  had  lived  in  his  house. 
Before  their  marriage,  Nikolay  had  told  his  wife  all  that  had  passed 
between  him  and  Sonya,  blaming  himself  and  praising  her  conduct.  He 
begged  Princess  Marya  to  be  kind  and  affectionate  to  his  cousin.  His  wife 
was  fully  sensible  of  the  wrong  her  husband  had  done  his  cousin;  she  felt 
herself  too  guilty  toward  Sonya;  she  fancied  her  wealth  had  influenced 
Nikolay  in  his  choice,  could  find  no  fault  in  Sonya,  and  wished  to  love  her. 
But  she  could  not  like  her,  and  often  found  evil  feelings  in  her  soul  in 
regard  to  her,  which  she  could  not  overcome. 

One  day  she  was  talking  with  her  friend  Natasha  of  Sonya  and  her 
own  injustice  towards  her. 

‘Do  you  know  what,’  said  Natasha;  ‘you  have  read  the  Gospel  a  great 
deal;  there  is  a  passage  there  that  applies  exactly  to  Sonya.’ 

‘What  is  it?’  Countess  Marya  asked  in  surprise. 

‘  “To  him  that  hath  shall  be  given,  and  to  him  that  hath  not  shall  be 
taken  even  that  that  he  hath,”  do  you  remember?  She  is  the  one  that  hath 
not;  why,  I  don’t  know;  perhaps  she  has  no  egoism.  I  don’t  know;  but 
from  her  is  taken  away,  and  everything  has  been  taken  away.  I  am  some¬ 
times  awfully  sorry  for  her.  I  used  in  old  days  to  want  Nikolay  to  marry 
her  but  I  always  had  a  sort  of  presentiment  that  it  would  not  happen.  She 
is  a  barren  flower,  you  know,  like  what  one  finds  among  the  strawberry 


1082 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

flowers.  Sometimes  I  am  sorry  for  her,  and  sometimes  I  think  she  d(! 
not  feel  it  as  we  should  have  felt  it.’ 

And  although  Countess  Marya  argued  with  Natasha  that  those  wod 
of  the  Gospel  must  not  be  taken  in  that  sense,  looking  at  Sonya,  s 
agreed  with  the  explanation  given  by  Natasha.  It  did  seem  really 
though  Sonya  did  not  feel  her  position  irksome,  and  was  quite  reconjcil 
to  her  fate  as  a  barren  floiver.  She  seemed  to  be  fond  not  so  much  ; 
people  as  of  the  whole  family.  Like  a  cat,  she  had  attached  herself  n 
to  persons  but  to  the  house.  She  waited  on  the  old  countess,  petted  ai 
spoiled  the  children,  was  always  ready  to  perform  small  services,  whl 
she  seemed  particularly  clever  at;  but  all  she  did  was  unconscious 
taken  for  granted,  without  much  gratitude.  .  .  . 

The  Bleak  Hills  house  had  been  built  up  again,  but  not  on  the  san 
scale  as  under  the  old  prince. 

The  buildings,  begun  in  days  of  straitened  means,  were  more  the 
simple.  The  immense  mansion  on  the  old  stone  foundation  was  of  woo 
plastered  only  on  the  inside.  The  great  rambling  house,  with  its  unstaine 
plank  floors,  was  furnished  with  the  simplest  rough  sofas  and  chairs  anl 
tables  made  of  their  own  birch-trees  by  the  labour  of  their  serf  carpenter 
The  house  was  very  roomy,  with  quarters  for  the  house-serfs  and  accon 
modation  for  visitors. 

The  relations  of  the  Rostovs  and  the  Bolkonskys  would  sometime 
come  on  visits  to  Bleak  Hills  with  their  families,  sixteen  horses  an 
dozens  of  servants,  and  stay  for  months.  And  four  times  a  year — on  th( 
namedays  and  birthdays  of  the  master  and  mistress — as  many  as  a  hur 
dred  visitors  would  be  put  up  for  a  day  or  two.  The  rest  of  the  year  thj 
regular  life  of  the  household  went  on  in  unbroken  routine,  with  its  roun 
of  duties,  and  of  teas,  breakfasts,  dinners,  and  suppers,  all  provided  ou 
of  home-grown  produce. 


IX 

It  was  on  the  eve  of  St.  Nikolay’s  day,  the  5th  of  December,  1820.  Tha 
year  Natasha  with  her  husband  and  children  had  been  staying  at  Bleal 
Hills  since  the  beginning  of  autumn.  Pierre  was  in  Petersburg,  where  hi 
had  gone  on  private  business  of  his  own,  as  he  said,  for  three  weeks.  Hi 
had  already  been  away  for  six,  and  was  expected  home  every  minute 
On  this  5th  of  December  there  was  also  staying  with  the  Rostovs 
Nikolay’s  old  friend,  the  general  on  half-pay,  Vassily  Fedorovitcl 
Denisov. 

Next  day  visitors  were  coming  in  celebration  of  his  nameday,  ancj 
Nikolay  knew  that  he  would  have  to  take  off  his  loose  Tatar  coat,  to  pul 
on  a  frock  coat,  and  narrow  boots  with  pointed  toes,  and  to  go  to  the  nevr 
church  he  had  built,  and  there  to  receive  congratulations,  and  to  offei 
refreshments  to  his  guests,  and  to  talk  about  the  provincial  elections  anc 
the  year’s  crops.  But  the  day  before  he  considered  he  had  a  right  to  spenc 
as  usual.  Before  dinner-time  Nikolay  had  gone  over  the  bailiff’s  account: 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1083 

■in  the  Ryazan  estate,  the  property  of  his  wife’s  nephew;  written  two 
oness  letters,  and  walked  through  the  corn  barns,  the  cattleyard,  and 
1  stables.  After  taking  measures  against  the  general  drunkenness  he 
sected  next  day  among  his  peasants  in  honour  of  the  fete,  he  came  in 
dinner,  without  having  had  a  moment’s  conversation  alone  with  his 
i>  all  day.  He  sat  down  to  a  long  table  laid  with  twenty  covers,  at. 
rich  all  the  household  were  assembled,  consisting  of  his  mother,  old 
Idame  Byelov,  who  lived  with  her  as  a  companion,  his  wife  and  three 
bdren,  their  governess  and  tutor,  his  wife’s  nephew  with  his  tutor, 
cya,  Denisov,  Natasha,  her  three  children,  their  governess,  and  Mihail 
mitch,  the  old  prince’s  architect,  who  was  living  out  his  old  age  in 
ice  at  Bleak  Hills. 

lountess  Marya  was  sitting  at  the  opposite  end  of  the  table.  As  soon 
sier  husband  sat  down  to  the  table,  from  the  gesture  with  which  he 
nk  up  his  table-napkin  and  quickly  pushed  back  the  tumbler  and  wine- 
hs  set  at  his  place,  she  knew  that  he  was  out  of  humour,  as  he  some- 
ies  was,  particularly  before  the  soup,  and  when  he  came  straight  in  to 
iner  from  his  work.  Countess  Marya  understood  this  mood  in  her  hus- 
;d  very  well,  and  when  she  was  herself  in  a  good  temper,  she  used  to 
?  t  quietly  till  he  had  swallowed  his  soup,  and  only  then  began  to  talk 
:iim  and  to  make  him  admit  that  he  had  no  reason  to  be  out  of  temper. 
Ijt  to-day  she  totally  forgot  this  principle  of  hers;  she  had  a  miserable 
Ese  of  his  being  vexed  with  her  without  cause,  and  she  felt  wretched. 

1  asked  him  where  he  had  been.  He  answered.  She  asked  again  whether 
vlrything  were  going  well  on  the  estate.  He  frowned  disagreeably  at  her 
natural  tone,  and  made  a  hasty  reply. 

I  was  right  then,’  thought  Countess  Marya,  ‘and  what  is  he  cross  with 

i  for?’  In  the  tone  of  his  answer  she  read  ill-will  towards  her  and  a 
(ire  to  cut  short  the  conversation.  She  felt  that  her  words  were  un- 
;ural;  but  she  could  not  restrain  herself,  and  asked  a  few  more 
istions. 

"he  conversation  at  dinner,  thanks  to  Denisov,  soon  became  general 

ii  animated,  and  she  did  not  say  more  to  her  husband.  When  they  rose 
rn  table,  and  according  to  custom  came  up  to  thank  the  old  countess, 
iintess  Marya  kissed  her  husband,  offering  him  her  hand,  and  asked 
ry  he  was  cross  with  her. 

irou  always  have  such  strange  ideas;  I  never  thought  of  being  cross,’ 
(said. 

lut  that  word  always  answered  her:  Yes,  I  am  angry,  and  I  don’t 
!  ose  to  say. 

Nikolay  lived  on  such  excellent  terms  with  his  wife  that  even  Sonya 

I I  the  old  countess,  who  from  jealousy  would  have  been  pleased  to  see 
1  agreement  between  them,  could  find  nothing  to  reproach  them  with; 
)  there  were  moments  of  antagonism  even  between  them.  Sometimes, 
rticularly  just  after  their  happiest  periods,  they  had  a  sudden  feeling 
) estrangement  and  antagonism;  that  feeling  was  most  frequent  during 


10S4  WAR  AND  PEACE 

the  times  when  Countess  Marya  was  with  child.  They  happened  ted 
just  now  at  such  a  period  of  antagonism. 

‘Well,  messieurs  et  mesdames,’  said  Nikolay  loudly,  and  with  a  slaj 
of  cheerfulness  (it  seemed  to  his  wife  that  this  was  on  purpose  to  mor.y 
her),  T  have  been  since  six  o’clock  on  my  legs.  To-morrow  will  ben 
infliction,  so  to-day  I’ll  go  and  rest.’  And  saying  nothing  more  to  Coun  ,s 
Marya,  he  went  off  to  the  little  divan-room,  and  lay  down  on  the  s  t, 

‘That’s  how  it  always  is,’  thought  his  wife.  ‘He  talks  to  everybody  it 
not  to  me.  I  see,  I  see  that  I  am  repulsive  to  him,  especially  in  this  coii- 
tion.’  She  looked  down  at  her  high  waist  and  then  into  the  looking-gis 
at  her  sallow  and  sunken  face,  in  which  the  eyes  looked  bigger  than  e  r. 

And  everything  jarred  upon  her:  Denisov’s  shout  and  guffaw;) 
Natasha’s  chatter,  and  above  all  the  hasty  glance  Sonya  stole  at  a, 

Sonya  was  always  the  first  excuse  Countess  Marya  pitched  on  for  n 
irritability. 

After  sitting  a  little  while  with  her  guests,  not  understanding  a  wj 
they  were  saying,  she  slipped  out  and  went  to  the  nursery. 

The  children  were  sitting  on  chairs  playing  at  driving  to  Moscow, 
invited  her  to  join  them.  She  sat  down  and  played  with  them,  but  e 
thought  of  her  husband  and  his  causeless  ill-temper  worried  her  all  e 
time.  She  got  up,  and  walked  with  difficulty  on  tiptoe  to  the  little  div  ■ 
room. 

‘Perhaps  he  is  not  asleep.  I  will  speak  plainly  to  him,’  she  saido 
herself.  Andryusha,  her  elder  boy,  followed  her  on  tiptoe,  imitating  If, 
His  mother  did  not  notice  him. 

‘Dear  Marie,  I  believe  he  is  asleep;  he  was  so  tired,’  said  Sonya,  mi: 
ing  her  in  the  next  room  (it  seemed  to  Countess  Marya  that  she  u 
everywhere).  ‘Andryusha  had  better  not  wake  him.’ 

Countess  Marya  looked  round,  saw  Andryusha  behind  her,  felt  tl 
Sonya  was  right,  and  for  that  very  reason  flushed  angrily,  and  with  tl 
dent  difficulty  restrained  herself  from  a  cruel  retort.  She  said  nothi; 
and,  so  as  not  to  obey  her,  let  Andryusha  follow  her,  but  signed  to  Jjr 
to  be  quiet,  and  went  up  to  the  door.  Sonya  w^ent  out  by  the  other  dc 
From  the  room  where  Nikolay  was  asleep,  his  wife  could  hear  his  e  r 
breathing,  every  tone  of  which  was  so  familiar.  As  she  listened  to  it,  ( 
could  see  his  smooth,  handsome  brow,  his  moustaches,  the  whole  ff 
she  had  so  often  gazed  at  in  the  stillness  of  the  night  when  he  was  aslo 
Nikolay  suddenly  stirred  and  cleared  his  throat.  And  at  the  same  instl 
Andryusha  shouted  from  the  door,  ‘Papa,  mamma’s  here!’  His  moti 
turned  pale  with  dismay  and  made  signs  to  the  boy.  He  was  quiet,  a 
there  followed  a  terrible  silence  that  lasted  a  minute.  She  knew  to 
Nikolay  disliked  being  waked.  Suddenly  she  heard  him  stir  and  clear) 
throat  again,  and  in  a  tone  of  displeasure  he  said: 

‘I’m  never  given  a  moment’s  peace.  Marie,  is  it  you?  Why  did  \l 
bring  him  here?’ 

‘I  only  came  to  look  ...  I  did  not  see  .  .  .  I’m  so  sorry  .  .  .’ 

Nikolay  coughed  sa\  said  no  more.  Plis  wife  went  away,  and  took 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1085 

sa  back  to  the  nursery.  Five  minutes  later  little,  black-eyed,  three-year- 
0  Natasha,  her  father’s  favourite,  hearing  from  her  brother  that  papa 
ns  asleep,  and  mamma  in  the  next  room,  ran  in  to  her  father,  unnoticed 
b  her  mother. 

The  black-eyed  little  girl  boldly  rattled  at  the  door,  and  her  fat,  little 
fit  ran  with  vigorous  steps  up  to  the  sofa.  After  examining  the  position 
aher  father,  who  was  asleep  with  his  back  to  her,  she  stood  on  tiptoe 
id  kissed  the  hand  that  lay  under  his  head.  Nikolay  turned  round  to 
h'  with  a  smile  of  tenderness  on  his  face. 

rNatasha,  Natasha!  ’  he  heard  his  wife  whisper  in  dismay  from  the  door. 
}ipa  is  sleepy.’ 

No,  mamma,  he  isn’t  sleepy,’  little  Natasha  answered  with  conviction, 
la’s  laughing.’ 

Nikolay  set  his  feet  down,  got  up,  and  picked  his  little  daughter  up  in 
b  arms. 

Come  in,  Masha,’  he  said  to  his  wife.  She  went  in  and  sat  down 
biide  him. 

I  did  not  see  him  run  in  after  me,’  she  said  timidly.  ‘I  just  looked 

if.  . 

Holding  his  little  girl  on  one  arm,  Nikolay  looked  at  his  wife,  and 
uticing  her  guilty  expression,  he  put  the  other  arm  round  her  and  kissed 
Hr  on  the  hair. 

May  I  kiss  mamma?’  he  asked  Natasha.  The  little  girl  smiled  de- 
rirely.  ‘Again,’  she  said,  with  a  peremptory  gesture,  pointing  to  the  spot 
p  ere  Nikolay  had  kissed  her  mother. 

T  don’t  know  why  you  should  think  I  am  cross,’  said  Nikolay,  replying 
t the  question  which  he  knew  was  in  his  wife’s  heart. 

‘You  can’t  imagine  how  unhappy,  how  lonely,  I  am  when  you  are  like 
tit.  It  always  seems  to  me  .  .  .’ 

‘Marie,  hush,  nonsense!  Y'ou  ought  to  be  ashamed,’  he  said  gaily. 
1‘It  seems  to  me  that  you  can’t  care  for  me;  that  I  am  so  ugly  .  •.  .  at 
3  times,  and  now  in  this  .  .  .’ 

‘Oh,  how  absurd  you  are!  It’s  not  those  who  are  handsome  we  love, 
It  those  we  love  who  are  handsome.  It  is  only  Malvinas  and  such  hero- 
ills  who  are  loved  because  they  are  beautiful.  And  do  you  suppose  I 
re  my  wife?  Oh  no,  I  don’t  love  you,  but  only  ...  1  don’t  know  how 
b  tell  you.  When  you  are  away,  and  any  misunderstanding  like  this 
:mes  between  us,  I  feel  as  though  I  were  lost,  and  can  do  nothing.  Why, 
:•  I  love  my  finger?  I  don’t  love  it,  but  only  try  cutting  it  off  .  .  .' 
{‘No,  I  don’t  feel  like  that,  but  I  understand.  Then  you  are  not  angry 
ith  me?’ 

“I  am  awfully  angry!’  he  said,  smiling,  and  getting  up,  and  smoothing 
b  hair,  he  began  pacing  up  and  down  the  room. 

‘‘Do  you  know,  Marie,  what  I  have  been  thinking?’  he  began,  begin- 
tig  at  once  now  that  peace  was  made  between  them,  thinking  aloud 
t fore  his  wife.  He  did  not  inquire  whether  she  were  disposed  to  listen; 
tat  did  not  matter  to  him.  An  idea  occurred  to  him;  and  so  it  must  to 


io86 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

her,  too.  And  he  told  her  that  he  meant  to  persuade  Pierre  to  stay  wi 
them  till  the  spring. 

Countess  Marya  listened  to  him,  made  some  comments,  and  then 
her  turn  began  thinking  her  thoughts  aloud.  Her  thoughts  were  of  tl 
children. 

‘How  one  can  see  the  woman  in  her  already,’  she  said  in  French,  poin 
ing  to  little  Natasha.  ‘You  reproach  us  women  for  being  illogical.  Yc 
see  in  her  our  logic.  I  say,  papa  is  sleepy;  and  she  says,  no,  he’s  laughin 
And  she  is  right,’  said  Countess  Marya,  smiling  blissfully. 

‘Yes,  yes,’  and  Nikolay,  lifting  up  his  little  girl  in  his  strong  arr 
raised  her  high  in  the  air,  sat  her  on  his  shoulder,  holding  her  little  fee 
and  began  walking  up  and  down  with  her.  There  was  just  the  same  loc 
of  thoughtless  happiness  on  the  faces  of  father  and  daughter. 

‘But  do  you  know,  you  may  be  unfair.  You  are  too  fond  of  this  one 
his  wife  whispered  in  French. 

‘Yes,  but  what  can  I  do?  ...  I  try  not  to  show  it  .  .  .’ 

At  that  moment  there  was  heard  from  the  hall  and  the  vestibule  th 
sound  of  the  block  of  the  door,  and  footsteps,  as  though  some  one  ha 
arrived. 

‘Somebody  has  come.’ 

‘I  am  sure  it  is  Pierre.  I  will  go  and  find  out,’  said  Countess  Mary; 
and  she  went  out  of  the  room. 

While  she  was  gone  Nikolay  allowed  himself  to  gallop  round  the  rooifl 
with  his  little  girl.  Panting  for  breath,  he  quickly  lowered  the  laughin 
child,  and  hugged  her  to  his  breast.  His  capers  made  him  think  of  danc 
ing;  and  looking  at  the  childish,  round,  happy  little  face,  he  wondere 
what  she  would  be  like  when  he  would  be  an  old  man,  taking  her  out  t 
dances,  and  he  remembered  how  his  father  used  to  dance  Daniel  Coope 
and  the  mazurka  with  his  daughter. 

‘It  is  he,  it  is  he,  Nikolay!’  said  Countess  Marya,  returning  a  fet 
minutes  later.  ‘Now  our  Natasha  is  herself  again.  You  should  have  seei 
her  delight,  and  what  a  scolding  he  came  in  for  at  once  for  having  out 
stayed  his  time.  Come,  let  us  go;  make  haste;  come  along!  You  mus 
part  at  last,’  she  said,  smiling,  as  she  looked  at  the  little  girl  nestling  uj 
to  her  father.  Nikolay  went  out,  holding  his  daughter  by  the  hand. 

Countess  Marya  lingered  behind. 

‘Never,  never  could  I  have  believed,’  she  murmured  to  herself,  ‘tha 
one  could  be  so  happy.’  Her  face  lighted  up  with  a  smile;  but  at  tb 
same  moment  she  sighed,  and  a  soft  melancholy  came  into  her  thoughtfu 
glance.  It  was  as  though,  apart  from  the  happiness  she  was  feeling  then 
was  another  happiness  unattainable  in  this  life,  which  she  could  not  helj 
remembering  at  that  moment. 


X 

Natasha  was  married  in  the  early  spring  of  1813,  and  by  1820  she  hai 
three  daughters  and  a  son.  The  latter  had  been  eagerly  desired,  and  sli 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1087 

ias  now  nursing  him  herself.  She  had  grown  stouter  and  broader,  so  that 
itwas  hard  to  recognise  in  the  robust-looking  young  mother  the  slim, 
n  bile  Natasha  of  old  days.  Her  features  had  become  more  defined,  and 
ure  an  expression  of  calm  softness  and  serenity.  Her  face  had  no  longer 
Lit  ever-glowing  fire  of  eagerness  that  had  once  constituted  her  chief 
:irm.  Now,  often  her  face  and  body  were  all  that  was  to  be  seen,  and 
t)  soul  was  not  visible  at  all.  All  there  was  to  be  seen  in  her  was  a 
yorous,  handsome,  and  fruitful  mother.  Only  on  rare  occasions  now 
t“  old  fire  glowed  in  her  again.  That  happened  only  when,  as  now,  her 
nsband  returned  after  absence,  when  a  sick  child  recovered,  or  when  she 
5)ke  to  Countess  Marya  of  Prince  Andrey  (to  her  husband  she  never 
like  of  Prince  Andrey,  fancying  he  might  be  jealous  of  her  love  for 
in),  or  on  the  rare  occasions  when  something  happened  to  attract  her 
t  her  singing,  which  she  had  entirely  laid  aside  since  her  marriage.  And 
i  those  rare  moments,  when  the  old  fire  glowed  again,  she  was  more 
iractive,  with  her  handsome,  fully-developed  figure,  than  she  had  ever 
ten  in  the  past. 

Since  her  marriage  Natasha  and  her  husband  had  lived  in  Moscow,  in 
Itersburg,  on  their  estate  near  Moscow,  and  at  her  mother’s;  that  is  to 
51/,  at  Nikolay’s.  The  young  Countess  Bezuhov  was  little  seen  in  society, 
id  those  who  had  seen  her  there  were  not  greatly  pleased  with  her.  She 
,>s  neither  charming  nor  amiable.  It  was  not  that  Natasha  was  fond  of 
ilitude  (she  could  not  have  said  whether  she  liked  it  or  not;  she  rather 
Dposed  indeed  that  she  did  not);  but  as  she  was  bearing  and  nursing 
r'ldren,  and  taking  interest  in  every  minute  of  her  husband’s  life,  she 
..ild  not  meet  all  these  demands  on  her  except  by  renouncing  society, 
[ery  one  who  had  known  Natasha  before  her  marriage  marvelled  at 
ije  change  that  had  taken  place  in  her,  as  though  it  were  something  ex- 
b  ordinary.  Only  the  old  countess,  with  her  mother’s  insight,  had  seen 
tit  what  was  at  the  root  of  all  Natasha’s  wild  outbursts  of  feeling  was 
nply  the  need  of  children  and  a  husband  of  her  own,  as  she  often  used 
t  declare,  more  in  earnest  than  in  joke,  at  Otradnoe.  The  mother  was 
pprised  at  the  wonder  of  people  who  did  not  understand  Natasha,  and 
neated  that  she  had  always  known  that  she  would  make  an  exemplary 
tfe  and  mother. 

‘Only  she  does  carry  her  devotion  to  her  husband  and  children  to  an 
fireme,’  the  countess  would  say;  ‘so  much  so,  that  it’s  positively  foolish.’ 
Natasha  did  not  follow  the  golden  rule  preached  by  so  many  prudent 
[rsons,  especially  by  the  French,  that  recommends  that  a  girl  on  marry- 
ig  should  not  neglect  herself,  should  not  give  up  her  accomplishments, 
iould  think  even  more  of  her  appearance  than  when  a  young  girl,  and 
sauld  try  to  fascinate  her  husband  as  she  had  fascinated  him  before  he 
us  her  husband.  Natasha,  on  the  contrary,  had  at  once  abandoned  all 
lr  accomplishments,  of  which  the  greatest  was  her  singing.  She  gave  that 
1  just  because  it  was  such  a  great  attraction.  Natasha  troubled  herself 
1  tie  about  manners  or  delicacy  of  speech;  nor  did  she  think  of  showing 
rself  to  her  husband  in  the  most  becoming  attitudes  and  costumes,  nor 


*p8B  WAR  AND  PEACE 

strive  to  avoid  worrying  him  by  being  over-exacting.  She  acted  in  dir 
contravention  of  all  those  rules.  She  felt  that  the  arts  of  attraction  tl 
instinct  had  taught  her  to  use  before  would  now  have  seemed  or 
ludicrous  to  her  husband,  to  whom  she  had  from  the  first  moment  gi\ 
herself  up  entirely,  that  is  with  her  whole  soul,  not  keeping  a  single  corr 
of  it  hidden  from  him.  She  felt  that  the  tie  that  bound  her  to  her  husba 
did  not  rest  on  those  romantic  feelings  which  had  attracted  him  to  h 
but  rested  on  something  else  undefined,  but  as  strong  as  the  tie  tl 
bound  her  soul  to  her  body. 

To  curl  her  hair,  put  on  a  crinoline,  and  sing  songs  to  attract  her  hr 
band  would  have  seemed  to  her  as  strange  as  to  deck  herself  up  so  as 
please  herself.  To  adorn  herself  to  please  others  might  perhaps  have  be 
agreeable  to  her — she  did  not  know — but  she  had  absolutely  no  time  f 
it.  The  chief  reason  why  she  could  not  attend  to  her  singing,  nor  to  h 
dress,  nor  to  the  careful  choice  of  her  words  was  that  she  simply  had  r'l 
time  to  think  of  those  things. 

It  is  well  known  that  man  has  the  faculty  of  entire  absorption  in  o 
subject,  however  trivial  that  subject  may  appear  to  be.  And  it  is  w* 
known  that  there  is  no  subject  so  trivial  that  it  will  not  grow  to  indefin> 
proportions  if  concentrated  attention  be  devoted  to  it. 

The  subject  in  which  Natasha  was  completely  absorbed  was  h 
family,  that  is,  her  husband,  whom  she  kept  such  a  hold  on  so  that  1 1 
should  belong  entirely  to  her,  to  his  home  and  her  children,  whom  sb 
had  to  carry,  to  bear,  to  nurse  and  to  bring  up. 

And  the  more  she  put,  not  her  mind  only,  but  her  whole  soul,  her  who' 
being,  into  the  subject  that  absorbed  her,  the  more  that  subject  seemt' 
to  enlarge  under  her  eyes,  and  the  feebler  and  the  more  inadequate  hi 
own  powers  seemed  for  coping  with  it,  so  that  she  concentrated  them  a 
on  that  one  subject,  and  still  had  not  time  to  do  all  that  seemed  to  h< 
necessary. 

There  were  in  those  days,  just  as  now,  arguments  and  discussions  c 
the  rights  of  women,  on  the  relations  of  husband  and  wife,  and  d 
freedom  and  rights  in  marriage,  though  they  were  not  then,  as  no\ 
called  questions.  But  these  questions  had  no  interest  for  Natasha,  in  fai 
she  had  absolutely  no  comprehension  of  them. 

Those  questions,  then  as  now,  existed  only  for  those  persons  who  see  i 
marriage  only  the  satisfaction  the  married  receive  from  one  another,  the 
is,  only  the  first  beginnings  of  marriage  and  not  all  its  significance,  whic 
lies  in  the  family. 

Such  discussions  and  the  questions  of  to-day,  like  the  question  how  t 
get  the  utmost  possible  gratification  out  of  one’s  dinner,  then,  as  nov 
did  not  exist  for  persons  for  whom  the  object  of  dinner  is  nourishmen 
and  the  object  of  wedlock  is  the  family. 

If  the  end  of  dinner  is  the  nourishment  of  the  body,  the  man  who  eal 
two  dinners  obtains  possibly  a  greater  amount  of  pleasure,  but  he  doe; 
not  attain  the  object  of  it,  since  two  dinners  cannot  be  digested  by  th 
stomach. 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1089 

[f  the  end  of  marriage  is  the  family,  the  person  who  prefers  to  have 
sreral  wives  and  several  husbands  may  possibly  derive  a  great  deal  of 
siisfaction  therefrom,  but  will  not  in  any  case  have  a  family.  If  the  end 
0  dinner  is  nourishment  and  the  end  of  marriage  is  the  family,  the  whole 
qjstion  is  only  solved  by  not  eating  more  than  the  stomach  can  digest 
al  not  having  more  husbands  or  wives  than  as  many  as  are  needed  for 
tl  family,  that  is,  one  wife  and  one  husband.  Natasha  needed  a  husband. 
Arusband  was  given  her;  and  her  husband  gave  her  a  family.  And  she 
no  need  of  another  better  husband,  and  indeed,  as  all  her  spiritual 
;.Tgies  were  devoted  to  serving  that  husband  and  his  children,  she  could 
n  picture,  and  found  no  interest  in  trying  to  picture,  what  would  have 
hopened  had  things  been  different. 

Natasha  did  not  care  for  society  in  general,  but  she  greatly  prized  the 
5  iety  of  her  kinsfolk— of  Countess  Marya,  her  brother,  her  mother, 
ai  Sonya.  She  cared  for  the  society  of  those  persons  to  whom  she  could 
r.h  in  from  the  nursery  in  a  dressing-gown  with  her  hair  down ;  to  whom 
could,  with  a  joyful  face,  show  a  baby’s  napkin  stained  yellow  instead 
agreen,  and  to  receive  their  comforting  assurances  that  that  proved  that 
fcpy  was  now  really  better. 

Natasha  neglected  herself  to  such  a  degree  that  her  dresses,  her  untidy 
bir,  her  inappropriately  blurted-out  words,  and  her  jealousy— she  was 
j  Ious  of  Sonya,  of  the  governess,  of  every  woman,  pretty  and  ugly — 
yre  a  continual  subject  of  jests  among  her  friends.  The  general  opinion 
?s  that  Pierre  was  tied  to  his  wife’s  apron  strings,  and  it  really  was  so. 
bm  the  earliest  days  of  their  marriage  Natasha  had  made  plain  her 
;ims.  Pierre  had  been  greatly  surprised  at  his  wife’s  view — to  him  a 
[Tipletely  novel  idea — that  every  minute  of  his  life  belonged  to  her  and 
L'ir  home.  He  was  surprised  at  his  wife’s  demands,  but  he  was  flattered 
5  them,  and  he  acquiesced  in  them. 

Pierre  was  so  far  under  petticoat  government  that  he  did  not  dare  to  be 
entive,  or  even  to  speak  with  a  smile,  to  any  other  woman;  did  not 
re  go  to  dine  at  the  club,  without  good  reason,  simply  for  entertain- 
?nt ;  did  not  dare  spend  money  on  idle  whims,  and  did  not  dare  to  be 
ay  from  home  for  any  long  time  together,  except  on  business,  in  which 
;  wife  included  his  scientific  pursuits.  Though  she  understood  nothing 
the  latter,  she  attached  great  consequence  to  them.  To  make  up  for  all 
s  Pierre  had  complete  power  in  his  own  house  to  dispose  of  the  whole 
usehold,  as  well  as  of  himself,  as  he  chose.  In  their  own  home  Natasha 
ide  herself  a  slave  to  her  husband;  and  the  whole  household  had  to  go 
tiptoe  if  the  master  were  busy  reading  or  writing  in  his  study.  Pierre 
d  only  to  show  the  slightest  preference,  for  what  he  desired  to  be  at 
ce  carried  out.  He  had  but  to  express  a  wish  and  Natasha  jumped  up 
!  once  and  ran  for  what  he  wanted. 

The  whole  household  was  ruled  by  the  supposed  directions  of  the 
ister,  that  is,  by  the  wishes  of  Pierre,  which  Natasha  tried  to  guess, 
leir  manner  of  life  and  place  of  residence,  their  acquaintances  and  ties, 
atasha’s  pursuits,  and  the  bringing  up  of  the  children — all  followed, 


logo  WAR  AND  PEACE 

not  only  Pierre’s  expressed  wishes,  but  even  the  deductions  Nataa 
strove  to  draw  from  the  ideas  he  explained  in  conversation  with  her.  / c 
she  guessed  very  correctly  what  was  the  essential  point  of  Pier  's 
wishes,  and  having  once  guessed  it  she  was  steadfast  in  adhering  to  : 
even  when  Pierre  himself  would  have  veered  round  she  opposed  him  v  I 
his  own  weapons. 

In  the  troubled  days  that  Pierre  could  never  forget,  after  the  birth 
their  first  child,  they  had  tried  three  wet  nurses,  one  after  another,  h 
the  delicate  baby,  and  Natasha  had  fallen  ill  with  anxiety.  At  the  t  f 
Pierre  had  explained  to  her  Rousseau’s  views  on  the  unnaturalness  ;c 
harmfulness  of  a  child  being  suckled  by  any  woman  but  its  own  moth 
and  told  her  he  fully  agreed  with  those  views.  When  the  next  baby  '  < 
born,  in  spite  of  the  opposition  of  her  mother,  the  doctors,  and  even 
her  husband  himself,  who  all  looked  on  it  as  something  unheard  of,  ;c 
injurious,  she  insisted  on  having  her  own  way,  and  from  that  day  1c 
nursed  all  her  children  herself.  It  happened  very  often  in  moment'll 
irritability  that  the  husband  and  wife  quarrelled;  but  long  after  til; 
dispute  Pierre  had,  to  his  own  delight  and  surprise,  found  in  his  win 
actions,  as  well  as  words,  that  very  idea  of  his  with  which  she  h 
quarrelled.  And  he  not  only  found  his  own  idea,  but  found  it  purified : 
all  that  was  superfluous,  and  had  been  evoked  by  the  heat  of  argumi 
in  his  own  expression  of  the  idea. 

After  seven  years  of  married  life,  Pierre  had  a  firm  and  joyful  c  i 
sciousness  that  he  was  not  a  bad  fellow,  and  he  felt  this  because  he  if 
himself  reflected  in  his  wife.  In  himself  he  felt  all  the  good  and  lie 
mingled  together,  and  obscuring  one  another.  But  in  his  wife  he  sp 
reflected  only  what  was  really  good ;  everything  not  quite  good  was  !.i 
out.  And  this  result  was  not  reached  by  the  way  of  logical  thought,  111 
by  way  of  a  mysterious,  direct  reflection  of  himself. 


XI 

Two  months  previously,  Pierre  was  already  settled  at  the  Rostovs’  wlr 
he  received  a  letter  from  a  certain  Prince  Fyodor,  urging  him  to  comec 
Petersburg  for  the  discussion  of  various  important  questions  that  w( 
agitating  the  Petersburg  members  of  a  society,  of  w'hich  Pierre  had  bir 
one  of  the  chief  founders. 

Natasha  read  this  letter,  as  she  did  indeed  all  her  husband’s  letters,  ac 
bitterly  as  she  always  felt  his  absence,  she  urged  him  herself  to  got 
Petersburg.  To  everything  appertaining  to  her  husband’s  intellectil 
abstract  pursuits,  she  ascribed  immense  consequence,  though  she  had  ( 
understanding  of  them,  and  she  was  always  in  dread  of  being  a  hindraif 
to  her  husband  in  such  matters.  To  Pierre’s  timid  glance  of  inquiry  af 
reading  the  letter,  she  replied  by  begging  him  to  go,  and  all  she  asked  j 
that  he  would  fix  an  absolutely  certain  date  for  his  return.  And  leave* 
absence  was  given  him  for  four  weeks. 


WAR  AND  PEACE  ioqi 

Ever  since  the  day  fixed  for  his  return,  a  fortnight  before,  Natasha  had 
bn  in  a  continual  condition  of  alarm,  depression,  and  irritability. 
Denisov,  a  general  on  the  retired  list,  very  much  dissatisfied  at  the 
psent  position  of  public  affairs,  had  arrived  during  that  fortnight,  and 
\  looked  at  Natasha  with  melancholy  wonder,  as  at  a  bad  likeness  of  a 
pson  once  loved.  A  bored,  dejected  glance,  random  replies,  and  incessant 
t  k  of  the  nursery  was  all  he  saw  and  heard  of  his  enchantress  of 
d  days. 

All  that  fortnight  Natasha  had  been  melancholy  and  irritable,  espe- 
ftlly  when  her  mother,  her  brother,  Sonya,  or  Countess  Marya  tried  to 
insole  her  by  excusing  Pierre,  and  inventing  good  reasons  for  his  delay 
j  returning. 

‘It’s  all  nonsense,  all  idiocy,’  Natasha  would  say;  ‘all  his  projects  that 
iver  lead  to  anything,  and  all  those  fools  of  societies,’  she  would  declare 
i  the  very  matters  in  the  immense  importance  of  which  she  firmly 
i  lieved.  And  she  would  march  off  to  the  nursery  to  nurse  her  only  boy, 
e  baby  Petya. 

No  one  could  give  her  such  sensible  and  soothing  consolation  as  that 
tie  three  months’  old  creature,  when  it  lay  at  her  breast,  and  she  felt 
e  movement  of  its  lips  and  the  snuffling  of  its  nose.  That  little  creature 
id  to  her:  ‘You  are  angry,  you  are  jealous,  you  would  like  to  punish 
m,  you  are  afraid,  but  here  am  I— I  am  he.  Here,  I  am  he  .  .  .’  And 
fere  was  no  answering  that.  It  was  more  than  true. 

Natasha  had  so  often  during  that  fortnight  had  recourse  to  her  baby 
>r  comfort,  that  she  had  over-nursed  him,  and  he  had  fallen  ill.  She  was 
rrified  at  his  illness,  but  still  this  was  just  what  she  needed.  In  looking 
ter  him,  she  was  able  to  bear  her  uneasiness  about  her  husband  better. 
She  was  nursing  the  baby  when  Pierre’s  carriage  drove  noisily  up  to 
le  entrance,  and  the  nurse,  knowing  how  to  please  her  mistress,  came 
(audibly  but  quickly  to  the  door  with  a  beaming  face. 

‘He  has  come?’  asked  Natasha  in  a  rapid  whisper,  afraid  to  stir  for 
■ar  of  waking  the  baby,vwho  was  dropping  asleep. 

‘He  has  come,  ma’am,’  whispered  the  nurse. 

The  blood  rushed  to  Natasha’s  face,  and  her  feet  involuntarily  moved; 
ut  to  jump  up  and  run  was  out  of  the  question.  The  baby  opened  its 
ttle  eyes  again,  glanced,  as  though  to  say,  ‘You  are  here,’  and  gave 
nother  lazy  smack  with  its  lips. 

Cautiously  withdrawing  her  breast,  Natasha  dandled  it,  handed  it  to 
:ie  nurse,  and  went  with  swift  steps  towards  the  door.  But  at  the  door 
he  stopped  as  though  her  conscience  pricked  her  for  being  in  such  haste 
nd  joy  to  leave  the  baby,  and  she  looked  back.  The  nurse,  with  her  elbows 
aised,  was  lifting  the  baby  over  the  rail  of  the  cot. 

‘Yes,  go  along,  go  along,  ma’am,  don’t  worry,  run  along,’  whispered 
he  nurse,  smiling  with  the  familiarity  that  was  common  between  nurse 
tnd  mistress. 

With  light  steps  Natasha  ran  to  the  vestibule.  Denisov,  coming  out 
if  the  study  into  the  hall  with  a  pipe  in  his  mouth,  seemed  to  see  Natasha 


I0Q2 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

again  for  the  first  time.  A  vivid  radiance  of  joy  shed  streams  of  light  fro 
her  transfigured  countenance. 

‘He  has  come!  ’  she  called  to  him,  as  she  flew  by,  and  Denisov  felt  tl 
he  was  thrilled  to  hear  that  Pierre  had  come,  though  he  did  not  partk 
larlv  care  for  him.  Running  into  the  vestibule,  Natasha  saw  a  tall  figi 
in  a  fur  cloak  fumbling  at  his  scarf. 

‘He!  he!  It’s  true.  Here  he  is,’  she  said  to  herself,  and  darting  up 
him,  she  hugged  him,  squeezing  her  head  to  his  breast,  and  then  drawi 
back,  glanced  at  the  frosty,  red,  and  happy  face  of  Pierre.  ‘Yes,  here 
is;  happy,  satisfied  .  .  .’ 

And  all  at  once  she  remembered  all  the  tortures  of  suspense  she  h; 
passed  through  during  the  last  fortnight.  The  joy  beaming  in  her  fa 
vanished;  she  frowned,  and  a  torrent  of  reproaches  and  angry  wor 
broke  upon  Pierre. 

‘Yes,  you  are  all  right,  you  have  been  happy,  you  have  been  enjoyii 
yourself  .  .  .  But  what  about  me!  You  might  at  least  think  of  yo; 
children.  I  am  nursing,  my  milk  went  wrong  .  .  .  Petya  nearly  died  of  ill 
And  you  have  been  enjoying  yourself.  Yes,  enjoying  yourself  .  .  .’ 

Pierre  knew  he  was  not  to  blame,  because  he  could  not  have  con 
sooner.  He  knew  this  outburst  on  her  part  was  unseemly,  and  would  be  a 
over  in  two  minutes.  Above  all,  he  knew  that  he  was  himself  happy  an 
joyful.  He  would  have  liked  to  smile,  but  dared  not  even  think  of  tha 
He  made  a  piteous,  dismayed  face,  and  bowed  before  the  storm. 

‘I  could  not,  upon  my  word.  But  how  is  Petya?’ 

‘He  is  all  right  now,  come  along.  Aren’t  you  ashamed?  If  you  could  se 
what  I  am  like  without  you,  how  wretched  I  am  .  .  .’ 

‘Are  you  quite  well?’ 

‘Come  along,  come  along,’  she  said,  not  letting  go  of  his  hand.  And  the 
went  off  to  their  rooms.  When  Nikolay  and  his  wife  came  to  look  fc 
Pierre,  they  found  him  in  the  nursery,  with  his  baby  son  awake  on  hi 
broad  right  hand,  dandling  him.  There  was  a  gleeful  smile  on  the  baby’ 
broad  face  and  open,  toothless  mouth.  The  storm  had  long  blown  ovei 
and  a  bright,  sunny  radiance  of  joy  flowed  all  over  Natasha’s  face,  a 
she  gazed  tenderly  at  her  husband  and  son. 

‘And  did  you  have  a  good  talk  over  everything  with  Prince  Fyodor? 
Natasha  was  saying. 

‘Yes,  capital.’ 

‘You  see,  he  holds  his  head  up’  (Natasha  meant  the  baby).  ‘Oh,  wha 
a  fright  he  gave  me.  And  did  you  see  the  princess?  Is  it  true  that  she  is  ir 
love  with  that  .  .  .’ 

‘Yes,  can  you  fancy  .  .  .’ 

At  that  moment  Nikolay  came  in  with  his  wife.  Pierre,  not  letting  go  o 
his  son,  stooped  down,  kissed  them,  and  answered  their  inquiries.  But  i 
was  obvious  that  in  spite  of  the  many  interesting  things  they  had  to  dis 
cuss,  the  baby,  with  the  wobbling  head  in  the  little  cap,  was  absorbini 
Pierre’s  whole  attention. 

‘How  sweet  he  is!’  said  Countess  Marya,  looking  at  the  baby  an< 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1093 

pying  with  him.  ‘That’s  a  thing  I  can’t  understand,  Nikolay,’  she  said, 
fning  to  her  husband,  'how  it  is  you  don’t  feel  the  charm  of  these  ex- 
cisite  little  creatures?’ 

‘Well,  I  don’t,  I  can’t,’  said  Nikolay,  looking  coldly  at  the  baby.  ‘Just 
gnorsel  of  flesh.  Come  along,  Pierre.’ 

‘The  great  thing  is,  that  he  is  really  a  devoted  father,’  said  Countess 
Iarya,  apologising  for  her  husband,  ‘but  only  after  a  year  or  so  .  .  .’ 

'Oh,  Pierre  is  a  capital  nurse,’  said  Natasha;  'he  says  his  hand  is  just 
nde  for  a  baby’s  back.  Just  look.’ 

‘Oh  yes,  but  not  for  this,’  Pierre  cried  laughing,  and  hurriedly  snatching 
D  the  baby,  he  handed  him  back  to  his  nurse. 


XII 

.5  in  every  real  family,  there  were  several  quite  separate  worlds  living  to- 
•ther  in  the  Bleak  Hills  house,  and  while  each  of  these  preserved  its  own 
dividuality,  they  made  concessions  to  one  another,  and  mixed  into  one 
trmonious  whole.  Every  event  that  occurred  in  the  house  was  alike 
nportant  and  joyful  or  distressing  to  all  those  circles.  But  each  circle 
id  its  own  private  grounds  for  rejoicing  or  mourning  at  every  event 
aite  apart  from  the  rest. 

So  Pierre’s  arrival  was  a  joyful  and  important  event,  reflected  as  such 
1  all  the  circles  of  the  household. 

The  servants,  the  most  infallible  judges  of  their  masters,  because  they 
ldge  them,  not  from  their  conversation  and  expression  of  their  feelings, 
ut  from  their  actions  and  their  manner  of  living,  were  delighted  at 
ierre’s  return,  because  they  knew  that  when  he  was  there,  the  count, 
leir  master,  would  not  go  out  every  day  to  superintend  the  peasants  on 
le  estate,  and  would  be  in  better  temper  and  spirits,  and  also  because 
hey  knew  there  would  be  valuable  presents  for  all  of  them  for  the 
ste  day. 

The  children  and  their  governesses  were  delighted  at  Bezuhov’s  return, 
■ecause  no  one  drew  them  into  the  general  social  life  of  the  house  as 
’ierre  did.  He  it  was  who  could  play  on  the  clavichord  that  ecossaise  (his 
ne  piece),  to  which,  as  he  said,  one  could  dance  all  possible  dances;  and 
ie  was  quite  sure,  too,  to  have  brought  all  of  them  presents. 

Nikolinka  Bolkonsky,  who  was  now  a  thin,  delicate,  intelligent  boy  of 
ifteen,  with  curly  light  hair  and  beautiful  eyes,  was  delighted  because 
Jncle  Pierre,  as  he  called  him,  was  the  object  of  his  passionate  love  and 
tdoration.  No  one  had  instilled  a  particular  affection  for  Pierre  into 
Nikolinka,  and  he  only  rarely  saw  him.  Countess  Marya,  who  had 
nought  him  up,  had  done  her  utmost  to  make  Nikolinka  love  her  hus- 
)and,  as  she  loved  him;  and  the  boy  did  like  his  uncle,  but  there  was  a 
scarcely  perceptible  shade  of  contempt  in  his  liking  of  him.  Pierre  he 
idored.  He  did  not  want  to  be  an  hussar  or  a  Cavalier  of  St.  George  like 
us  Uncle  Nikolay;  he  wanted  to  be  learned,  clever,  and  kind  like  Pierre. 


b: 


1094  WAR  AND  PEACE 

In  Pierre's  presence  there  was  always  a  happy  radiance  on  his  face,  ai 
he  blushed  and  was  breathless  when  Pierre  addressed  him.  He  nev 
missed  a  word  that  Pierre  uttered,  and  afterwards  alone  or  with  Dessal’ 
recalled  every  phrase,  and  pondered  its  exact  significance.  Pierre’s  pa 
life,  his  unhappiness  before  1812  (of  which,  from  the  few  words  he  h; 
heard,  he  had  made  up  a  vague,  romantic  picture),  his  adventures 
Moscow,  and  captivity  with  the  French,  Platon  Karataev  (of  whom  1 
had  heard  from  Pierre),  his  love  for  Natasha  (whom  the  boy  loved  tc 
with  quite  a  special  feeling),  and,  above  all,  his  friendship  with  his  fathe 
whom  Nikolinka  did  not  remember,  all  made  Pierre  a  hero  and  a  saint  i 
his  eyes. 

From  the  phrases  he  had  heard  dropped  about  his  father  and  Natash; 
from  the  emotion  with  which  Pierre  spoke  of  him,  and  the  circumspeci 
reverent  tenderness  with  which  Natasha,  spoke  of  him,  the  boy,  who  wa 
only  just  beginning  to  form  his  conceptions  of  love,  had  gathered  th 
idea  that  his  father  had  loved  Natasha,  and  had  bequeathed  her  at  hi 
death  to  his  friend.  That  father,  of  whom  the  boy  had  no  memory 
seemed  to  him  a  divine  being,  of  whom  one  could  have  no  clear  concep 
tion,  and  of  whom  he  could  not  think  without  a  throbbing  heart  and  tear 
of  sorrow  and  rapture. 

And  so  the  boy  too  was  happy  at  Pierre’s  arrival. 

The  guests  in  the  house  were  glad  to  see  Pierre,  for  he  was  a  persor 
who  always  enlivened  every  party,  and  made  its  different  elements  mi: 
well  together. 

The  grown-up  members  of  the  household  were  glad  to  see  a  friend  whc 
always  made  daily  life  run  more  smoothly  and  easily. 

The  old  ladies  were  pleased  both  at  the  presents  he  brought  them,  and 
still  more  at  Natasha’s  being  herself  again. 

Pierre  felt  the  various  views  those  different  sets  of  people  took  of  him, 
and  made  haste  to  satisfy  the  expectations  of  all  of  them. 

Though  he  was  the  most  absent-minded  and  forgetful  of  men,  by  the 
help  of  a  list  his  wife  made  for  him,  he  had  bought  everything,  not  for¬ 
getting  a  single  commission  from  his  mother-in-law  or  brother-in-law,  nor 
the  presents  of  a  dress  for  Madame  Byelov  and  toys  for  his  nephews. 

In  the  early  days  of  his  married  life  his  wife’s  expectation  that  he 
should  forget  nothing  he  had  undertaken  to  buy  had  struck  him  as 
strange,  and  he  had  been  impressed  by  her  serious  chagrin  when  after  his 
first  absence  he  had  returned  having  forgotten  everything.  But  in  time  he 
had  grown  used  to  this.  Knowing  that  Natasha  gave  him  no  commissions 
on  her  own  account,  and  for  others  only  asked  him  to  get  things  when  he 
had  himself  offered  to  do  so,  he  now  took  a  childish  pleasure,  that  was  a 
surprise  to  himself,  in  those  purchases  of  presents  for  all  the  household, 
and  never  forgot  anything.  If  he  incurred  Natasha’s  censure  now,  it  was 
only  for  buying  too  much,  and  paying  too  much  for  his  purchases.  To  her 
other  defects  in  the  eyes  of  the  world — good  qualities  in  Pierre’s  eyes — 
her  untidiness  and  negligence,  Natasha  added  that  of  stinginess. 

Ever  since  Pierre  had  begun  living  a  home  life,  involving  increased 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1095 

tpenses  in  a  large  house,  he  had  noticed  to  his  astonishment  that  he 
us  spending  half  what  he  had  spent  in  the  past,  and  that  his  circum- 
■ances,  somewhat  straitened  latterly,  especially  by  his  first  wife’s  debts, 
ure  beginning  to  improve. 

Living  was  much  cheaper,  because  his  life  was  coherent;  the  most  ex- 
unsive  luxury  in  his  former  manner  of  life,  that  is,  the  possibility  of  a 
omplete  change  in  it  at  any  moment,  Pierre  had  not  now,  and  had  no 
isire  for.  He  felt  that  his  manner  of  life  was  settled  now  once  for  all  till 
;ath;  that  to  change  it  was  not  in  his  power,  and  therefore  that  manner 

life  was  cheaper. 

With  a  beaming,  smiling  countenance,  Pierre  was  unpacking  his 
urchases. 

‘Look!’  he  said,  unfolding  a  piece  of  material  like  a  shopman.  Natasha 
as  sitting  opposite  him  with  her  eldest  girl  on  her  knee,  and  she  turned 
er  sparkling  eyes  from  her  husband  to  what  he  was  showing  her. 

That’s  for  Madame  Byelov?  Splendid.’  She  touched  it  to  feel  the 
oodness  of  the  material.  ‘It  must  have  been  a  rouble  a  yard?’ 

Pierre  mentioned  the  price. 

‘Very  dear,’  said  Natasha.  ‘Well,  how  pleased  the  children  will  be  and 
laman  too.  Only  you  shouldn’t  have  bought  me  this,’  she  added,  unable 
o  suppress  a  smile,  as  she  admired  the  gold  and  pearl  comb,  of  a  pattern 
list  then  coming  into  fashion. 

‘Adele  kept  on  at  me  to  buy  it,’  said  Pierre. 

‘When  shall  I  wear  it?’  Natasha  put  it  in  her  coil  of  hair.  ‘It  will  do 
nhen  I  have  to  bring  little  Masha  out;  perhaps  they  will  come  in  again 
hen.  Well,  let  us  go  in.’ 

And  gathering  up  the  presents,  they  went  first  into  the  nursery,  and 
hen  in  to  see  the  countess. 

The  countess,  as  her  habit  was,  was  sitting  playing  patience  with 
Vladame  Byelov  when  Pierre  and  Natasha  went  into  the  drawing-room 
jvith  parcels  under  their  arms. 

The  countess  was  by  now  over  sixty.  Her  hair  was  completely  grey, 
md  she  wore  a  cap  that  surrounded  her  whole  face  with  a  frill.  Her  face 
vas  wrinkled,  her  upper  lip  had  sunk,  and  her  eyes  were  dim. 

After  the  deaths  of  her  son  and  her  husband  that  had  followed  so 
quickly  on  one  another,  she  had  felt  herself  a  creature  accidentally  for¬ 
gotten  in  this  world,  with  no  object  and  no  interest  in  life.  She  ate  and 
drank,  slept  and  lay  awake,  but  she  did  not  live.  Life  gave  her  no  im¬ 
pressions.  She  wanted  nothing  from  life  but  peace,  and  that  peace  she 
could  find  only  in  death.  But  until  death  came  to  her  she  had  to  go  on 
living — that  is,  using  her  vital  forces.  There  was  in  the  highest  degree 
noticeable  in  her  what  may  be  observed  in  very  small  children  and  in 
very  old  people.  No  external  aim  could  be  seen  in  her  existence;  all  that 
could  be  seen  was  the  need  to  exercise  her  various  capacities  and  pro¬ 
pensities.  She  had  to  eat,  to  sleep,  to  think,  to  talk,  to  weep,  to  work, 
to  get  angry,  and  so  on,  simply  because  she  had  a  stomach,  a  brain, 
muscles,  nerves,  and  spleen.  All  this  she  did,  not  at  the  promptings  of 


1096  WAR  AND  PEACE 

any  external  motive,  as  people  do  in  the  full  vigour  of  life,  when  the  ai 
towards  which  they  strive  screens  from  our  view  that  other  aim  ■ 
exercising  their  powers.  She  only  talked  because  she  needed  to  exerci; 
her  lungs  and  her  tongue.  She  cried  like  a  child,  because  she  needed  tl 
physical  relief  of  tears,  and  so  on.  What  for  people  in  their  full  vigoi 
is  a  motive,  with  her  was  obviously  a  pretext. 

Thus  in  the  morning,  especially  if  she  had  eaten  anything  too  rich  tl 
night  before,  she  sought  an  occasion  for  anger,  and  pitched  on  the  fin 
excuse — the  deafness  of  Madame  Byelov. 

From  the  other  end  of  the  room  she  would  begin  to  say  something  t 
her  in  a  low  voice. 

‘I  fancy  it  is  warmer  to-day,  my  dear,’  she  would  say  in  a  whispei 
And  when  Madame  Byelov  replied:  ‘To  be  sure,  they  have  come,’  sh 
would  mutter  angrily:  ‘Mercy  on  us,  how  deaf  and  stupid  she  is!’ 

Another  excuse  was  her  snuff,  which  she  fancied  either  too  dry,  o 
too  moist,  or  badly  pounded.  After  these  outbursts  of  irritability,  a  biliou 
hue  came  into  her  face.  And  her  maids  knew  by  infallible  tokens  whei 
Madame  Byelov  would  be  deaf  again,  and  when  her  snuff  would  agaii 
be  damp,  and  her  face  would  again  be  yellow.  Just  as  she  had  to  exercisi 
her  spleen,  she  had  sometimes  to  exercise  her  remaining  faculties;  am 
for  thought  the  pretext  was  patience.  When  she  wanted  to  cry,  the 
subject  of  her  tears  was  the  late  count.  When  she  needed  excitement,  thi 
subject  was  Nikolay  and  anxiety  about  his  health.  When  she  wanted  t( 
say  something  spiteful,  the  pretext  was  the  Countess  Marya.  When  sht 
required  exercise  for  her  organs  of  speech — this  was  usually  about  sever 
o’clock,  after  she  had  had  her  after-dinner  rest  in  a  darkened  room- 
then  the  pretext  was  found  in  repetition  of  anecdotes,  always  the  same, 
and  always  to  the  same  listeners. 

The  old  countess’s  condition  was  understood  by  all  the  household, 
though  no  one  ever  spoke  of  it,  and  every  possible  effort  was  made  by 
every  one  to  satisfy  her  requirements.  Only  rarely  a  mournful  half-smile 
passed  between  Nikolay,  Pierre,  Natasha,  and  Countess  Marya  that  be¬ 
trayed  their  comprehension  of  her  condition. 

But  those  glances  said  something  else  besides.  They  said  that  she 
had  done  her  work  in  life  already,  that  she  was  not  all  here  in  what  was 
seen  in  her  now,  that  they  would  all  be  the  same,  and  that  they  were 
glad  to  give  way  to  her,  to  restrain  themselves  for  the  sake  of  this  poor 
creature,  once  so  dear,  once  as  full  of  life  as  they.  Memento  mori,  said 
those  glances. 

Only  quite  heartless  and  stupid  people  and  little  children  failed  to 
understand  this,  and  held  themselves  aloof  from  her. 


XIII 

When  Pierre  and  his  wife  came  into  the  drawing-room,  the  countess 
happened  to  be  in  her  customary  condition  of  needing  the  mental  exer- 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1097 

ce  of  a  game  of  patience,  and  therefore,  although  from  habit  she  uttered 
t;  words,  she  always  repeated  on  the  return  of  Pierre  or  her  son  after 
asence:  ‘It  was  high  time,  high  time,  my  dear  boy;  we  have  been  ex¬ 
piring  you  a  long  while.  Well,  thank  God,  you  are  here.’  And  on  the 
pesents  being  given  her,  pronounced  another  stock  phrase:  ‘It’s  not 
tjs  gift  that  is  precious,  my  dear.  .  .  .  Thank  you  for  thinking  of  an 
cl  woman  like  me.  .  .  .’  It  was  evident  that  Pierre’s  entrance  at  that 
nment  was  unwelcome,  because  it  interrupted  her  in  dealing  her  cards, 
fe  finished  her  game  of  patience,  and  only  then  gave  her  attention  to 
te  presents.  The  presents  for  her  consisted  of  a  card-case  of  fine  work- 
anship,  a  bright  blue  Sevres  cup  with  a  lid  and  a  picture  of  shepherdesses 
i  it,  and  a  gold  snuff-box  with  the  count’s  portrait  on  it,  which  Pierre 
Id  had  executed  by  a  miniature-painter  in  Petersburg.  The  countess 
Id  long  wished  to  have  this;  but  just  now  she  had  no  inclination  to 
■jep,  and  so  she  looked  unconcernedly  at  the  portrait,  and  took  more 
)tice  of  the  card-case. 

‘Thank  you,  my  dear,  you  are  a  comfort  to  me,’  she  said,  as  she  always 
d.  ‘But  best  of  all,  you  have  brought  yourself  back.  It  has  been  beyond 
rerything;  you  must  really  scold  your  wife.  She  is  like  one  possessed 
ithout  you.  She  sees  nothing,  thinks  of  nothing,’  she  said  as  usual, 
mok,  Anna  Timofyevna,’  she  added,  ‘what  a  card-case  my  son  has 
rought  us.’ 

Madame  Byelov  admired  the  present,  and  was  enchanted  with  the 
ress  material. 

Pierre,  Natasha,  Nikolay,  Countess  Marya,  and  Denisov  had  a  great 
eal  they  wanted  to  talk  about,  which  was  not  talked  of  before  the  old 
ountess;  not  because  anything  was  concealed  from  her,  but  simply 
ecause  she  had  dropped  so  out  of  things,  that  if  they  had  begun  to 
alk  freely  before  her  they  would  have  had  to  answer  so  many  questions 
’Ut  by  her  at  random,  and  to  repeat  so  many  things  that  had  been 
epeated  to  her  so  many  times  already;  to  tell  her  that  this  person  was 
ead  and  that  person  was  married,  which  she  could  never  remember, 
/et  they  sat  as  usual  at  tea  in  the  drawing-room,  and  Pierre  answered 
he  countess’s  quite  superfluous  questions,  which  were  of  no  interest 
ven  to  her,  and  told  her  that  Prince  Vassily  was  looking  older,  and  that 
lountess  Marya  Alexeyevna  sent  her  kind  regards  and  remembrances, 
tc. 

Such  conversation,  of  no  interest  to  any  one,  but  inevitable,  was  kept 
ip  all  tea-time.  All  the  grown-up  members  of  the  family  were  gathered 
ibout  the  round  tea-table  with  the  samovar,  at  which  Sonya  presided, 
fhe  children  with  their  tutors  and  governesses  had  already  had  tea,  and 
heir  voices  could  be  heard  in  the  next  room.  At  tea  every  one  sat  in  their 
>wn  habitual  places.  Nikolay  sat  by  the  stove  at  a  little  table  apart, 
vhere  his  tea  was  handed  him.  An  old  terrier  bitch,  with  a  perfectly  grey 
ace,  Milka,  the  daughter  of  the  first  Milka,  lay  on  a  chair  beside  him. 
Denisov,  with  streaks  of  grey  in  his  curly  hair,  moustaches,  and  whiskers, 
vearing  his  general’s  coat  unbuttoned,  sat  beside  Countess  Marya. 


109S  WAR  AND  PEACE 

Pierre  was  sitting  between  his  wife  and  the  old  countess.  He  was  tellir 
what  he  knew  might  interest  the  old  lady  and  be  intelligible  to  her.  t 
talked  of  external  social  events  and  of  the  persons  who  had  once  mac 
up  the  circle  of  the  old  countess’s  contemporaries,  and  had  once  been 
real  living  circle  of  people,  but  were  now  for  the  most  part  scattere 
about  the  world,  and,  like  her,  living  out  their  remnant  of  life,  gleanin 
up  the  stray  ears  of  what  they  had  sown  in  life.  But  they,  these  cor 
temporaries,  seemed  to  the  old  countess  to  make  up  the  only  real  worl 
that  was  worth  considering.  By  Pierre’s  eagerness,  Natasha  saw  tha 
his  visit  had  been  an  interesting  one,  that  he  was  longing  to  tell  tlier 
about  it,  but  dared  not  speak  freely  before  the  countess.  Denisov,  nc 
being  a  member  of  the  family,  did  not  understand  Pierre’s  circumspect 
ness,  and,  moreover,  being  dissatisfied  with  the  course  of  events,  too' 
a  very  great  interest  in  all  that  was  going  forward  at  Petersburg.  He  wa 
continually  trying  to  get  Pierre  to  tell  him  about  the  recent  scanda 
about  the  Semyonovsky  regiment,  or  about  Araktcheev,  or  about  thi 
Bible  Society.  Pierre  was  sometimes  led  on  into  beginning  to  talk  abou 
those  subjects,  but  Nikolay  and  Natasha  always  brought  him  back  ti 
the  health  of  Prince  Ivan  and  Countess  Marya  Antonovna. 

‘Well,  what  is  all  this  idiocy,  Gossner  and  Madame  Tatarinov,’  Denison 
asked,  ‘is  that  still  going  on?’ 

‘Going  on?’  said  Pierre.  ‘Worse  than  ever.  The  Bible  Society  is  nov 
the  whole  government.’ 

‘What  is  that,  mon  cher  ami?”  asked  the  old  countess,  who,  having 
drunk  her  tea,  w7as  obviously  seeking  a  pretext  for  ill-humour  after  tak¬ 
ing  food.  ‘What  are  you  saying  about  the  government?  I  don’t  under¬ 
stand  that.’ 

‘Why,  you  know,  maman put  in  Nikolay,  who  knew  how  to  translate 
things  into  his  mother’s  language.  ‘Prince  Alexander  Nikolaevitch  Golit¬ 
sin  has  founded  a  society,  so  he  has  great  influence  they  say.’ 

‘Araktcheev  and  Golitsin,’  said  Pierre  incautiously,  ‘are  practically 
the  government  now.  And  what  a  government!  They  see  conspiracy  in 
everything,  they  are  afraid  of  everything.’ 

‘What,  Prince  Alexander  Nikolaevitch  found  fault  with!  He  is  a  most 
estimable  man.  I  used  to  meet  him  in  old  days  at  Marya  Antonovna’s,’1 
said  the  countess  in  an  aggrieved  tone.  And  still  more  aggrieved  by  the 
general  silence,  she  went  on,  ‘Nowadays  people  find  fault  with  every  one. 
A  Gospel  Society,  what  harm  is  there  in  that?’  and  she  got  up  (every  one 
rose  too),  and  with  a  severe  face  sailed  out  to  her  table  in  the  adjoining 
divan-room. 

In  the  midst  of  the  mournful  silence  that  followed,  they  heard  the 
sound  of  children’s  voices  and  laughter  from  the  next  room.  There  was 
evidently  some  joyful  excitement  afoot  among  the  children. 

‘Finished,  finished!’  the  gleeful  shriek  of  little  Natasha  was  heard 
above  all  the  rest.  Pierre  exchanged  glances  with  Countess  Marya  and 
Nikolay  (Natasha  he  was  looking  at  all  the  time),  and  he  smiled  happily. 

‘Delightful  music!’  he  said. 


iogg 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

Anna  Makarovna  has  finished  her  stocking,’  said  Countess  Marya. 

Oh,  I’m  going  to  have  a  look  at  them,’  said  Pierre,  jumping  up.  ‘You 
tow,’  he  said,  stopping  at  the  door,  ‘why  it  is  I  so  particularly  love 
tit  music — it  is  what  first  lets  me  know  that  all’s  well.  As  I  came  to-day, 
t2  nearer  I  got  to  home,  the  greater  my  panic.  As  I  came  into  the 
\stibule,  I  heard  Andryusha  in  peals  of  laughter,  and  then  I  knew 
a  was  well  .  .  .’ 

‘I  know,  I  know  that  feeling,’  Nikolay  chimed  in.  ‘I  mustn’t  come — 
He  stockings  are  a  surprise  in  store  for  me.’ 

Pierre  went  in  to  the  children,  and  the  shrieks  and  laughter  were 
Lider  than  ever.  ‘Now,  Anna  Makarovna,’  cried  Pierre’s  voice,  ‘here  in 
te  middle  of  the  room  and  at  the  word  of  command — one,  two,  and 
vien  I  say  three,  you  stand  here.  You  in  my  arms.  Now,  one,  two  .  .  .’ 
lere  was  complete  silence.  ‘Three!’  and  an  enthusiastic  roar  of  chil- 
cen’s  voices  rose  in  the  room.  ‘Two,  two!’  cried  the  children. 

They  meant  the  two  stockings,  which,  by  a  secret  only  known  to  her, 
.ana  Makarovna  used  to  knit  on  her  needles  at  once.  She  always  made 
solemn  ceremony  of  pulling  one  stocking  out  of  the  other  in  the  presence 
i  the  children  when  the  pair  was  finished. 


XIV 

oon  after  this  the  children  came  in  to  say  good-night.  The  children 
ssed  every  one,  the  tutors  and  governesses  said  good-night  and  went 
vay.  Dessalle  alone  remained  with  his  pupil.  The  tutor  whispered  to 
[is  young  charge  to  come  downstairs. 

‘No,  M.  Dessalle,  I  will  ask  my  aunt  for  leave  to  stay,’  Nikolinka 
olkonsky  answered,  also  in  a  whisper. 

‘Ma  tante,  will  you  let  me  stay?’  said  Nikolinka,  going  up  to  his  aunt, 
is  face  was  full  of  entreaty,  excitement,  and  enthusiasm.  Countess 
farya  looked  at  him  and  turned  to  Pierre. 

‘When  you  are  here,  there  is  no  tearing  him  away  .  .  .’  she  said. 

‘I  will  bring  him  directly,  M.  Dessalle.  Good-night,’  said  Pierre,  giv- 
lg  his  hand  to  the  Swiss  tutor,  and  he  turned  smiling  to  Nikolinka.  ‘We 
ave  not  seen  each  other  at  all  yet.  Marie,  how  like  he  is  growing,’  he 
dded,  turning  to  Countess  Marya. 

‘Like  my  father?’  said  the  boy,  flushing  crimson  and  looking  up  at 
ierre  with  rapturous,  shining  eyes. 

Pierre  nodded  to  him,  and  went  on  with  the  conversation  that  had 
een  interrupted  by  the  children.  Countess  Marya  had  some  canvas 
mbroidery  in  her  hands;  Natasha  sat  with  her  eyes  fixed  on  her  hus- 
and.  Nikolay  and  Denisov  got  up,  asked  for  pipes,  smoked,  and  took 
ups  of  tea  from  Sonya,  still  sitting  with  weary  pertinacity  at  the  samovar, 
nd  asked  questions  of  Pierre.  The  curly-headed,  delicate  boy,  with  his 
hining  eyes,  sat  unnoticed  by  any  one  in  a  corner.  Turning  the  curly 
iead  and  the  slender  neck  above  his  laydown  collar  to  follow  Pierre’s 


1 100 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

movements,  lie  trembled  now  and  then,  and  murmured  something 
himself,  evidently  thrilled  by  some  new  and  violent  emotion. 

The  conversation  turned  on  the  scandals  of  the  day  in  the  high 
government,  circles,  a  subject  in  which  the  majority  of  people  usual 
find  the  chief  interest  of  home  politics.  Denisov,  who  was  dissatisfied  wi 
the  government  on  account  of  his  own  disappointments  in  the  servii 
heard  with  glee  of  all  the  follies,  as  he  considered  them,  that  were  goi 
on  now  in  Petersburg,  and  made  his  comments  on  Pierre’s  words  in  har 
and  in  cutting  phrases. 

‘In  old  days  you  had  to  be  a  German  to  be  anybody,  nowadays  y< 
have  to  dance  with  the  Tatarinov  woman  and  Madame  Kriidner,  to  re; 

.  .  .  Eckartshausem  and  the  rest  of  that  crew.  Ugh!  I  would  let  go< 
old  Bonaparte  loose  again!  He  would  knock  all  the  nonsense  out 
them.  Why,  isn’t  it  beyond  everything  to  have  given  that  fellow  Schwar 
the  Semyonovsky  regiment?’  he  shouted. 

Though  Nikolay  had  not  Denisov’s  disposition  to  find  everythir 
amiss,  he  too  thought  it  dignified  and  becoming  to  criticise  the  goven 
ment,  and  he  believed  that  the  fact,  that  A.  had  been  appointed  ministi1 
of  such  a  department,  and  B.  had  been  made  governor  of  such  a  provinc 
and  the  Tsar  had  said  this,  and  the  minister  had  said  that,  were  a 
matters  of  the  greatest  importance.  And  he  thought  it  incumbent  upc 
him  to  take  an  interest  in  the  subject  and  to  question  Pierre  about  ij 
So  the  questions  put  by  Nikolay  and  Denisov  kept  the  conversation  o 
the  usual  lines  of  gossip  about  the  higher  government  circles. 

But  Natasha,  who  knew  every  thought  and  expression  in  her  husbanc 
saw  that  Pierre  all  the  while  wanted  to  lead  the  conversation  into  anothe 
channel,  and  to  open  his  heart  on  his  own  idea,  the  idea  which  he  ha 
gone  to  Petersburg  to  consult  his  new  friend  Prince  Fyodor  about.  Sh 
saw  too  that  he  could  not  lead  up  to  this,  and  she  came  to  the  rescu 
with  a  question:  How  had  he  settled  things  with  Prince  Fyodor? 

‘What  was  that?’  asked  Nikolay. 

‘All  the  same  thing  over  and  over  again,’  said  Pierre,  looking  abou 
him.  ‘Every  one  sees  that  things  are  all  going  so  wrong  that  they  can’ 
be  endured,  and  that  it’s  the  duty  of  all  honest  men  to  oppose  it  to  tb 
utmost  of  their  power.’ 

‘Why,  what  can  honest  men  do?’  said  Nikolay,  frowning  slightly 
‘What  can  be  done?’ 

‘Why,  this  .  .  .’ 

‘Let  us  go  into  the  study,’  said  Nikolay. 

Natasha,  who  had  a  long  while  been  expecting  to  be  fetched  to  hei 
baby,  heard  the  nurse  calling  her,  and  went  off  to  the  nursery.  Countes; 
Marya  went  with  her.  The  men  went  to  the  study,  and  Nikolinka  Bol¬ 
konsky  stole  in,  unnoticed  by  his  uncle,  and  sat  down  at  the  writing- 
table,  in  the  dark  by  the  window. 

‘Well,  what  are  you  going  to  do?’  said  Denisov. 

‘Everlastingly  these  fantastic  schemes,’  said  Nikolay. 

‘Well,’  Pierre  began,  not  sitting  down,  but  pacing  the  room,  and  com- 


IICI 


WAR  AND  PEACE 
['  to  an  occasional  standstill,  lisping  and  gesticulating  rapidly  as  he 
tked.  ‘This  is  the  position  of  things  in  Petersburg:  the  Tsar  lets  every- 
tng  go.  He  is  entirely  wrapped  up  in  this  mysticism’  (mysticism  Pierre 
cjld  not  forgive  in  anybody  now).  ‘All  he  asks  for  is  peace;  and  he 
cn  only  get  peace  through  these  men  of  no  faith  and  no  conscience,  who 
si  stifling  and  destroying  everything,  Magnitsky  and  Araktcheev,  and 
ttti  quanti  .  .  .  You  will  admit  that  if  you  did  not  look  after  your 
pperty  yourself,  and  only  asked  for  peace  and  quiet,  the  crueller  your 
liliff  were,  the  more  readily  you  would  attain  your  object,’  he  said, 
trning  to  Nikolay. 

‘Well,  but  what  is  the  drift  of  all  this?’  said  Nikolay. 

‘Why,  everything  is  going  to  ruin.  Bribery  in  the  law-courts,  in  the 
;my  nothing  but  coercion  and  drill:  exile — people  are  being  tortured, 
:  d  enlightenment  is  suppressed.  Everything  youthful  and  honourable— 
■ey  are  crushing!  Everybody  sees  that  it  can’t  go  on  like  this.  The 
:rain  is  too  great,  and  the  string  must  snap,’  said  Pierre  (as  men  always 
a  say,  looking  into  the  working  of  any  government  so  long  as  govern- 
ents  have  existed).  ‘I  told  them  one  thing  in  Petersburg.’ 

‘Told  whom?’  asked  Denisov. 

‘Oh,  you  know  whom,’  said  Pierre,  with  a  meaning  look  from  under 
s  brows,  ‘Prince  Fyodor  and  all  of  them.  Zeal  in  educational  and  philan- 
ropic  work  is  all  very  good  of  course.  Their  object  is  excellent  and  all 
ie  rest  of  it;  but  in  present  circumstances  what  is  wanted  is  something 
se.’ 

At  that  moment  Nikolay  noticed  the  presence  of  his  nephew.  His  face 
II;  he  went  up  to  him. 

‘Why  are  you  here?’ 

‘Oh,  let  him  be,’  said  Pierre,  taking  hold  of  Nikolay’s  arm;  and  he 
,ent  on.  ‘That’s  not  enough,  I  told  them;  something  else  is  wanted  now. 
/hile  you  stand  waiting  for  the  string  to  snap  every  moment;  while  every 
ne  is  expecting  the  inevitable  revolution,  as  many  people  as  possible 
lould  join  hands  as  closely  as  they  can  to  withstand  the  general  catas- 
•ophe.  All  the  youth  and  energy  is  being  drawn  away  and  dissipated. 
>ne  lured  by  women,  another  by  honours,  a  third  by  display  or  money — 
ley  are  all  going  over  to  the  wrong  side.  As  for  independent,  honest  men, 
ke  you  and  me — there  are  none  of  them  left.  I  say:  enlarge  the  scope 
f  the  society:  let  the  mot  d’ordre  be  not  loyalty  only,  but  independence 
nd  action.’ 

Nikolay,  leaving  his  nephew,  had  angrily  moved  out  a  chair,  and  sat 
own  in  it.  As  he  listened  to  Pierre,  he  coughed  in  a  dissatisfied  way,  and 
rowned  more  and  more. 

‘But  action  with  what  object?’  he  cried.  ‘And  what  attitude  do  you 
ike  up  to  the  government?’ 

‘Why,  the  attitude  of  supporters!  The  society  will  perhaps  not  even 
ie  a  secret  one,  if  the  government  will  allow  it.  So  far  from  being  hostile 
o  the  government,  we  are  the  real  conservatives.  It  is  a  society  of 
entlemen,  in  the  full  significance  of  the  word.  It  is  simply  to  prevent 


1102 


WAR  AND  PEACE 
Pugatchov  from  coming  to  massacre  my  children  and  yours,  to  preve 
Araktcheev  from  transporting  me  to  a  military  settlement,  that  we  a 
joining  hands,  with  the  sole  object  of  the  common  welfare  and  security 

‘Yes;  but  it’s  a  secret  society,  and  consequently  a  hostile  and  mi 
chievous  society,  which  can  only  lead  to  evil.’ 

‘Why  so?  Did  the  Tugend-bund  which  saved  Europe’  (people  did  n< 
yet  venture  to  believe  that  Russia  had  saved  Europe)  ‘lead  to  evil? 
Tugend-bund  it  is,  an  alliance  of  virtue;  it  is  love  and  mutual  help;  it 
what  Christ  preached  on  the  cross  .  . 

Natasha,  coming  into  the  room  in  the  middle  of  the  conversatio 
looked  joyfully  at  her  husband.  She  was  not  rejoicing  in  what  he  w; 
saying.  It  did  not  interest  her  indeed,  because  it  seemed  to  her  that 
wTas  all  so  excessively  simple,  and  that  she  had  known  it  long  ago.  SI 
fancied  this,  because  she  knew  all  that  it  sprang  from — all  Pierre’s  sou 
But  she  was  glad  looking  at  his  eager,  enthusiastic  figure. 

Pierre  was  watched  with  even  more  rapturous  gladness  by  the  bo 
with  the  slender  neck  in  the  laydown  collar,  who  had  been  forgotten  b 
all  of  them.  Every  word  Pierre  uttered  set  his  heart  in  a  glow,  and  h 
fingers  moving  nervously,  he  unconsciously  picked  up  and  broke  t 
pieces  the  sticks  of  sealing-wax  and  pens  on  his  uncle’s  table. 

‘It’s  not  at  all  what  you  imagine,  but  just  such  a  society  as  the  Germa 
Tugend-bund  is  what  I  propose.’ 

‘Well,  my  boy,  that’s  all  very  well  for  the  sausage-eaters — a  Tugenc 
bund — but  I  don’t  understand  it,  and  I  can’t  even  pronounce  it,’  Den 
sov’s  loud,  positive  voice  broke  in.  ‘Everything’s  rotten  and  corrupt;  ■ 
agree  there;  only  your  Tugend-bund  I  don’t  understand,  but  if  one  i>| 
dissatisfied, — a  bunt  now’  (i.e.  riot  or  mutiny),  ‘je  suis  votre  homme. 

Pierre  smiled,  Natasha  laughed;  but  Nikolay  knitted  his  brows  mor 
than  ever,  and  began  arguing  with  Pierre  that  no  revolution  was  to  b 
expected,  and  that  the  danger  he  talked  of  had  no  existence  but  in  hi 
imagination.  Pierre  maintained  his  view,  and  as  his  intellectual  facultie 
were  keener  and  more  resourceful,  Nikolay  was  soon  at  a  loss  for  ai 
answer.  This  angered  him  still  more,  as  in  his  heart  he  felt  convinced 
not  by  reasoning,  but  by  something  stronger  than  reasoning,  of  the  in 
dubitable  truth  of  his  own  view. 

‘Well,  let  me  tell  you,’  he  said,  getting  up  and  nervously  setting  hi 
pipe  down  in  the  corner,  and  then  flinging  it  away;  ‘I  can’t  prove  it. you 
You  say  everything  is  all  rotten,  and  there  will  be  a  revolution;  I  don’ 
see  it;  but  you  say  our  oath  of  allegiance  is  a  conditional  thing,  and  a; 
to  that,  let  me  tell  you,  you  are  my  greatest  friend,  you  know  that,  bu 
you  make  a  secret  society,  you  begin  working  against  the  government— 
whatever  it  may  be,  I  know  it’s  my  duty  to  obey  it.  And  if  Araktcb^ 
bids  me  march  against  you  with  a  squadron  and  cut  you  down,  I  shan’ 
hesitate  for  a  second,  I  shall  go.  And  then  you  may  think  what  you  like 
about  it.’ 

An  awkward  silence  followed  these  words.  Natasha  was  the  first  to 
break  it  by  defending  her  husband  and  attacking  her  brother.  Hei 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1103 

(Fence  was  weak  and  clumsy.  But  it  attained  her  object.  The  con- 
ysation  was  taken  up  again,  and  no  longer  in  the  unpleasantly  hostile 
tie  in  which  Nikolay’s  last  words  had  been  spoken. 

When  they  all  got  up  to  go  in  to  supper,  Nikolinka  Bolkonsky  went 
i  to  Pierre  with  a  pale  face  and  shining,  luminous  eyes. 

‘Uncle  Pierre  .  .  .  you  ...  no  ...  If  papa  had  been  alive  .  .  . 

I  would  have  been  on  your  side?’  he  asked. 

Pierre  saw  in  a  flash  all  the  original,  complicated  and  violent  travail 
c  thought  and  feeling  that  must  have  been  going  on  independently  in 
tis  boy  during  the  conversation.  And  recalling  all  he  had  been  saying, 

]  felt  vexed  that  the  boy  should  have  heard  him.  He  had  to  answer 
lm,  however. 

‘I  believe  he  would,’  he  said  reluctantly,  and  he  went  out  of  the  study. 
The  boy  looked  down,  and  then  for  the  first  time  seemed  to  become 
ivare  of  the  havoc  he  had  been  making  on  the  writing-table.  He  flushed 
>tly  and  went  up  to  Nikolay. 

‘Uncle,  forgive  me;  I  did  it — not  on  purpose,’  he  said,  pointing  to  the 
agments  of  sealing-wax  and  pens. 

Nikolay  bounded  up  angrily.  ‘Very  good,  very  good,’  he  said,  throw- 
g  the  bits  of  pens  and  sealing-wax  under  the  table.  And  with  evident 
(fort  mastering  his  fury,  he  turned  away  from  him. 

‘You  ought  not  to  have  been  here  at  all,’  he  said. 

XV 

.T  supper  no  more  was  said  of  politics  and  societies,  but  a  conversation 
urned  on  the  subject  most  agreeable  to  Nikolay — reminiscences  of  1812. 
)enisov  started  the  talk,  and  Pierre  was  particularly  cordial  and  amus- 
rg.  And  the  party  broke  up  on  the  friendliest  terms.  Nikolay,  after  un- 
ressing  in  his  study,  and  giving  instructions  to  his  steward,  who  was 
waiting  him  went  in  his  dressing-gown  to  his  bedroom,  and  found  his 
/ife  still  at  her  writing-table:  she  was  writing  something. 

1  ‘What  are  you  writing,  Marie? ’asked  Nikolay.  Countess  Marya  flushed, 
ihe  was  afraid  that  what  she  was  writing  would  not  be  understood  and 
pproved  by  her  husband. 

She  would  have  liked  to  conceal  what  she  was  writing  from  him,  and 
iit  the  same  time,  she  was  glad  he  had  caught  her,  and  she  had  to  tell  him. 

’It’s  my  diary,  Nikolay,’  she  said,  handing  him  a  blue  note-book,  filled 
with  her  firm,  bold  handwriting. 

‘A  diary!’  .  .  .  said  Nikolay,  with  a  shade  of  mockery,  and  he  took 
he  note-book.  He  saw  written  in  French: 

‘December  4. — Andryusha’  (their  elder  boy)  ‘would  not  be  dressed 
when  he  waked  up  this  morning,  and  Mademoiselle  Louise  sent  for  me. 
He  was  naughty  and  obstinate.  I  tried  threatening  him,  but  he  only  got 
more  ill-tempered.  Then  I  undertook  to  manage  him,  left  him,  and  helped 
nurse  get  the  other  children  up,  and  told  him  I  did  not  love  him.  For  a 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


1104 

long  while  he  was  quiet,  as  though  he  were  surprised.  Then  he  rushed  01 
to  me  in  his  night-shirt,  and  sobbed  so  that  I  could  not  soothe  him  for 
long  while.  It  was  clear  that  what  distressed  him  most  was  having  grieve 
me.  Then,  when  I  gave  him  his  report  in  the  evening,  he  cried  piteous! 
again  as  he  kissed  me.  One  can  do  anything  with  him  by  tenderness.’ 

‘What  is  his  report?’  asked  Nikolay. 

‘I  have  begun  giving  the  elder  ones  little  marks  in  the  evening  of  ho 
they  have  behaved.’ 

Nikolay  glanced  at  the  luminous  eyes  watching  him,  and  went  on  turi 
ing  over,  and  read  the  diary.  Everything  in  the  children’s  lives  was  note 
down  in  it  that  seemed  to  the  mother  of  interest  as  showing  the  characte 
of  the  children,  or  leading  to  general  conclusions  as  to  methods  of  bringin 
them  up.  It  consisted  mostly  of  the  most  trilling  details;  but  they  did  nc 
seem  so  either  to  the  mother  or  the  father,  as  he  now,  for  the  first  thru 
read  this  record  of  his  children’s  lives.  On  the  5th  of  December  there  wa 
the  note: 

‘Mitya  was  naughty  at  table.  Papa  said  he  should  have  no  pudding.  H 
had  none;  but  he  looked  so  miserably  and  greedily  at  the  others  whil 
they  were  eating.  I  believe  that  punishing  them  by  depriving  them  of  swee 
things  only  develops  greediness.  Must  tell  Nikolay.’ 

Nikolay  put  the  book  down  and  looked  at  his  wife.  The  luminous  eye 
looked  at  him  doubtfully,  to  see  whether  he  approved  or  not.  There  coul 
be  no  doubtof  Nikolay’s  approval,  of  his  enthusiastic  admiration  of  hi 
wife. 

Perhaps  there  was  no  need  to  do  it  so  pedantically ;  perhaps  there  wa 
no  need  of  it  all,  thought  Nikolay;  but  this  untiring,  perpetual  spiritua 
effort,  directed  only  at  the  children’s  moral  welfare,  enchanted  him.  I 
Nikolay  could  have  analysed  his  feelings,  he  would  have  found  tha 
the  very  ground  work  of  his  steady  and  tender  love  and  pride  in  hi: 
wife  was  always  this  feeling  of  awe  at  her  spirituality,  at  that  elevatei 
moral  world  that  he  could  hardly  enter,  in  which  his  wife  always  lived. 

He  was  proud  that  she  was  so  clever  and  so  good,  recognising  his  owi 
insignificance  beside  her  in  the  spiritual  world,  and  he  rejoiced  the  mor< 
that  she,  with  her  soul,  not  only  belonged  to  him,  but  was  a  part  of  hi; 
very  self. 

‘I  quite,  quite  approve,  my  darling!’  he  said,  with  a  significant  air 
‘And,’  after  a  brief  pause,  he  added,  ‘And  I  have  behaved  badly  to-day 
You  were  not  in  the  study.  Pierre  and  I  were  arguing,  and  I  lost  my 
temper.  I  couldn’t  help  it.  He  is  such  a  child.  I  don’t  know  what  woulc 
become  of  him  if  Natasha  didn’t  keep  him  at  her  apron-strings.  Can  yoi 
imagine  what  he  went  to  Petersburg  about?  .  .  .  They  have  made  a  .  .  . 

‘Yes,  I  know,’  said  Countess  Marya.  ‘Natasha  told  me.’ 

‘Oh,  well,  you  know,  then,’  Nikolay  went  on,  getting  hot  at  the  mere 
recollection  of  the  discussion.  ‘He  wants  to  persuade  me  that  it’s  the  duty 
of  every  honest  man  to  work  against  the  government  when  one’s  sworn 
allegiance  and  duty.  ...  I  am  sorry  you  were  not  there.  As  it  was,  they 
all  fell  upon  me,  Denisov,  and  Natasha,  too.  .  .  .  Natasha  is  too  amusing. 


nos 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

le  know  she  twists  him  round  her  little  finger,  but  when  it  comes  to  dis- 
tssion — she  hasn’t  an  idea  to  call  her  own — she  simply  repeats  his 
nrds,’  added  Nikolay,  yielding  to  that  irresistible  impulse  that  tempts 
ee  to  criticise  one’s  nearest  and  dearest.  Nikolay  was  unaware  that  what 
1  was  saying  of  Natasha  might  be  said  word  for  word  of  himself  in  rela¬ 
te  to  his  wife. 

‘Yes,  I  have  noticed  that,’  said  Countess  Marya. 

‘When  I  told  him  that  duty  and  sworn  allegiance  come  before  every- 
ling,  he  began  arguing  God  knows  what.  It  was  a  pity  you  were  not  there. 
'  hat  would  you  have  said?’ 

‘To  my  thinking,  you  were  quite  right.  I  told  Natasha  so.  Pierre  says 
at  every  one  is  suffering,  and  being  ill-treated  and  corrupted,  and  that 
s  our  duty  to  help  our  neighbours.  Of  course,  he  is  right,’  said  Countess 
arya;  ‘but  he  forgets  that  we  have  other  nearer  duties,  which  God  Him- 
lf  has  marked  out  for  us,  and  that  we  may  run  risks  for  ourselves,  but 
)t  for  our  children.’ 

‘Yes,  yes,  that’s  just  what  I  told  him,’  cried  Nikolay,  who  actually  fan- 
ed  he  had  said  just  that.  ‘And  they  had  all  their  say  out  about  loving 
he’s  neighbour,  and  Christianity,  and  all  the  rest  of  it,  before  Nikolinka, 
ho  had  slipped  in  there,  and  was  pulling  all  my  things  to  pieces.’ 

‘Ah,  do  you  know,  Nikolay,  I  am  so  often  worried  about  Nikolinka,’ 
lid  Countess  Marya.  ‘He  is  such  an  exceptional  boy.  And  I  am  afraid 
neglect  him  for  my  own.  All  of  us  have  our  children;  we  all  have  our 
wn  ties;  while  he  has  nobody.  He  is  always  alone  with  his  thoughts.’ 
‘Well,  I  don’t  think  you  have  anything  to  reproach  yourself  with  on  his 
ccount.  Everything  the  fondest  mother  could  do  for  her  son  you  have 
one,  and  are  doing,  for  him.  And  of  course  I  am  glad  you  do.  He  is  a 
olendid  boy,  splendid!  This  evening  he  was  lost  in  a  sort  of  dream  listen- 
ig  to  Pierre.  And  only  fancy,  we  got  up  to  go  in  to  supper.  I  look;  and 
riere  he  has  broken  everything  on  my  table  to  fragments,  and  he  told  me 
f  it  at  once.  I  have  never  know  him  to  tell  a  fib.  He’s  a  splendid  boy!’ 
epeated  Nikolay,  who  did  not  in  his  heart  like  Nikolinka,  but  always  felt 
loved  to  acknowledge  that  he  was  a  splendid  fellow. 

‘Still  I  am  not  the  same  as  a  mother,’  said  Countess  Marya.  ‘I  feel 
hat  it’s  not  the  same,  and  it  worries  me.  He’s  a  wonderful  boy;  but  I 
m  awfully  afraid  for  him.  Companionship  will  be  good  for  him.’ 

‘Oh,  well,  it’s  not  for  long;  next  summer  I  shall  take  him  to  Petersburg,’ 
aid  Nikolay.  ‘Yes,  Pierre  always  was,  and  always  will  be,  a  dreamer,’  he 
vent  on,  returning  to  the  discussion  in  the  study,  which  had  evidently 
vorked  on  his  feelings.  ‘Why,  what  concern  is  all  that  of  mine — Arakt- 
heev’s  misdoings,  and  all  the  rest  of  it — what  concern  was  it  of  mine, 
vhen  at  the  time  of  our  marriage  I  had  so  many  debts  that  they  were  going 
o  put  me  in  prison,  and  a  mother  who  couldn  t  see  it  or  understand  it. 
\nd  then  you,  and  the  children,  and  my  work.  It’s  not  for  my  own 
Measure  I  am  from  morning  to  night  looking  after  the  men,  or  in  the 
:ounting-house.  No,  I  know  I  must  work  to  comfort  my  mother,  repay 
/ou,  and  not  leave  my  children  in  beggary,  as  I  was  left  myself.’ 


no6 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

Countess  Marya  wanted  to  tell  him  that  man  does  not  live  by  breai 
alone;  that  he  attached  too  much  importance  to  this  work.  But  she  kne\ 
that  she  must  not  say  this,  and  that  it  would  be  useless.  She  only  took  hi 
hand  and  kissed  it.  He  accepted  this  gesture  on  his  wife’s  part  as  a  sigi 
of  assent  and  approval  of  his  words,  and  after  a  few  moments  of  silen 
thought  he  went  on  thinking  aloud. 

‘Do  you  know,  Marie,’  he  said,  ‘Ilya  Mitrofanitch’  (this  was  a  stewan 
of  his)  ‘was  here  to-day  from  the  Tambov  estate,  and  he  tells  me  they  wi] 
give  eighty  thousand  for  the  forest.’  And  with  an  eager  face  Nikola; 
began  talking  of  the  possibility  of  buying  Otradnoe  back  within  a  ver; 
short  time.  ‘Another  ten  years  of  life,  and  I  shall  leave  the  children  .  . 
in  a  capital  position.’ 

Countess  Marya  listened  to  her  husband,  and  understood  all  he  sail 
to  her.  She  knew  that  when  he  was  thus  thinking  aloud,  he  would  some 
times  ask  what  he  had  been  saying,  and  was  vexed  when  he  noticed  shi 
had  been  thinking  of  something  else.  But  she  had  to  make  a  great  effor 
to  attend,  because  she  did  not  feel  the  slightest  interest  in  what  he  wa: 
saying  to  her.  She  looked  at  him,  and  though  she  would  not  exactly  think 
of  other  things,  her  feelings  were  elsewhere.  She  felt  a  submissive,  tendei 
love  for  this  man,  who  could  never  understand  all  that  she  understood: 
and  she  seemed,  for  that  very  reason,  to  love  him  the  more,  with  a  shadi 
of  passionate  tenderness.  Apart  from  that  feeling,  which  absorbed  hei 
entirely,  and  prevented  her  from  following  the  details  of  her  husband’s 
plans,  thoughts  kept  floating  through  her  brain  that  had  nothing  in  com¬ 
mon  with  what  he  was  saying.  She  thought  of  her  nephew  (what  her  hus¬ 
band  had  said  of  his  excitement  over  Pierre’s  talk  had  made  a  great  im¬ 
pression  on  her),  and  various  traits  of  his  tender,  sensitive  character  rose 
to  her  mind;  and  while  she  thought  of  her  nephew,  she  thought,  too,  of 
her  own  children.  She  did  not  compare  her  nephew  with  her  own  children, 
but  she  compared  her  own  feeling  for  him,  and  her  feeling  for  her  children, 
and  felt,  with  sorrow,  that  in  her  feeling  for  Nikolinka  there  was  some¬ 
thing  wanting. 

Sometimes  the  idea  had  occurred  to  her  that  this  difference  was  due  to 
his  age;  but  she  felt  guilty  towards  him,  and  in  her  soul  vowed  to  amend, 
and  to  do  the  impossible,  that  is,  in  this  life,  to  love  her  husband,  and  her 
children,  and  Nikolinka,  and  all  her  fellow-creatures,  as  Christ  loved  men. 
Countess  Marya’s  soul  was  always  striving  towards  the  infinite,  the 
eternal,  and  the  perfect,  and  so  she  could  never  be  at  peace.  A  stern  ex¬ 
pression  came  into  her  face  from  that  hidden,  lofty  suffering  of  the  spirit, 
weighed  down  by  the  flesh.  Nikolay  gazed  at  her.  ‘My  God!  What  will 
become  of  us,  if  she  dies,  as  I  dread,  when  she  looks  like  that?’  he  thought, 
and  standing  before  the  holy  images,  he  began  to  repeat  his  evening 
prayer. 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


1107 


XVI 

'atasha,  as  soon  as  she  was  alone  with  her  husband,  had  begun  talking 
0,  as  only  husband  and  wife  can  talk,  that  is,  understanding  and  com- 
unicating  their  thoughts  to  each  other,  with  extraordinary  clearness  and 
.pidity,  by  a  quite  peculiar  method  opposed  to  all  the  rules  of  logic, 
ithout  the  aid  of  premises,  deductions,  and  conclusions.  Natasha  was 
)  used  to  talking  to  her  husband  in  this  fashion  that  a  logical  sequence 
••1  f  thought  on  Pierre’s  part  was  to  her  an  infallible  symptom  of  something 
eing  out  of  tune  between  them.  When  he  began  arguing,  talking  reason- 
bly  and  calmly,  and  when  she  was  led  on  by  his  example  into  doing  the 
ime,  she  knew  it  would  infallibly  lead  to  a  quarrel. 

From  the  moment  they  were  alone  together  and  Natasha,  with  wide- 
pen,  happy  eyes,  crept  softly  up  to  him  and  suddenly,  swiftly  seizing  his 
ead,  pressed  it  to  her  bosom,  saying,  ‘Now  you’re  all  mine,  mine!  You 
han’t  escape!’  that  conversation  began  that  contravened  every  rule  of 
ogic,  especially  because  they  talked  of  several  different  subjects  at  once. 
This  discussion  of  all  sorts  of  things  at  once,  far  from  hindering  clearness 
if  comprehension,  was  the  surest  token  that  they  understood  one  an¬ 
other  fully. 

As  in  a  dream  everything  is  uncertain,  meaningless,  and  contradictory 
except  the  feeling  that  directs  the  dream,  so  in  this  communion  of  ideas, 
apart  from  every  law  of  reason,  what  is  clear  and  consecutive  is  not  what 
is  said,  but  the  feeling  that  prompts  the  words. 

;  Natasha  talked  to  Pierre  of  the  daily  round  of  existence  at  her  brother’s ; 
told  him  how  she  had  suffered  and  been  half-dead  without  him;  and  that 
jshe  was  fonder  of  Marie  than  ever,  and  Marie  was  better  in  every  way 
than  she  was.  In  saying  this  Natasha  was  quite  sincere  in  acknowledging 
Marie’s  superiority,  but  at  the  same  time  she  expected  Pierre  to  prefer 
her  to  Marie  and  all  other  women,  and  now,  especially  after  he  had  been 
seeing  a  great  many  women  in  Petersburg,  to  tell  her  so  anew.  In  response 
to  Natasha’s  words,  Pierre  told  her  how  intolerable  he  had  found  the 
evening  parties  and  dinners  with  ladies  in  Petersburg. 

‘I  have  quite  lost  the  art  of  talking  to  ladies,’  he  said;  ‘it  was  horribly 
tiresome.  Especially  as  I  was  so  busy.’ 

Natasha  looked  intently  at  him,  and  went  on.  ‘Marie,  now  she  is  won¬ 
derful!’  she  said.  ‘The  insight  she  has  into  children.  She  seems  to 
see  straight  into  their  souls.  Yesterday,  for  instance,  Mitenka  was 
naughty  .  .  .’ 

‘And  isn’t  he  like  his  father?’  Pierre  put  in. 

Natasha  knew  why  he  made  this  remark  about  Mitenka’s  likeness  to 
Nikolay.  He  disliked’  the  thought  of  his  dispute  with  his  brother-in-law, 
and  was  longing. to  hear  what  she  thought  about  it. 

‘It’s  a  weakness  of  Nikolay’s,  that  if  anything  is  not  generally  accepted, 
he  will  never  agree  with  it.  And  I  see  that  that’s  just  what  you  value  to 


noS  WAR  AND  PEACE 

ouvrir  unc  carriere,’  she  said,  repeating  a  phrase  Pierre  had  once  uttere 

‘No,  the  real  thing  is  that  to  Nikolay,’  said  Pierre,  ‘thoughts  and  ide; 
are  an  amusement,  almost  a  pastime.  Here  he’s  forming  a  library  and  h; 
made  it  a  rule  not  to  buy  a  new  book  till  he  has  read  through  the  last  h 
has  bought — Sismondi  and  Rousseau  and  Moniesquieu,’  Pierre  adde 

with  a  smile.  ‘You  know  how  I - ,’  he  was  beginning  to  soften  his  crit 

cism;  but  Natasha  interrupted,  giving  him  thereby  to  understand  tha 
that  was  not  necessary. 

‘So  you  say  ideas  to  him  are  not  serious  .  .  .’ 

‘Yes,  and  to  me  nothing  else  is  serious.  All  the  while  I  was  in  Peters 
burg,  I  seemed  to  be  seeing  every  one  in  a  dream.  When  I  am  absorbed  b; 
an  idea,  nothing  else  is  serious.’ 

‘Oh,  what  a  pity  I  didn’t  see  your  meeting  with  the  children,’  saic 
Natasha.  ‘Which  was  the  most  pleased?  Liza,  of  course?’ 

‘Yes,’  said  Pierre,  and  he  went  on  with  what  interested  him.  ‘Nikola} 
says  we  ought  not  to  think.  But  I  can’t  help  it.  To  say  nothing  of  th( 
fact  (I  can  say  so  to  you)  that  in  Petersburg  I  felt  that  the  whole  thing 
would  go  to  pieces  without  me,  every  one  pulled  his  own  way.  But  I  suc¬ 
ceeded  in  bringing  them  all  together;  and  then  my  idea  is  so  dear  and 
simple.  I  don’t  say  we  ought  to  work  against  so  and  so.  We  may  be  mis¬ 
taken.  But  I  say:  let  those  join  hands  who  care  for  the  good  cause,  and 
let  our  one  standard  be  energy  and  honesty.  Prince  Sergey  is  a  capital 
fellow,  and  clever.’ 

Natasha  would  have  had  no  doubt  that  Pierre’s  idea  was  a  grand  idea, 
but  that  one  thing  troubled  her.  It  was  his  being  her  husband.  ‘Is  it  pos¬ 
sible  that  a  man  of  such  value,  of  such  importance  to  society,  is  at  the 
same  time  my  husband?  How  can  it  have  happened?’  She  wanted  to  ex¬ 
press  this  doubt  to  him.  ‘Who  are  the  persons  who  could  decide  positively 
whether  he  is  so  much  cleverer  than  all  of  them?’  she  wondered,  and  she 
went  over  in  imagination  the  people  who  were  very  much  respected  by 
Pierre.  There  was  nobody  whom,  to  judge  by  his  own  account,  he  had 
respected  so  much  as  Platon  Karataev. 

‘Do  you  know  what  I  am  thinking  about?’  she  said.  ‘About  Platon 
Karataev.  What  would  he  have  said?  Would  he  have  approved  of  you 
now?’ 

Pierre  was  not  in  the  least  surprised  at  this  question.  He  understood  the 
connection  of  his  wife’s  ideas. 

‘Platon  Karataev?’  he  said,  and  he  pondered,  evidently  trying  sincerely 
to  picture  what  Karataev’s  judgment  would  have  been  on  the  subject. 
‘He  would  not  have  understood,  and  yet,  perhaps,  he  would.’ 

‘I  like  you  awfully!  ’  said  Natasha  all  at  once.  ‘Awfully!  awfully!’ 

‘No,  he  wouldn’t  have  approved,’  said  Pierre,  musing.  ‘What  he  would 
have  approved  of  is  our  home  life.  He  did  so  like  to  see  seemliness,  happi¬ 
ness,  peace  in  everything,  and  I  could  have  shown  him  all  of  us  with  pride. 
You  talk  about  separation.  But  you  would  not  believe  what  a  special  feel¬ 
ing  I  have  for  you  after  separation  .  .  .’ 

‘And,  besides,  .  .  Natasha  was  beginning. 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


1109 

•'No,  not  so.  I  never  leave  off  loving  you.  And  one  couldn’t  love  more; 
ft  it’s  something  special.  .  .  .’  He  did  not  finish,  because  their  eyes  meet- 
ig  said  the  rest. 

‘What  nonsense,’  said  Natasha  suddenly,  ‘it  all  is  about  the  honeymoon 
jd  that  the  greatest  happiness  is  at  first.  On  the  contrary,  now  is  much 
e  best.  If  only  you  wouldn’t  go  away.  Do  you  remember  how  we  used 
t  quarrel?  And  I  was  always  in  the  wrong.  It  was  always  my  doing.  And 
nat  we  quarrelled  about — I  don’t  remember  even.’ 

‘Always  the  same  thing,’  said  Pierre  smiling.  ‘Jea  .  .  .’ 

‘Don't  say  it,  I  can’t  bear  it,’  cried  Natasha,  and  a  cold,  vindictive  light 
yearned  in  her  eyes.  ‘Did  you  see  her?’  she  added  after  a  pause. 

‘No;  and  if  I  had,  I  shouldn't  have  known  her.’ 

They  were  silent. 

‘Oh!  do  you  know,  when  you  were  talking  in  the  study,  I  was  looking 
you,’  said  Natasha,  obviously  trying  to  drive  away  the  cloud  that  had 
)me  between  them.  ‘And  do  you  know  you  are  as  like  him  as  two  drops 
It  water,  like  the  boy.’  That  was  what  she  called  her  baby  son.  ‘Ah,  it’s 
me  I  went  to  him.  .  .  .  But  I  am  sorry  to  go  away.’ 

They  were  both  silent  for  some  seconds.  Then  all  at  once,  at  the  same 
loment,  they  turned  to  each  other  and  began  talking.  Pierre  was  begin- 
ing  with  self-satisfaction  and  enthusiasm,  Natasha  with  a  soft,  happy 
nile.  Interrupting  each  other,  both  stopped,  waiting  for  the  other  to 
0  on. 

‘No,  what  is  it?  Tell  me,  tell  me.’ 

‘No,  you  tell  me,  it  wasn’t  anything,  only  nonsense,’  said  Natasha. 
Pierre  said  what  he  had  been  going  to  say.  It  was  the  sequel  to  his 
omplacent  reflections  on  his  success  in  Petersburg.  It  seemed  to  him  at 
hat  moment  that  he  was  destined  to  give  a  new  direction  to  the  progress 
if  the  whole  of  Russian  society  and  of  the  whole  world. 

‘I  only  meant  to  say  that  all  ideas  that  have  immense  results  are  always 
imple.  All  my  idea  really  is  that  if  vicious  people  are  united  and  form  a 
)ower,  honest  men  must  do  the  same.  It’s  so  simple,  you  see.’ 

;  ‘Yes.’ 

‘But  what  were  you  going  to  say?’ 

‘Oh,  nothing,  nonsense.’ 

‘No,  say  it  though.’ 

‘Oh,  nothing,  only  silly  nonsense,’  said  Natasha,  breaking  into  a  more 
teaming  smile  than  ever.  ‘I  was  only  going  to  tell  you  about  Petya.  Nurse 
:ame  up  to  take  him  from  me  to-day,  he  laughed  and  puckered  up  his 
face  and  squeezed  up  to  me — I  suppose  he  thought  he  was  hiding.  He’s 
awfully  sweet.  .  .  .  There  he  is  crying.  Well,  good-bye!  ’  and  she  ran  out 
3f  the  room. 

Meanwhile,  below  in  Nikolinka  Bolkonsky’s  bedroom  a  lamp  was  burn¬ 
ing  as  usual  (the  boy  was  afraid  of  the  dark  and  could  not  be  cured  of  this 
weakness).  Dessalle  was  asleep  with  his  head  high  on  his  four  pillows, 
and  his  Roman  nose  gave  forth  rhythmic  sounds  of  snoring.  Nikolinka 
had  just  waked  up  in  a  cold  sweat,  and  was  sitting  up  in  bed,  gazing  with 


IIIO 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

wide-open  eyes  straight  before  him.  He  had  been  waked  by  a  fearfi 
dream.  In  his  dream  his  Uncle  Pierre  and  he  in  helmets,  such  as  appeare 
in  the  illustrations  in  his  Plutarch,  were  marching  at  the  head  of  an  in 
mense  army.  This  army  was  made  up  of  slanting,  white  threads  that  fille 
the  air  like  those  spider-webs  that  float  in  autumn  and  that  Dessall 
used  to  call  le  fil  de  la  Vierge.  Ahead  of  them  was  glory,  which  was  soitk 
thing  like  those  threads  too,  only  somewhat  more  opaque.  They — he  an 
Pierre — were  flying  lightly  and  happily  nearer  and  nearer  to  their  goa 
All  at  once  the  threads  that  moved  them  seemed  to  grow  weak  ani 
tangled;  and  it  was  all  difficult.  And  Uncle  Nikolay  stood  before  them  ii 
a  stern  and  menacing  attitude. 

‘Have  you  done  this?’  he  said,  pointing  to  broken  pens  and  sticks  o 
sealing-wax.  ‘I  did  love  you,  but  Araktcheev  has  bidden  me,  and  I  will  kil 
the  first  that  moves  forward.’ 

Nikolinka  looked  round  for  Pierre;  but  Pierre  was  not  there.  Insteac 
of  Pierre,  there  was  his  father — Prince  Andrey — and  his  father  had  nc 
shape  or  form,  but  he  was  there;  and  seeing  him,  Nikolinka  felt  the  weak¬ 
ness  of  love;  he  felt  powerless,  limp,  and  relaxed.  His  father  caressed  him 
and  pitied  him,  but  his  Uncle  Nikolay  was  moving  down  upon  them, 
coming  closer  and  closer.  A  great  horror  came  over  Nikolinka,  and  he 
waked  up. 

‘My  father!’  he  thought.  (Although  there  were  two  very  good  por¬ 
traits  of  Prince  Andrey  in  the  house,  Nikolinka  never  thought  of  his 
father  in  human  form.)  ‘My  father  has  been  with  me,  and  has  caressed; 
me.  He  approved  of  me;  he  approved  of  Uncle  Pierre.  Whatever  he  might 
tell  me,  I  would  do  it.  Mucius  Scaevola  burnt  his  hand.  But  why  should 
not  the  same  sort  of  thing  happen  in  my  life?  I  know  they  want  me  to 
study.  And  I  am  going  to  study.  But  some  day  I  shall  have  finished,  and 
then  I  will  act.  One  thing  only  I  pray  God  for,  that  the  same  sort  of  thing 
may  happen  with  me  as  with  Plutarch's  men,  and  I  will  act  in  the  same 
way.  I  will  do  more.  Every  one  shall  know  of  me,  shall  love  me,  and  admire 
me.’  And  all  at  once  Nikolinka  felt  his  breast  heaving  with  sobs,  and  he 
burst  into  tears. 

‘Are  you  ill?’  he  heard  Dessalle’s  voice. 

‘No,’  answered  Nikolinka,  and  he  lay  back  on  his  pillow.  ‘How  good  and 
kind  he  is;  I  love  him!’  He  thought  of  Dessalle.  ‘But  Uncle  Pierre!  Oh, 
what  a  wonderful  man!  And  my  father?  Father!  Father!  Yes,  I  will  do 
something  that  even  he  would  be  content  with  .  .  .’ 


PART  II 


I 

Iie  subject  of  history  is  the  life  of  peoples  and  of  humanity.  To  catch 
ad  pin  down  in  words — that  is,  to  describe  directly  the  life,  not  only  of 
Imanity,  but  even  of  a  single  people,  appears  to  be  impossible. 

All  the  ancient  historians  employed  the  same  method  for  describing  and 
(tching  what  is  seemingly  elusive — that  is,  the  life  of  a  people.  They 
(scribed  the  career  of  individual  persons  ruling  peoples;  and  their 
j tivity  was  to  them  an  expression  of  the  activity  of  the  whole  people. 
The  questions,  In  what  way  individual  persons  made  nations  act 
i  accordance  with  their  will,  and  by  what  the  will  of  those  individuals 
emselves  was  controlled,  the  ancients  answered,  By  the  will  of  God; 
hich  in  the  first  case  made  the  nation  subject  to  the  will  of  one  chosen 
:rson,  and,  in  the  second,  guided  the  will  of  that  chosen  monarch  to  the 
dained  end. 

For  the  ancients  these  questions  were  solved  by  faith  in  the  immediate 
irticipation  of  the  Deity  in  the  affairs  of  mankind. 

Modern  history  has  theoretically  rejected  both  those  positions.  One 
ould  have  thought  that  rejecting  the  convictions  of  the  ancients  of  men’s 
jbjection  to  the  Deity,  and  of  a  defined  goal  to  which  nations  are  led, 
lodern  history  should  have  studied,  not  the  manifestations  of  power, 
ut  the  causes  that  go  to  its  formation.  But  modern  history  has  not  done 
rat.  While  in  theory  rejecting  the  views  of  the  ancients,  it  follows  them 
1  practice. 

Instead  of  men  endowed  with  divine  authority  and  directly  led  by  the 
yill  of  the  Deity,  modern  history  has  set  up  either  heroes,  endowed  with 
xtraordinary,  superhuman  powers,  or  simply  men  of  the  most  varied 
haracteristics,  from  monarchs  to  journalists,  who  lead  the  masses.  Instead 
f  the  old  aim,  the  will  of  the  Deity,  that  to  the  old  historians  seemed 
he  end  of  the  movements  of  peoples,  such  as  the  Gauls,  the  Greeks,  and 
he  Romans,  modern  history  has  advanced  aims  of  its  own — the  welfare 
if  the  French,  the  German,  or  the  English  people,  or  its  highest  pitch  of 
generalisation,  the  civilisation  of  all  humanity,  by  which  is  usually  meant 
he  peoples  inhabiting  a  small,  northwestern  corner  of  the  great  mother- 
:arth. 

Modern  history  has  rejected  the  faiths  of  the  ancients,  without  putting 
my  new  conviction  in  their  place;  and  the  logic  of  the  position  has  forced 
he  historians,  leaving  behind  them  the  rejected,  divine  right  of  kings 
tnd  fate  of  the  ancients,  to  come  back  by  a  different  path  to  the  same 
xiint  again:  to  the  recognition,  that  is  (i),  that  peoples  are  led  by  in- 

III  I 


II 12 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

dividual  persons;  and  (2)  that  there  is  a  certain  goal  towards  whi 
humanity  and  the  peoples  constituting  it  are  moving. 

In  all  the  works  of  the  more  modern  historians,  from  Gibbon 
Buckle,  in  spite  of  their  apparent  differences  and  the  apparent  novel 
of  their  views,  these  two  old  inevitable  positions  lie  at  the  basis  of  t 
argument. 

In  the  first  place  the  historian  describes  the  conduct  of  separate  persoi 
who,  in  his  opinion,  lead  humanity  (one  regards  as  such  only  monarch 
military  generals,  and  ministers  of  state ;  another  includes  besides,  moi 
archs,  orators,  scientific  men,  reformers,  philosophers,  and  poets).  Se< 
ondly,  the  goal  towards  which  humanity  is  being  led  is  known  to  tl 
historian.  To  one  this  goal  is  the  greatness  of  the  Roman,  or  the  Spanis! 
or  the  French  state;  for  another,  it  is  freedom,  equality,  a  certain  soi 
of  civilisation  in  a  little  corner  of  the  world  called  Europe. 

In  1789  there  was  a  ferment  in  Paris:  it  grew  and  spread,  and  foun 
expression  in  the  movement  of  peoples  from  west  to  east.  Several  time 
that  movement  is  made  to  the  east,  and  comes  into  collision  with  a  counter 
movement  from  east  westwards.  In  the  year  1812  it  reaches  its  furthes 
limit,  Moscow,  and  then,  with  a  remarkable  symmetry,  the  counter 
movement  follows  from  east  to  west;  drawing  with  it,  like  the  firs 
movement,  the  peoples  of  Central  Europe.  The  counter-movement  reache 
the  starting-point  of  the  first  movement — Paris — and  subsides. 

During  this  period  of  twenty  years  an  immense  number  of  fields  an 
not  tilled;  houses  are  burned;  trade  changes  its  direction;  millions  0 
men  grow  poor  and  grow  rich,  and  change  their  habitations;  and  million' 
of  Christians,  professing  the  law  of  love,  murder  one  another. 

What  does  all  this  mean?  What  did  all  this  proceed  from?  What  in¬ 
duced  these  people  to  burn  houses  and  to  murder  their  fellow-creatures? 
What  were  the  causes  of  these  events?  What  force  compelled  men  to  act 
in  this  fashion?  These  are  the  involuntary  and  most  legitimate  questions 
that,  in  all  good  faith,  humanity  puts  to  itself  when  it  stumbles  on 
memorials  and  traditions  of  that  past  age  of  restlessness. 

To  answer  these  questions  the  common-sense  of  humanity  turns  to 
the  science  of  history,  the  object  of  which  is  the  self-knowledge  of  na¬ 
tions  and  of  humanity. 

Had  history  retained  the  view  of  the  ancients,  it  would  have  said: 
The  Deity,  to  reward  or  to  punish  His  people,  gave  Napoleon  power,  and 
guided  his  will  for  the  attainment  of  His  own  divine  ends.  And  that 
answer  would  have  been  complete  and  clear.  One  might  believe  or  dis¬ 
believe  in  the  divine  significance  of  Napoleon.  For  one  who  believed  in 
it,  all  the  history  of  that  period  would  have  been  comprehensible,  and 
there  would  have  been  nothing  contradictory  in  it. 

But  modern  history  cannot  answer  in  that  way.  Science  does  not  accept 
the  view  of  the  ancients  as  to  the  direct  participation  of  the  Deity  in  the 
affairs  of  mankind,  and  therefore  must  give  other  answers. 

Modern  history,  in  answer  to  these  questions,  says:  ‘You  want  to 


WAR  AND  PEACE  m3 

low  what  this  movement  means,  what  it  arose  from,  and  what  force 
pduced  these  events?  Listen. 

‘Louis  xiv.  was  a  very  haughty  and  self-willed  man;  he  had  such  and 
sch  mistresses,  and  such  and  such  ministers,  and  he  governed  France 
Idly.  Louis’s  successors,  too,  were  weak  men,  and  they,  too,  governed 
lance  badly.  And  they  had  such  and  such  favourites,  and  such  and  such 
listresses.  Moreover,  there  were  certain  men  writing  books  at  this  period. 
..  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century  there  were  some  two  dozen  men 
j  Paris  who  began  to  talk  all  about  men  being  equal  and  free.  This  led 
jople  all  over  France  to  fall  to  hewing  and  hacking  at  each  other.  These 
;ople  killed  the  king  and  a  great  many  more.  At  that  time  there  was  in 
ranee  a  man  of  genius — Napoleon.  He  conquered  every  one  everywhere, 
lat  is,  he  killed  a  great  many  people,  because  he  was  a  very  great  genius, 
nd  for  some  reason  he  went  to  kill  the  Africans;  and  killed  them  so 
ell,  and  was  so  cunning  and  clever,  that  on  returning  to  France  he  bade 
/ery  one  obey  him.  And  they  all  did  obey  him.  After  being  made  Em- 
eror  he  went  to  kill  people  in  Italy,  Austria,  and  Prussia.  And  there, 
jo,  he  killed  a  great  many.  In  Russia  there  was  an  Emperor,  Alexander, 
ho  was  resolved  to  re-establish  order  in  Europe,  and  so  made  war  with 
fapoleon.  But  in  1807  he  suddenly  made  friends  with  him,  and  in  1811 
e  quarrelled  again,  and  again  they  began  killing  a  great  many  people, 
md  Napoleon  took  six  hundred  thousand  men  into  Russia,  and  con- 
uered  Moscow,  and  then  he  suddenly  ran  away  out  of  Moscow,  and 
hen  the  Emperor  Alexander,  aided  by  the  counsels  of  Stein  and  others, 
inited  Europe  for  defence  against  the  destroyer  of  her  peace.  All  Napo- 
eon’s  allies  suddenly  became  his  enemies;  and  the  united  army  advanced 
against  the  fresh  troops  raised  by  Napoleon.  The  allies  vanquished 
Napoleon;  entered  Paris;  forced  Napoleon  to  abdicate,  and  sent  him 
0  the  island  of  Elba,  not  depriving  him,  however,  of  the  dignity  of 
Smperor,  showing  him,  in  fact,  every  respect,  although  five  years  before, 
ind  one  year  later,  he  was  regarded  by  every  one  as  a  brigand  outside 
he  pale  of  the  law.  And  Louis  xviii.,  who,  till  then,  had  been  a  laughing¬ 
stock  to  the  French  and  the  allies,  began  to  reign.  Napoleon  shed  tears 
oefore  the  Old  Guard,  abdicated  the  throne,  and  went  into  exile.  Then 
the  subtle,  political  people  and  diplomatists  (conspicuous  among  them 
Talleyrand,  who  succeeded  in  sitting  down  in  a  particular  chair  before 
any  one  else,  and  thereby  extended  the  frontiers  of  France)  had  conver¬ 
sations  together  at  Vienna,  and  by  these  conversations  made  nations 
happy  or  unhappy.  All  at  once  the  diplomatists  and  monarchs  all  but 
quarrelled;  they  were  on  the  point  of  again  commanding  their  armies  to 
kill  one  another;  but  at  that  time  Napoleon  entered  France  with  a  bat¬ 
talion,  and  the  French,  who  had  been  hating  him,  at  once  submitted  to 
him.  But  the  allied  monarchs  were  angry  at  this,  and  again  went  to  war 
with  the  French.  And  the  genius,  Napoleon,  was  conquered;  and  sud¬ 
denly  recognising  that  he  was  a  brigand,  they  took  him  to  the  island  of 
St.  Helena.  And  on  that  rock  the  exile,  parted  from  the  friends  of  his 
heart,  and  from  his  beloved  France,  died  a  lingering  death,  and  be- 


iii4  WAR  AND  PEACE 

queathed  all  his  great  deeds  to  posterity.  And  in  Europe  the  reacti 
followed,  and  all  the  sovereigns  began  oppressing  their  subjects  agai' 

It  would  be  quite  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  this  is  mockery — a  cark 
ture  of  historical  descriptions.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  a  softened-doi 
picture  of  the  contradictory  and  random  answers,  that  are  no  answe  < 
given  by  all  history,  from  the  compilers  of  memoirs  and  of  histories  ' 
separate  states  to  general  histories,  and  the  new  sort  of  histories  of  t 
culture  of  that  period. 

What  is  strange  and  comic  in  these  answers  is  due  to  the  fact  th 
modern  history  is  like  a  deaf  man  answering  questions  which  no  one  h. 
asked  him. 

If  the  aim  of  history  is  the  description  of  the  movement  of  humanii 
and  of  nations,  the  first  question  which  must  be  answered,  or  all  tl 
rest  remains  unintelligible,  is  the  following:  What  force  moves  nation: 
To  meet  this  question  modern  history  carefully  relates  that  Napolec 
was  a  very  great  genius,  and  that  Louis  xiv.  was  very  haughty,  or  th; 
certain  writers  wrote  certain  books. 

All  this  may  very  well  be  so,  and  humanity  is  ready  to  acquiesce  in  it 
but  it  is  not  what  it  asks  about.  All  that  might  be  very  interesting  if  w 
recognised  a  divine  power,  based  on  itself  and  always  alike,  guiding  it 
peoples  through  Napoleons,  Louis’,  and  writers;  but  we  do  not  acknowl' 
edge  such  a  power,  and  therefore  before  talking  about  Napoleons,  an 
Louis,  and  great  writers,  we  must  show  the  connection  existing  betwee: 
those  persons  and  the  movement  of  the  nations.  If  another  force  is  pu 
in  the  place  of  the  divine  power,  then  it  should  be  explained  what  tha 
force  consists  of,  since  it  is  precisely  in  that  force  that  the  whole  interes 
of  history  lies. 

History  seems  to  assume  that  this  force  is  taken  for  granted  of  itself 
and  is  known  to  every  one.  But  in  despite  of  every  desire  to  admit  thi. 
new  force  as  known,  any  one  who  reads  through  very  many  historica 
works  cannot  but  doubt  whether  this  new  force,  so  differently  understooc 
by  the  historians  themselves,  is  perfectly  well  known  to  every  one. 


II 

What  is  the  force  that  moves  nations? 

Biographical  historians,  and  historians  writing  of  separate  nations, 
understand  this  force  as  a  power  residing  in  heroes  and  sovereigns. 
According  to  their  narratives,  the  events  were  entirely  due  to  the  wills 
of  Napoleons,  of  Alexanders,  or,  generally  speaking,  of  those  persons  who 
form  the  Subject  of  historical  memoirs.  The  answers  given  by  historians 
of  this  class  to  the  question  as  to  the  force  which  brings  about  events 
are  satisfactory,  but  only  so  long  as  there  is  only  one  historian  for  any 
event.  But  as  soon  as  historians  of  different  views  and  different  nationali¬ 
ties  begin  describing  the  same  event,  the  answers  given  by  them  imme¬ 
diately  lose  all  their  value,  as  this  force  is  understood  by  them,  not  only 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1115 

jii-rently,  but  often  in  absolutely  opposite  ways.  One  historian  asserts 
th.  an  event  is  due  to  the  power  of  Napoleon;  another  maintains  that 
it  produced  by  the  power  of  Alexander;  a  third  ascribes  it  to  the  in- 
ilcrice  of  some  third  person.  Moreover,  historians  of  this  class  contradict 
or  another  even  in  their  explanation  of  the  force  on  which  the  influence 
of  he  same  person  is  based.  Thiers,  a  Bonapartist,  says  that  Napoleon’s 
peer  rested  on  his  virtue  and  his  genius;  Lanfrey,  a  Republican,  de- 
cl; es  that  it  rested  on  his  duplicity  and  deception  of  the  people.  So  that 
hiorians  of  this  class,  mutually  destroying  each  other’s  position,  at  the 
saie  time  destroy  the  conception  of  the  force  producing  events,  and  give 
nanswer  to  the  essential  question  of  history. 

Vriters  of  universal  history,  who  have  to  deal  with  all  the  nations  at 
01  e,  appear  to  recognise  the  incorrectness  of  the  views  of  historians  of 
Sfarate  countries  as  to  the  force  that  produces  events.  They  do  not  recog- 
n ;  this  force  as  a  power  pertaining  to  heroes  and  sovereigns,  but  regard 
itis  the  resultant  of  many  forces  working  in  different  directions.  In 
dcribing  a  war  on  the  subjugation  of  a  people,  the  writer  of  general 
htory  seeks  the  cause  of  the  event,  not  in  the  power  of  one  person,  but 
iithe  mutual  action  on  one  another  of  many  persons  connected  with 
tl  event. 

The  power  of  historical  personages  conceived  as  the  product  of  several 
fices,  according  to  this  view,  can  hardly,  one  would  have  supposed,  be 
r;arded  as  a  self-sufficient  force  independently  producing  events.  Yet 
eiters  of  general  history  do  in  the  great  majority  of  cases  employ  the 
:iception  of  power  again  as  a  self-sufficient  force  producing  events  and 
i  nding  in  the  relation  of  cause  to  them.  According  to  their  exposition 
vv  the  historical  personage  is  the  product  of  his  time,  and  his  power 
only  the  product  of  various  forces,  now  his  power  is  the  force  pro- 
:cing  events.  Gervinus,  Schlosser,  for  instance,  and  others,  in  one  place, 
;olain  that  Napoleon  is  the  product  of  the  Revolution,  of  the  ideas  of 
189,  and  so  on;  and  in  another  plainly  state  that  the  campaign  of  1812 
d  other  events  not  to  their  liking  are  simply  the  work  of  Napoleon’s 
ongly  directed  will,  and  that  the  very  ideas  of  1789  were  arrested  in 
eir  development  by  Napoleon’s  arbitrary  rule.  The  ideas  of  the  Revo- 
tion,  the  general  temper  of  the  age  produced  Napoleon’s  power.  The 
iwer  of  Napoleon  suppressed  the  ideas  of  the  Revolution  anti  the  general 
mper  of  the  age. 

This  strange  inconsistency  is  not  an  accidental  one.  It  confronts  us  at 
'ery  turn,  and,  in  fact,  whole  works  upon  universal  history  are  made 
)  of  consecutive  series  of  such  inconsistencies.  This  inconsistency  is 
re  to  the  fact  that  after  taking  a  few  steps  along  the  road  of  analysis, 
ese  historians  have  stopped  short  halfway. 

To  find  the  component  forces  that  make  up  the  composite  or  resultant 
rce,  it  is  essential  that  the  sum  of  the  component  parts  should  equal 
ie  resultant.  This  condition  is  never  observed  by  historical  writers,  and 
insequently,  to  explain  the  resultant  force,  they  must  inevitably  ad- 


iii6 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

mit,  in  addition  to  those  insufficient  contributory  forces,  some  furt  r 
unexplained  force  that  affects  also  the  resultant  action. 

The  historian  describing  the  campaign  of  1813,  or  the  restoration 
ffie  Bourbons,  says  bluntly  that  these  events  were  produced  by  the  \ 
of  Alexander.  But  the  philosophic  historian  Gervinus,  controverting  ( 
view  of  the  special  historian  of  those  events,  seeks  to  prove  that 
campaign  of  1813  and  the  restoration  of  the  Bourbons  was  due  not  0 
to  Alexander,  but  also  to  the  work  of  Stein,  Metternich,  Madame  de  St;, 
Talleyrand,  Fichte,  Chateaubriand,  and  others.  The  historian  obviou, 
analyses  the  power  of  Alexander  into  component  forces.  Talleyra; 
Chateaubriand,  and  so  on,  and  the  sum  of  these  component  forces,  t 
is,  the  effect  on  one  another  of  Chateaubriand,  Talleyrand,  Madame  ;i 
Stael,  and  others  is  obviously  no,t  equal  to  the  resultant  effect,  that  ^ 
the  phenomenon  of  millions  of  Frenchman  submitting  to  the  Bourbo.i 
Such  and  such  words  being  said  to  one  another  by  Chateaubriand,  IV .. 
dame  de  Stael,  and  others,  only  affects  their  relation  to  one  another,  al 
does  not  account  for  the  submission  of  millions.  And  therefore  to  explJ 
how  the  submission  of  millions  followed  from  their  relation  to  one  ; 
other,  that  is,  how  from  component  forces  equal  to  a  given  quantity 
there  followed  a  resultant  equal  to  a  thousand  times  A,  the  histori  1. 
is  inevitably  bound  to  admit  that  force  of  power,  which  he  has  renounc 
accepting  it  in  the  resultant  force,  that  is,  he  is  obliged  to  admit 
unexplained  force  that  acts  on  the  resultant  of  those  components.  A 
this  is  just  what  the  philosophic  historians  do.  And  consequently  tb 
not  only  contradict  the  writers  of  historical  memoirs,  but  also  contrad 
themselves. 

Country  people  who  have  no  clear  idea  of  the  cause  of  rain  say,  T: 
wind  has  blown  away  the  rain,  or  the  wind  is  blowing  up  for  rain,  ;| 
cording  as  they  are  in  want  of  rain  or  of  fair  weather.  In  the  same  wq 
philosophic  historians  at  times,  when  they  wish  it  to  be  so,  when  it  fits  ; 
with  their  theory,  say  that  power  is  the  result  of  events;  and  at  tim, 
when  they  want  to  prove  something  else,  they  say  power  produces  t; 
events. 

A  third  class  of  historians,  the  writers  of  the  so-called  history  of  ci 
ture,  following  on  the  lines  laid  down  by  the  writers  of  universal  histo 
who  sometimes  accept  writers  and  ladies  as  forces  producing  events,  } 
understand  that  force  quite  differently.  They  see  that  force  in  so-call 
culture,  in  intellectual  activity.  The  historians  of  culture  are  quite  co; 
sistent  as  regards  their  prototypes — the  writers  of  universal  history 
for  if  historical  events  can  be  explained  by  certain  persons  having  sa 
certain  things  to  one  another,  why  not  explain  them  by  certain  perso 
having  written  certain  books?  Out  of  all  the  immense  number  of  toke 
that  accompany  every  living  phenomenon,  these  historians  select  t 
symptom  of  intellectual  activity,  and  assert  that  this  symptom  is  t 
cause.  But  in  spite  of  all  their  endeavours  to  prove  that  the  cause 
events  lies  in  intellectual  activity,  it  is  only  by  a  great  stretch  that  0 
can  agree  that  there  is  anything  in  common  between  intp  actual  activi 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


hi)- 

ncthe  movement  of  peoples.  And  it  is  altogether  impossible  to  admit 
aa  intellectual  activity  has  guided  the  actions  of  men,  for  such  phe- 
oiena  as  the  cruel  murders  of  the  French  Revolution,  resulting  from 
teloctrinfe  of  the  equality  of  man,  and  the  most  wicked  wars  and  mas- 
ices  arising  from  the  Gospel  of  love,  do  not  confirm  this  hypothesis. 

]jt  even  admitting  that  all  the  cunningly  woven  arguments  with  which 
iee  histories  abound  are  correct,  admitting  that  nations  are  governed 
y  jme  indefinite  force  called  an  idea— the  essential  question  of  history 
;il remains  unanswered;  or  to  the  power  of  monarchs  and  the  influence 
f  tunsellors  and  other  persons,  introduced  by  the  philosophic  historian, 
niher  new  force  is  now  joined — the  idea,  the  connection  of  which  with 
lenasses  demands  explanation.  One  can  understand  that  Napoleon  had 
osr  and  so  an  event  came  to  pass;  with  some  effort  one  can  even  con- 
sib  that  Napoleon  together  with  other  influences  was  the  cause  of  an 
rut.  But  in  what  fashion  a  book,  Le  Contrat  Social,  led  the  French  to 
a:  each  other  to  pieces  cannot  be  understood  without  an  explanation 
[  le  causal  connection  of  this  new  force  with  the  event. 

here  undoubtedly  exists  a  connection  between  all  the  people  living 
t  ne  time,  and  so  it  is  possible  to  find  some  sort  of  connection  between 
)i intellectual  activity  of  men  and  their  historical  movements,  just  as 
n  may  find  a  connection  between  the  movements  of  humanity  and 
jmerce,  handicrafts,  gardening,  and  anything  you  like.  But  why  in- 
ihctual  activity  should  be  conceived  of  by  the  historians  of  culture  as 
i  cause  or  the  expression  of  a  whole  historical  movement,  it  is  hard 
understand.  Historians  can  only  be  led  to  such  a  conclusion  by  the 
nwing  considerations:  (i)  That  history  is  written  by  learned  men; 
t.  so  it  is  natural  and  agreeable  to  them  to  believe  that  the  pursuit 
fheir  calling  is  the  basis  of  the  movement  of  the  whole  of  humanity, 
i  as  a  similar  belief  would  be  natural  and  agreeable  to  merchants, 
ificulturists,  or  soldiers  (such  a  belief  on  their  part  does  not  find 
Session  simply  because  merchants  and  soldiers  don’t  write  history); 
f.  (2)  that  spiritual  activity,  enlightenment,  civilisation,  culture,  ideas 
:  all  vague,  indefinite  conceptions,  under  cover  of  which  they  can  con- 
iiently  use  phrases  having  a  less  definite  signification,  and  so  easily 
i  ught  under  any  theory. 

lut  to  say  nothing  of  the  inner  dignity  of  histories  of  this  kind  (pos- 
y  they  are  of  use  for  some  one  or  for  something),  the  histories  of 
ture,  towards  which  all  general  histories  tend  more  and  more  to  ap- 
,ximate,  are  noteworthy  from  the  fact  that  though  they  give  a  serious 
I  detailed  analysis  of  various  religious,  philosophic,  and  political  doc- 
aes  as  causes  of  events,  every  time  they  have  to  describe  an  actual 
jtorical  event,  as,  for  instance,  the  campaign  of  1812,  they  uncon- 
nisly  describe  it  as  the  effect  of  the  exercise  of  power,  frankly  saying 
t  that  campaign  was  the  work  of  Napoleon’s  will.  In  saying  this,  the 
torians  of  culture  unconsciously  contradict  themselves,  to  prove  that 
new  force  t1-  j  have  invented  is  not  the  expression  of  historical  events. 


HIS 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


and  that  the  sole  means  of  explaining  history  is  by  that  power  which 
they  had  apparently  rejected. 


Ill 

A  steam-engine  moves.  The  question  is  asked,  How  is  it  moved?  A 
peasant  answers,  It  is  the  devil  moving  it.  Another  man  says,  The  steam- 
engine  moves  because  the  wheels  are  going  round.  A  third  maintains  that 
the  cause  of  the  motion  is  to  be  found  in  the  smoke  floated  from  it  by 
the  wind. 

The  peasant’s  contention  is  irrefutable.  To  refute  him  some  one  must 
prove  to  him  that  there  is  no  devil,  or  another  peasant  must  explain  that 
it  is  not  a  devil,  but  a  German  who  moves  the  steamer.  Then  from  their 
contradictory  views  they  see  that  both  are  wrong.  But  the  man  who 
says  the  cause  is  the  movement  of  the  wheels  refutes  himself,  seeing  that 
having  once  entered  on  the  path  of  analysis,  he  ought  to  proceed  further 
and  further  along  it;  he  ought  to  explain  the  cause  of  the  wheels  moving. 
And  he  has  not  to  stop  in  his  search  for  a  cause  till  he  finds  the  ultimate 
cause  of  the  movement  of  the  steam-engine  in  the  steam  compressed  in 
the  boiler.  As  for  the  man  who  explained  the  movement  of  the  steam- 
engine  as  due  to  the  smoke  being  blown  back  from  it,  he  has  simply  noticed 
that  the  wheel  explanation  was  insufficient,  and  pitching  on  the  first 
accompanying  symptom,  gave  that  out  as  his  cause. 

The  only  conception  which  can  explain  the  movement  of  the  steamer 
is  the  conception  of  a  force  equal  to  the  movement  that  is  seen. 

The  only  conception  by  means  of  which  the  movements  of  nations 
can  be  explained  is  a  conception  of  a  force  equal  to  the  whole  movement 
of  the  nations. 

Yet  under  this  conception  there  are  included  by  various  historians 
forces  of  the  most  various  kinds,  and  all  unequal  to  the  movement  that  is 
seen.  Some  see  in  it  a  force  directly  pertaining  to  heroes,  as  the  peasant 
sees  the  devil  in  the  steam-engine.  Others,  a  force  resulting  from  several 
other  forces,  like  the  movement  of  the  wheels;  a  third  class,  intellectual 
influence,  like  the  smoke. 

So  long  as  histories  are  written  of  individual  persons — whether  they 
are  Caesars  and  Alexanders,  or  Luthers  and  Voltaires — and  not  the  history 
of  all,  without  one  exception,  all  the  people  taking  part  in  an  event,  there 
is  no  possibility  of  describing  the  movement  of  humanity  without  a  con¬ 
ception  of  a  force  impelling  men  to  direct  their  activity  to  one  end.  And 
the  only  conception  of  this  kind  familiar  to  historians  is  power. 

This  conception  is  the  sole  handle  by  means  of  which  the  material 
of  history,  as  at  present  expounded,  can  be  dealt  with;  and  the  historian 
who  should,  like  Buckle,  break  off  this  handle,  without  discovering  any 
other  means  of  dealing  with  historical  material,  would  only  be  depriving 
himself  of  the  last  chance  of  dealing  with  it.  The  necessity  of  the  con¬ 
ception  of  the  exercise  of  power  to  explain  the  phenomena  of  history  is 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1119 

most  strikingly  shown  by  the  very  writers  of  universal  history  and  the 
history  of  culture,  who,  after  professedly  rejecting  the  conception  of 
power,  inevitably  resort  to  it  at  every  step. 

Historical  science  in  relation  to  the  questions  of  humanity  has  hitherto 
been  like  money  in  circulation — paper  notes  and  metal  coins.  The  his¬ 
torical  memoirs  and  histories  of  separate  peoples  are  like  paper  money. 
They  may  pass  and  be  accepted,  doing  their  part  without  mischief  to 
any  one,  and  even  being  useful,  so  long  as  no  question  arises  as  to  their 
value.  One  has  only  to  forget  the  question  how  the  will  of  heroes  produces 
events,  and  Thiers’s  histories  will  be  interesting,  instructive,  and  will, 
moreover,  not  be  devoid  of  a  certain  poetry.  But  just  as  a  doubt  of  the 
stability  of  paper  money  arises,  either  because  from  the  ease  of  making 
it,  too  much  is  put  into  circulation,  or  because  of  a  desire  to  replace  it  by 
gold,  so  a  doubt  of  the  real  value  of  history  of  this  kind  arises  either 
because  too  many  such  histories  appear,  or  because  some  one  in  the  sim¬ 
plicity  of  his  heart  asks:  By  what  force  did  Napoleon  do  that? — that  is, 
wishes  to  change  the  current  paper  for  the  pure  gold  of  a  true  conception. 

The  writers  of  general  history  and  the  history  of  culture  are  like  men 
who,  recognising  the  inconvenience  of  paper  money,  should  decide  to 
make  instead  of  paper  notes,  jingling  coin  of  metal  not  of  the  density 
of  gold.  And  such  coin  would  be  jingling  coin,  and  only  jingling  coin.  A 
paper  note  might  deceive  the  ignorant;  but  coin  not  of  precious  metal 
could  deceive  no  one.  Just  as  gold  is  only  gold  when  it  is  of  value,  not 
only  for  exchange,  but  also  for  use,  so  the  writers  of  universal  history 
will  only  prove  themselves  of  real  value  when  they  are  able  to  answer 
the  essential  question  of  history:  What  is  power?  These  historians  give 
contradictory  answers  to  this  question,  while  the  historians  of  culture 
altogether  evade  it,  answering  something  quite  different.  And  as  counters 
in  imitation  of  gold  can  only  be  used  in  a  community  of  persons  who 
agree  to  accept  them  for  gold,  or  who  are  ignorant  of  the  true  character 
of  gold,  so  do  the  historians  who  do  not  answer  the  essential  questions 
of  humanity  serve  for  some  objects  of  their  own  as  current  coin  at  the 
universities  and  with  that  crowd  of  readers— fond  of  serious  reading,  as 
they  call  it. 


IV 

Since  history  has  abandoned  the  views  of  the  ancients  as  to  the  divine 
subjection  of  the  will  of  a  people  to  one  chosen  vessel,  and  the  subjection 
of  the  will  of  that  chosen  vessel  to  the  Deity,  it  cannot  take  a  single  step 
without  encountering  contradictions.  It  must  choose  one  of  two  alterna¬ 
tives:  either  to  return  to  its  old  faith  in  the  direct  intervention  of  the 
Deity  in  the  affairs  of  humanity;  or  to  find  a  definite  explanation  of  that 
force  producing  historical  events  that  is  called,  power. 

To  return  to  the  old  way  is  out  of  the  question:  the  old  faith  is  shat¬ 
tered,  and  so  an  explanation  must  be  found  of  the  meaning  of  power. 

Napoleon  commanded  an  army  to  be  raised,  and  to  march  out  to  war. 


1120 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

This  conception  is  so  familiar  to  us,  we  are  so  accustomed  to  this  idea, 
that  the  question  why  six  hundred  thousand  men  go  out  to  fisht  when 
Napoleon  utters  certain  words  seems  meaningless  to  us.  He  had  the 
power,  and  so  the  commands  he  gave  were  carried  out. 

This  answer  is  completely  satisfactory  if  we  believe  that  power  has 
been  given  him  from  God.  But  as  soon  as  we  do  not  accept  that,  it  is 
essential  to  define  what  this  power  is  of  one  man  over  others. 

This  power  cannot  be  that  direct  power  of  the  physical  ascendency  of 
a  strong  creature  over  a  weak  one,  that  ascendency  based  on  the  applica¬ 
tion  or  the  threat  of  the  application  of  physical  force — like  the  power  of 
Hercules.  Nor  can  it  be  based  on  the  ascendency  of  moral  force,  as  in  the 
simplicity  of  their  hearts  several  historians  suppose,  maintaining  that  the 
leading  historical  figures  are  heroes — that  is,  men  endowed  with  a  special 
force  of  soul  and  mind  called  genius.  This  power  cannot  be  based  on  the 
ascendency  of  moral  force;  for,  to  say  nothing  of  historical  heroes,  like 
Napoleon,  concerning  whose  moral  qualities  opinions  greatly  differ,  his¬ 
tory  proves  to  us  that  neither  Louis  xi.  nor  Metternich,  who  governed 
millions  of  men,  had  any  marked  characteristics  of  moral  force,  but  that 
they  were,  on  the  contrary,  in  most  respects  morally  weaker  than  any 
one  of  the  millions  of  men  they  governed. 

If  the  source  of  power  lies  not  in  the  physical  and  not  in  the  moral 
characteristics  of  the  person  possessing  it,  it  is  evident  that  the  source  of 
this  power  must  be  found  outside  the  person — in  those  relations  in  which 
the  person  possessing  the  power  stands  to  the  masses. 

That  is  precisely  how  power  is  interpreted  by  the  science  of  law,  that 
cash  bank  of  history,  that  undertakes  to  change  the  historical  token 
money  of  power  for  sterling  gold. 

Power  is  the  combined  wills  of  the  masses,  transferred  by  their  ex¬ 
pressed  or  tacit  consent  to  the  rulers  chosen  by  the  masses. 

In  the  domain  of  the  science  of  law,  made  up  of  arguments  on  how  a 
state  and  power  ought  to  be  constructed,  if  it  were  possible  to  construct 
it,  all  this  is  very  clear;  but  in  its  application  to  history  this  definition  of 
power  calls  for  elucidation. 

The  science  of  law  regards  the  state  and  power,  as  the  ancients  re¬ 
garded  fire,  as  something  positively  existing.  But  for  history  the  state 
and  power  are  merely  phenomena,  just  as  for  the  physical  science  of 
to-day  fire  is  not  an  element,  but  a  phenomenon. 

From  this  fundamental  difference  in  the  point  of  view  of  history  and 
of  the  science  of  law,  it  comes  to  pass  that  the  science  of  law  can  discuss 
in  detail  how  in  the  scientific  writer’s  opinion  power  should  be  organised, 
and  what  is  power,  existing  immovable  outside  the  conditions  of  time; 
but  to  historical  questions  as  to  the  significance  of  power,  undergoing 
visible  transformation  in  time,  it  can  give  no  answer. 

If  power  is  the  combined  will  of  the  masses  transferred  to  their  rulers, 
is  Pugatchov  a  representative  of  the  will  of  the  masses?  If  he  is  not,  how 
then  is  Napoleon  i.  such  a  representative?  Why  is  it  that  Napoleon  hi., 


1 1  2  I 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

when  he  was  seized  at  Boulogne,  was  a  criminal,  and  afterwards  those 
who  had  been  seized  by  him  were  criminals? 

In  palace  revolutions — in  which  sometimes  two  or  three  persons  only 
take  part — is  the  will  of  the  masses  transferred  to  a  new  person?  In  inter¬ 
national  relations,  is  the  will  of  the  masses  of  the  people  transferred  to 
their  conqueror?  In  1808  was  the  will  of  the  Rhine  Alliance  league  trans¬ 
ferred  to  Napoleon?  Was  the  will  of  the  mass  of  the  Russian  people 
transferred  to  Napoleon  in  1809,  when  our  army  in  alliance  with  the 
French  made  war  upon  Austria? 

These  questions  may  be  answered  in  three  ways:  (1)  By  maintaining 
that  the  will  of  the  masses  is  always  unconditionally  delegated  over  to 
that  ruler  or  those  rulers  whom  they  have  chosen,  and  that  consequently 
every  rising  up  of  new  power,  every  struggle  against  the  power  once 
delegated,  must  be  regarded  as  a  contravention  of  the  real  power. 

Or  (2)  by  maintaining  that  the  will  of  the  masses  is  delegated  to  the 
rulers,  under  certain  definite  conditions,  and  by  showing  that  all  re¬ 
strictions  on,  conflicts  with,  and  even  abolition  of  power  are  due  to  non- 
observance  of  the  rulers  of  those  conditions  upon  which  power  was 
delegated  to  them. 

Or  (3)  by  maintaining  that  the  will  of  the  masses  is  delegated  to  the 
rulers  conditionally,  but  that  the  conditions  are  uncertain  and  undefined, 
and  that  the  rising  up  of  several  authorities,  and  their  conflict  and  fall, 
are  due  only  to  the  more  or  less  complete  fulfilment  of  the  rulers  of  the 
uncertain  conditions  upon  which  the  will  of  the  masses  is  transferred 
from  one  set  of  persons  to  another. 

In  these  three  ways  do  historians  explain  the  relation  of  the  masses 
to  their  rulers. 

Some  historians — those  most  distinctively  biographers  and  writers  of 
memoirs,  of  whom  we  have  spoken  above — -failing  in  the  simplicity  of 
their  hearts  to  understand  the  question  as  to  the  meaning  of  power, 
seem  to  believe  that  the  combined  will  of  the  masses  is  delegated  to  his¬ 
torical  leaders  unconditionally,  and  therefore,  describing  any  such  author¬ 
ity,  these  historians  assume  that  that  authority  is  the  one  absolute  and 
real  one,  and  that  every  other  force,  opposing  that  real  authoritjq  is  not 
authority,  but  a  violation  of  authority,  and  unlawful  violence. 

Their  theory  fits  in  well  with  primitive  and  peaceful  periods  of  his¬ 
tory;  but  in  its  application  to  complicated  and  stormy  periods  in  the 
life  of  nations,  when  several  different  authorities  rise  up  simultaneously 
and  struggle  together,  the  inconvenience  arises  that  the  legitimist  his¬ 
torian  will  assert  that  the  National  Assembly,  the  Directorate,  and 
Bonaparte  were  only  violations  of  real  authority:  while  the  Republican 
and  the  Bonapartist  will  maintain,  one  that  the  Republic,  and  the  other 
that  the  Empire  were  the  real  authority,  and  that  all  the  rest  was  a 
violation  of  authority.  It  is  evident  that  the  explanations  given  by  these 
historians,  being  mutually  contradictory,  can  satisfy  none  but  children 
of  the  tenderest  age. 

Recognising  the  deceptiveness  of  this  view  of  history,  another  class  of 


1122 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

historians  assert  that  authority  rests  on  the  conditional  delegation  of 
the  combined  will  of  the  masses  to  their  rulers,  and  that  historical  leaders 
possess  power  only  on  condition  of  carrying  out  the  programme  which  the 
will  of  the  people  has  by  tacit  consent  dictated  to  them.  But  what  this 
programme  consists  of,  those  historians  do  not  tell  us,  or  if  they  do,  they 
continually  contradict  one  another. 

In  accordance  with  his  view  of  what  constitutes  the  goal  of  the  move¬ 
ments  of  a  people,  each  historian  conceives  of  this  programme,  as,  for 
instance,  the  greatness,  the  wealth,  the  freedom,  or  the  enlightenment  of 
the  citizens  of  France  or  some  other  kingdom.  But  putting  aside  the 
contradictions  between  historians  as  to  the  nature  of  such  a  programme, 
and  even  supposing  that  one  general  programme  to  exist  for  all,  the  facts 
of  history  almost  always  contradict  this  theory. 

If  the  conditions  on  which  power  is  vested  in  rulers  are  to  be  found 
in  the  wealth,  freedom,  and  enlightenment  of  the  people,  how  is  it  that 
kings  like  Louis  xxv.  and  John  xv.  lived  out  their  reigns  in  peace,  while 
kings  like  Louis  xvi.  and  Charles  x.  were  put  to  death  by  their  peoples? 

To  this  question  these  historians  reply,  that  the  effect  of  the  actions  of 
Louis  xiv.  contrary  to  the  programme  were  reacted  upon  Louis  xvi. 
But  why  not  reflected  on  Louis  xiv.  and  Louis  xv.?  Why  precisely  on 
Louis  xvi.?  And  what  limit  is  there  to  such  reflection?  To  these  questions 
there  is  and  can  be  no  reply.  Nor  does  this  view  explain  the  reason  that 
the  combined  will  of  a  people  remains  for  several  centuries  vested  in  its 
rulers  and  their  heirs,  and  then  all  at  once  during  a  period  of  fifty  years 
is  transferred  to  a  Convention,  a  Directory,  to  Napoleon,  to  Alexander, 
to  Louis  xvin.,  again  to  Napoleon,  to  Charles  x.,  to  Louis  Philippe,  to 
a  republican  government,  and  to  Napoleon  xn.  To  explain  these  rapid 
transferences  of  the  people’s  will  from  one  person  to  another,  especially 
when  complicated  by  international  relations,  wars,  and  alliances,  these 
historians  are  unwillingly  obliged  to  allow  that  a  proportion  of  these 
phenomena  are  not  normal  transferences  of  the  will  of  the  people,  but  ~ 
casual  incidents,  depending  on  the  cunning,  or  the  blundering,  or  the 
craft,  or  the  weakness  of  a  diplomatist  or  a  monarch,  or  the  leader  of  a 
party.  So  that  the  greater  number  of  the  phenomena  of  history — civil 
wars,  revolutions,  wars — are  regarded  by  these  historians  as  not  being 
produced  by  the  delegation  of  the  free-will  of  the  people,  but  as  being 
produced  by  the  wrongly  directed  will  of  one  or  several  persons,  that 
is,  again  by  a  violation  of  authority.  And  so  by  this  class  of  historians, 
too,  historical  events  are  conceived  of  as  exceptions  to  their  theory. 

These  historians  are  like  a  botanist  who,  observing  that  several  plants 
grow  by  their  seed  parting  into  two  cotyledons,  or  seed-leaves,  should 
insist  that  everything  that  grows  only  grows  by  parting  into  two  leaves ; 
and  that  the  palm-tree  and  the  mushroom,  and  even  the  oak,  when  it 
spreads  its  branches  in  all  directions  in  its  mature  growth,  and  has  lost 
all  semblance  to  its  two  seed-leaves,  are  departures  from  their  theory 
of  the  true  law  of  growth.  A  third  class  of  historians  admit  that  the  will 
of  the  masses  is  vested  in  historical  leaders  conditionally,  but  say  that 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1123 

those  conditions  are  not  known  to  us.  They  maintain  that  historical 
leaders  have  power  only  because  they  are  carrying  out  the  will  of  the 
masses  delegated  to  them. 

Bu.  in  that  case,  if  the  force  moving  the  peoples  lies  not  in  their  his¬ 
torical  leaders,  but  in  the  peoples  themselves,  where  is  the  significance 
of  those  historical  leaders? 

Historical  leaders  are,  so  those  historians  tell  us,  the  self-expression  of 
the  will  of  the  masses;  the  activity  of  the  historical  leaders  serves  as  a 
type  of  the  activity  of  the  masses. 

But  in  that  case  the  question  arises,  Does  all  the  activity  of  historical 
leaders  serve  as  an  expression  of  the  will  of  the  masses,  or  only  a  certain 
side  of  it?  If  all  the  life-activity  of  historical  leaders  serves  as  an  ex¬ 
pression  of  the  will  of  the  masses,  as  some  indeed  believe,  then  the 
biographies  of  Napoleons  and  Catherines,  with  all  the  details  of  court 
scandal,  serve  as  the  expression  of  the  life  of  their  peoples,  which  is  an 
obvious  absurdity.  If  only  one  side  of  the  activity  of  an  historical  leader 
serves  as  the  expression  of  the  life  of  a  people,  as  other  supposed  philo¬ 
sophical  historians  believe,  then  to  define  wdiat  side  of  the  activity  of 
an  historical  leader  does  express  the  life  of  a  people,  one  must  know  first 
what  the  life  of  the  people  consists  of. 

Being  confronted  with  this  difficulty,  historians  of  this  class  invent 
the  most  obscure,  intangible,  and  general  abstraction,  under  w’hich  to 
class  the  greatest  possible  number  of  events,  and  declare  that  in  this 
abstraction  is  to  be  found  the  aim  of  the  movements  of  humanity.  The 
most  usual  abstractions  accepted  by  almost  all  historians  are:  freedom, 
equality,  enlightenment,  progress,  civilisation,  culture.  Postulating  some 
such  abstraction  as  the  goal  of  the  movements  of  humanity,  the  his¬ 
torians  study  those  persons  who  have  left  the  greatest  number  of  memo¬ 
rials  behind  them — kings,  ministers,  generals,  writers,  reformers,  popes, 
and  journalists — from  the  point  of  view  of  the  effect  those  persons  in 
their  opinion  had  in  promoting  or  hindering  that  abstraction.  But  as  it 
is  nowhere  proven  that  the  goal  of  humanity  really  is  freedom,  equality, 
enlightenment,  or  civilisation,  and  as  the  connection  of  the  masses  with 
their  rulers  and  with  the  leaders  of  humanity  only  rests  on  the  arbitrary 
assumption  that  the  combined  will  of  the  masses  is  ahvays  vested  in  these 
figures  which  attract  our  attention—the  fact  remains  that  the  activity 
of  the  millions  of  men  who  move  from  place  to  place,  burn  houses,  aban¬ 
don  tilling  the  soil,  and  butcher  one  another,  never  does  find  expression 
in  descriptions  of  the  activity  of  some  dozen  persons,  who  do  not  burn 
houses,  never  have  tilled  the  soil,  and  do  not  kill  their  fellow-creatures. 

History  proves  this  at  every  turn.  Is  the  ferment  of  the  peoples  of  the 
west  towards  the  end  of  last  century,  and  their  rush  to  the  east,  explained 
by  the  activity  of  Louis  xiv.,  Louis  xv.,  and  Louis  xvi.,  or  their  mistresses 
and  ministers,  or  by  the  life  of  Napoleon,  of  Rousseau,  of  Diderot,  of 
Beaumarchais,  and  others? 

The  movement  of  the  Russian  people  to  the  east.,  to  Kazan  and 


1X24  WAR  AND  PEACE 

Siberia,  is  that  expressed  in  the  details  of  the  morbid  life  of  John  iv. 
and  his  correspondence  with  Kurbsky? 

Is  the  movement  of  the  peoples  at  the  time  of  the  Crusades  explained 
by  the  life  and  activity  of  certain  Godfreys  and  Louis’  and  their  ladies? 

It  has  remained  beyond  our  comprehension,  that  movement  of  the 
peoples  from  west  to  east,  without  an  object,  without  leadership,  with  a 
crowd  of  tramps  following  Peter  the  Hermit.  And  even  more  incom¬ 
prehensible  is  the  cessation  of  that  movement,  when  a  rational  and  holy 
object  for  the  expeditions  had  been  clearly  set  up  by  historical  leaders — 
that  is,  the  deliverance  of  Jerusalem. 

Popes,  kings,  and  knights  urged  the  people  to  set  free  the  Holy  Land. 
But  the  people  did  not  move,  because  that  unknown  cause,  which  had 
impelled  them  before  to  movement,  existed  no  longer.  The  history  of 
the  Godfreys  and  the  Minnesingers  evidently  cannot  be  regarded  as  an 
epitome  of  the  life  of  the  peoples.  And  the  history  of  the  Godfreys  and 
the  Minnesingers  has  remained  the  history  of  those  knights  and  those 
Minnesingers,  while  the  history  of  the  life  of  the  peoples  and  their  im¬ 
pulses  has  remained  unknown. 

Even  less  explanatory  of  the  life  of  the  peoples  is  the  history  of  the 
lives  of  writers  and  reformers. 

The  history  of  culture  offers  us  as  the  impelling  motives  of  the  life 
of  the  people  the  circumstances  of  the  lives  or  the  ideas  of  a  writer  or  a 
reformer.  We  learn  that  Luther  had  a  hasty  temper  and  uttered  certain 
speeches;  we  learn  that  Rousseau  was  distrustful  and  wrote  certain  books; 
but  we  do  not  learn  what  made  the  nations  cut  each  other  to  pieces  after 
the  Reformation,  or  why  men  guillotined  each  other  during-  the  French 
Revolution. 

If  we  unite  both  these  kinds  of  history  together,  as  do  the  most  modern 
historians,  then  we  shall  get  histories  of  monarchs  and  of  writers,  but 
not  a  history  of  the  life  of  nations. 


V 

The  life  of  nations  is  not  contained  in  the  life  of  a  few  men,  since  the 
connection  between  those  few  men  and  the  nations  has  not  been  found. 
The  theory  that  this  connection  is  based  on  the  delegation  of  the  com¬ 
bined  will  of  a  people  to  its  historical  leaders  is  an  hypothesis,  not  sup¬ 
ported  by  the  testimony  of  history. 

The  theory  of  the  delegation  of  the  combined  will  of  the  masses  to 
historical  personages  may  perhaps  explain  a  great  deal  in  the  domain 
of  the  science  of  law,  and  is  possibly  essential  for  its  purposes.  But  in 
its  application  to  history,  as  soon  as  revolutions,  wars,  civil  disturbances 
arise,  as  soon  as  history  begins  in  fact— this  theory  explains  nothing. 

This  theory  appears  irrefutable,  just  because  the  act  of  delegating  the 
will  of  the  people  can  never  be  verified,  since  it  has  never  existed. 

Whatever  event  might  take  place,  and  whoever  might  be  taking  the 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


1125 

lead  in  such  an  event,  the  theory  can  always  say  that  such  a  person  took 
the  lead  in  bringing  about  that  event  because  the  combined  will  was 
vested  in  him. 

The  answers  given  by  this  theory  to  historical  questions  are  like  the 
answers  of  a  man  who,  watching  the  movements  of  a  flock,  should  pay 
no  attention  to  the  varying  quality  of  the  pasturage  in  different  parts  of 
the  field,  nor  to  the  actions  of  the  shepherd,  but  should  look  for  the  causes 
of  the  flock  taking  this  or  that  direction  simply  in  the  animal  that  hap¬ 
pened  to  be  foremost  in  it. 

‘The  flock  moves  in  this  direction  because  the  animal  in  front  leads 
it,  and  the  combined  will  of  all  the  other  animals  is  delegated  to  the 
leader  of  the  flock.’  Such  is  the  answer  given  by  the  first  class  of  his¬ 
torians,  who  suppose  an  unconditional  delegation  of  will  to  the  authority. 

‘If  the  animals  leading  the  flock  are  changed  for  others,  it  is  due  to 
the  fact  that  the  combined  will  of  all  the  beasts  is  transferred  from  one 
leader  to  another  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  first  leader  did  not  follow 
the  direction  chosen  by  all  the  flock.’  Such  is  the  reply  of  those  historians 
who  assume  that  the  combined  will  of  the  masses  is  vested  in  their  rulers 
on  conditions  which  they  regard  as  unknown.  (With  this  method  of  ob¬ 
servation  it  very  often  happens  that  the  observer,  judging  from  the  direc¬ 
tion  chosen  by  him.  reckons  as  leaders  those  who,  when  the  direction  of 
the  masses  is  changed,  are  not  in  front,  but  on  one  side,  and  even  some¬ 
times  the  hindmost.) 

‘If  the  beasts  that  are  foremost  are  constantly  being  changed,  and  the 
direction  taken  by  the  flock  too  is  continually  changing,  that  is  due  to 
the  fact  that  to  attain  a  certain  direction  known  to  us  the  beasts  delegate 
their  wills  to  those  beasts  which  attract  our  attention,  and  to  study  the 
movements  of  the  flock  we  ought  to  observe  all  the  noticeable  animals 
that  are  moving  on  all  sides  of  the  flock.’  So  say  the  third  class  of  his¬ 
torians,  who  accept  all  historical  characters  as  the  expression  of  their 
age  from  monarchs  to  journalists. 

The  theory  of  the  transference  of  the  will  of  the  masses  to  historical 
characters  is  only  a  paraphrase — only  a  restatement  of  the  question  in 
other  words. 

What  is  the  cause  of  historical  events?  Power. 

What  is  power?  Power  is  the  combined  will  of  the  masses  vested  in 
one  person. 

On  what  conditions  are  the  wills  of  the  masses  vested  in  one  person? 
On  condition  of  that  person’s  expressing  the  will  of  all  men.  That  is, 
power  is  power.  That  is,  power  is  a  word  the  meaning  of  which  is  beyond 
our  comprehension. 

If  the  domain  of  human  knowledge  were  confined  to  abstract  reason¬ 
ing  alone,  then,  after  subjecting  the  explanation  of  power  given  by  science 
to  criticism,  humanity  would  come  to  the  conclusion  that  power  is  only 
a  word,  and  that  it  has  no  existence  in  reality.  But  for  the  knowledge  of 
phenomena,  man  has  besides  abstract  reasoning  another  instrument — 


1126 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

experience — by  which  he  verifies  the  results  of  reasoning.  And  experience 
tells  him  that  power  is  not  merely  a  word,  but  an  actually  existing  phe¬ 
nomenon. 

To  say  nothing  of  the  fact  that  not  a  single  account  of  the  combined 
action  of  men  can  omit  the  conception  of  power,  the  reality  of  power  is 
shown  us,  not  only  by  history,  but  by  observation  of  contemporary 
events. 

Whenever  an  event  takes  place,  a  man  or  men  appear  by  whose  will 
the  event  is  conceived  to  have  been  accomplished.  Napoleon  hi.  gives  an 
order,  and  the  French  go  to  Mexico.  The  Prussian  King  and  Bismarck 
give  certain  orders,  and  troops  go  to  Bohemia.  Napoleon  i.  gives  a  com¬ 
mand,  and  soldiers  march  into  Russia.  Alexander  i.  gives  a  command, 
and  the  French  submit  to  the  Bourbons.  Experience  shows  us  that  what¬ 
ever  takes  place,  it  is  always  connected  with  the  will  of  one  or  of  several 
men,  who  decreed  it  should  be  so. 

Historians,  from  the  old  habit  of  recognising  divine  intervention  in 
the  affairs  of  humanity,  are  inclined  to  look  for  the  cause  of  events  in 
the  exercise  of  the  will  of  the  person  endowed  with  power;  but  this  con¬ 
clusion  is  not  confirmed  either  by  reason  or  by  experience. 

Ob  one  side  reason  shows  that  the  expression  of  the  will  of  a  man — 
his  words,  in  fact,  are  only  a  part  of  the  general  activity  expressed  ifi  an 
event,  such  as  a  revolution  or  a  war,  and  therefore  without  the  assump¬ 
tion  of  an  incomprehensible,  supernatural  force — a  miracle— it  cannot 
be  admitted  that  these  words  can  be  the  immediate  cause  of  the  move¬ 
ments  of  millions  of  men. 

On  the  other  side,  even  if  one  admits  that  words  may  be  the  cause  of 
an  event,  history  shows  us  that  the  expression  of  the  will  of  historical 
personages  in  the  great  majority  of  cases  does  not  lead  to  any  effect  at 
all — that  is,  that  their  commands  are  often  not  carried  out,  and,  in  fact, 
sometimes  the  very  opposite  of  what  they  have  commanded  is  done. 

Without  admitting  divine  intervention  in  the  affairs  of  humanity,  we 
cannot  accept  power  as  a  cause  of  events. 

Power,  from  the  point  of  view  of  experience,  is  only  the  dependence 
existing  between  the  expression  of  the  will  of  a  person  and  the  carrying 
out  of  that  will  by  others. 

To  explain  the  conditions  of  that  dependence,  we  have,  first  of  all,  to 
reinstate  the  conception  of  the  expression  of  will,  referring  it  to  man, 
and  not  to  the  Deity. 

If  the  Deity  gives  a  command,  expresses  Flis  will,  as  the  history  of  the 
ancients  tell  us,  the  expression  of  that  will  is  independent  of  time,  and 
is  not  called  forth  by  anything,  as  the  Deity  is  not  connected  with  the 
event.  But  when  we  speak  of  commands  that  are  the  expression  of  the 
will  of  men,  acting  in  time  and  connected  with  one  another,  we  must,  if 
we  are  to  understand  the  connection  of  the  command  with  the  event, 
restore  (i)  the  conditions  of  all  the  circumstances  that  took  place,  the 
dynamic  continuity  in  time  both  of  the  event  and  of  the  person  com- 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


1127 

manding  it;  and  (2)  the  condition  of  the  inevitable  connection  in  which 
■the  person  commanding  stands  with  those  who  carry  out  his  command. 


.VI 

Only  the  expression  of  the  will  of  the  Deity,  not  depending  on  time,  can 
relate  to  a  whole  series  of  events  that  have  to  take  place  during  several 
years  or  centuries;  and  only  the  Deity,  acting  by  His  will  alone,  not 
affected  by  any  cause,  can  determine  the  direction  of  the  movement  of 
humanity.  Man  acts  in  time,  and  himself  takes  part  in  the  event. 

Restoring  the  first  condition  that  was  omitted,  the  condition  of  time, 
we  perceive  that  no  single  command  can  be  carried  out  apart  from  pre¬ 
ceding  commands  that  have  made  the  execution  of  the  last  command 
possible. 

Never  is  a  single  command  given  quite  independently  and  arbitrarily, 
nor  does  it  cover  a  whole  series  of  events.  Every  command  is  the  sequel 
to  some  other;  and  it  never  relates  to  a  whole  course  of  events,  but  only 
to  one  moment  in  those  events. 

When  we  say,  for  instance,  that  Napoleon  commanded  the  army  to  go 
to  fight,  we  sum  up  in  one  single  expression  a  series  of  consecutive  com¬ 
mands,  depending  one  upon  another.  Napoleon  could  not  command  a 
campaign  against  Russia,  and  never  did  command  it.  He  commanded  one 
day  certain  papers  to  be  written  to  Vienna,  to  Berlin,  and  to  Petersburg; 
next  day,  certain  decrees  and  instructions  to  the  army,  the  fleet,  and  the 
commissariat,  and  so  on  and  so  on — millions  of  separate  commands,  mak¬ 
ing  up  a  whole  series  of  commands,  corresponding  to  a  series  of  events 
leading  the  French  soldiers  to  Russia. 

Napoleon  was  giving  commands  all  through  his  reign  for  an  expedition 
to  England.  On  no  one  of' his  undertakings  did  he  waste  so  much  time 
and  so  much  effort,  and  yet  not  once  during  his  reign  was  an  attempt 
made  to  carry  out  his  design.  Yet  he  made  an  expedition  against  Russia, 
with  which,  according  to  his  repeatedly  expressed  conviction,  it  was  to 
his  advantage  to  be  in  alliance;  and  this  is  due  to  the  fact  that  his  com¬ 
mands  in  the  first  case  did  not,  and  in  the  second  did,  correspond  with 
the  course  of  events. 

In  order  that  a  command  should  certainly  be  carried  out,  it  is  neces¬ 
sary  that  the  man  should  give  a  command  that  can  be  carried  out.  To 
know  what  can  and  what  cannot  be  carried  out  is  impossible,  not  only  in 
the  case  of  Napoleon’s  campaign  against  Russia,  in  which  millions  took 
part,  but  even  in  the  case  of  the  simplest  event,  since  millions  of  obstacles 
may  always  arise  to  prevent  its  being  carried  out.  Every  command  that 
is  carried  out  is  always  one  out  of  a  mass  of  commands  that  are  not 
carried  out.  All  the  impossible  commands  are  inconsistent  with  the 
course  of  events  and  are  not  carried  out.  Only  those  which  are  possible 
are  connected  with  consecutive  series  of  commands,  consistent  with  series 
of  events,  and  they  are  carried  out. 


I  I2S 


WAR  AND  PEACE 

Our  false  conception  that  the  command  that  precedes  an  event  is  the 
cause  of  an  event  is  due  to  the  fact  that  when  the  event  has  taken  place 
and  those  few  out  of  thousands  of  commands,  which  happen  to  be  con¬ 
sistent  with  the  course  of  events,  are  carried  out,  we  forget  those  which 
were  not,  because  they  could  not  be,-  carried  out.  Apart  from  that,  the 
chief  source  of  our  error  arises  from  the  fact  that  in  the  historical  account 
a  whole  series  of  innumerable,  various,  and  most  minute  events,  as,  for 
instance,  all  that  led  the  French  soldiers  to  Russia,  are  generalised  into 
a  single  event,  in  accordance  with  the  result  produced  by  that  series  of 
events;  and  by  a  corresponding  generalisation  a  whole  series  of  com¬ 
mands  too  is  summed  up  into  a  single  expression  of  will. 

We  say:  Napoleon  chose  to  invade  Russia  and  he  did  so.  In  reality 
we  never  find  in  all  Napoleon’s  doings  anything  like  an  expression  of 
that  design:  what  we  find  is  a  series  of  commands  or  expressions  of  his 
will  of  the  most  various  and  undefined  tendency.  Out  of  many  series  of 
innumerable  commands  of  Napoleon  not  carried  out,  one  series  of 
commands  for  the  campaign  of  1812  was  carried  out;  not  from  any 
essential  difference  between  the  commands  carried  out  and  those  not 
carried  out,  but  simply  because  the  former  coincided  with  the  course  of 
events  that  led  the  French  soldiers  into  Russia;  just  as  in  stencil-work 
one  figure  or  another  is  sketched,  not  because  the  colours  are  laid  on  tlJs 
side  or  in  that  way,  but  because  on  the  figure  cut  out  in  stencil  colours 
are  laid  on  all  sides. 

So  that  examining  in  time  the  relation  of  commands  to  events,  we  find 
that  the  command  can  never  in  any  case  be  the  cause  of  the  event,  but 
that  a  certain  definite  dependence  exists  between  them.  To  understand 
of  what  this  dependence  consists,  it  is  essential  to  restore  the  other  cir¬ 
cumstance  lost  sight  of,  a  condition  accompanying  any  command  issuing 
not  from  the  Deity,  but  from  man.  That  circumstance  is  that  the  man 
giving  the  command  is  himself  taking  part  in  the  event. 

That  relation  of  the  commanding  person  to  those  he  commands  is  in¬ 
deed  precisely  what  is  called  power.  That  relation  may  be  analysed  as 
follows. 

For  common  action,  men  always  unite  in  certain  combinations,  in 
which,  in  spite  of  the  difference  of  the  objects  aimed  at  by  common  action, 
the  relation  between  the  men  taking  a  part  in  the  action  always  remains 
the  same. 

Uniting  in  these  combinations,  men  always  stand  in  such  a  relation  to 
one  another  that  the  largest  number  of  men  take  a  greater  direct  share, 
and  a  smaller  number  of  men  a  less  direct  share  in  the  combined  action 
for  which  they  are  united.  Of  all  such  combinations  in  which  men  are 
organised  for  the  performance  of  common  action,  one  of  the  most  striking 
and  definite  examples  is  the  army. 

Every  army  is  composed  of  members  of  lower  military  standing — the 
private  soldiers,  who  are  always  the  largest  proportion  of  the  whole,  of 
members  of  a  slightly  higher  military  standing — corporals  and  non-com¬ 
missioned  officers,  who  are  fewer  in  number  than  the  privates;  of  still 


1129 


WAR  AND  PEACE 
higher  officers,  whose  numbers  are  even  less;  and  so  on,  up  to  the  chief 
military  command  of  all,  which  is  concentrated  in  one  person. 

The  military  organisation  may  be  with  perfect  accuracy  compared  to 
the  figure  of  a  cone,  the  base  of  which,  with  the  largest  diameter,  consists 
of  privates;  the  next  higher  and  smaller  plane,  of  the  lower  officers;  and 
so  on  up  to  the  apex  of  the  cone,  which  will  be  the  commander-in-chief. 

The  soldiers,  who  are  the  largest  number,  form  the  lowest  plane  and 
the  base  of  the  cone.  The  soldier  himself  does  the  stabbing  and  hacking, 
and  burning  and  pillaging,  and  always  receives  commands  to  perform 
these  acts  from  the  persons  in  the  plane  next  above.  He  himself  never 
gives  a  command.  The  non-commissioned  officer  (these  are  fewer  in  num¬ 
ber)  more  rarely  performs  the  immediate  act  than  the  soldier;  but  he 
gives  commands.  The  officer  next  above  him  still  more  rarely  acts  directly 
himself,  and  still  more  frequently  commands.  The  general  does  nothing 
but  command  the  army,  and  hardly  ever  makes  use  of  a  weapon.  The 
commander-in-chief  never  takes  direct  part  in  the  action  itself,  and  simply 
makes  general  arrangements  as  to  the  movements  of  the  masses.  A  similar 
relation  exists  in  every  combination  of  persons  for  common  action — in 
agriculture,  commerce,  and  in  every  department  of  activity. 

And  so  without  artificially  analysing  all  the  converging  planes  of  the 
cone  and  ranks  of  the  army  or  classes  or  ranks  of  any  department  what¬ 
ever,  or  public  undertaking,  from  lower  to  higher,  a  law  comes  into  exist¬ 
ence,  by  which  men  always  combine  together  for  the  performance  of 
common  action  in  such  relation  that  the  more  directly  they  take  part  in 
the  action,  the  less  they  command,  and  the  greater  their  numbers;  and 
the  less  direct  the  part  they  take  in  the  common  action,  the  more  they 
command,  and  the  fewer  they  are  in  number;  passing  in  that  way  from 
the  lower  strata  up  to  a  single  man  at  the  top,  who  takes  least  direct 
share  in  the  action,  and  devotes  his  energy  more  than  all  the  rest  to  giving 
commands. 

This  is  the  relation  of  persons  in  command  to  those  whom  they  com¬ 
mand,  and  it  constitutes  the  essence  of  the  conception  of  what  is  called 
power. 

Restoring  the  conditions  of  time  under  which  all  events  take  place,  we 
found  that  a  command  is  carried  out  only  when  it  relates  to  a  correspond¬ 
ing  course  of  events.  Restoring  the  essential  condition  of  connection  be¬ 
tween  the  persons  commanding  and  fulfilling  the  commands,  we  have 
found  that  by  their  very  nature  the  persons  commanding  take  the  smallest 
part  in  the  action  itself,  and  their  energy  is  exclusively  directed  to  com¬ 
manding. 


VII 

When  some  event  takes  place,  men  express  their  opinions  and  desires 
in  regard  to  the  event,  and  as  the  event  proceeds  from  the  combined  ac¬ 
tion  of  many  men,  some  one  of  the  opinions  or  desires  expressed  is  certain 
to  be  at  least  approximately  fulfilled.  When  one  of  the  opinions  expressed 


ii30  WAR  AND  PEACE 

is  fulfilled,  that  opinion  is  connected  with  the  event  as  the  command  pre¬ 
ceding  it. 

Men  are  dragging  a  log.  Every  man  expresses  his  opinion  as  to  how 
and  where  to  drag  it.  The  men  drag  the  log  off ;  and  it  turns  out  that  it  has 
been  done  just  as  one  of  them  advised.  He  gave  the  command  then.  This 
is  commanding  and  power  in  its  primitive  aspect. 

The  man  who  did  most  work  with  his  arms  could  think  least  what  he 
was  doing,  reflect  least  what  might  come  of  the  common  action,  and  so 
command  least.  The  man  who  commanded  most  could  obviously,  from 
h:3  greater  verbal  activity,  act  less  vigorously  with  his  arms.  In  a  larger 
assembly  of  men,  combining  their  energies  to  one  end,  the  class  of  those 
persons  who  take  the  less  direct  share  in  the  common  work  the  more  their 
energy  is  turned  to  command,  is  still  more  sharply  defined. 

When  a  man  acts  alone,  he  always  carries  within  him  a  certain  series 
of  considerations,  that  have,  as  he  supposes,  directed  his  past  conduct, 
and  that  serve  to  justify  to  him  his  present  action,  and  to  lead  him  to  make 
projects  for  his  future  activity. 

Assemblies  of  men  act  in  the  same  way,  only  leaving  to  those  who  do 
not  take  direct  part  in  the  action  to  invent  consideration,  justifications, 
and  projects  concerning  their  combined  activity. 

For  causes,  known  or  unknown  to  us,  the  French  begin  to  chop  and 
hack  at  each  other.  And  to  match  the  event,  it  is  accompanied  by  its 
justification  in  the  expressed  wills  of  certain  men,  who  declare  it  essential 
for  the  good  of  France,  for  the  cause  of  freedom,  of  equality.  Men  cease 
slaughtering  one  another,  and  that  event  is  accompanied  by  the  justifica  • 
tion  of  the  necessity  of  centralisation  of  power,  of  resistance  to  Europe, 
and  so  on.  Men  march  from  west  to  east,  killing  their  fellow-creatures, 
and  this  event  is  accompanied  by  phrases  about  the  glory  of  France,  the 
baseness  of  England,  and  so  on.  History  teaches  us  that  those  justifica¬ 
tions  for  the  event  are  devoid  of  all  common-sense,  that  they  are  incon¬ 
sistent  with  one  another,  as,  for  instance,  the  murder  of  a  man  as  a 
result  of  the  declaration  of  his  rights,  and  the  murder  of  millions  in  Russia 
for  the  abasement  of  England.  But  those  justifications  have  an  incon¬ 
testable  value  in  their  own  day. 

They  remove  moral  responsibility  from  those  men  who  produce  the 
events.  At  the  time  they  do  the  work  of  brooms,  that  go  in  front  to  clear 
the  rails  for  the  train:  they  clear  the  path  of  men’s  moral  responsibility. 
Apart  from  those  justifications,  no  solution  could  be  found  for  the  most 
obvious  question  that  occurs  to  one  at  once  on  examining  any  historical 
event;  that  is,  How  did  millions  of  men  come  to  combine  to  commit 
crimes,  murders,  wars,  and  so  on? 

Under  the  existing  complex  forms  of  political  social  life  in  Europe,  can 
any  event  be  imagined  which  would  not  have  been  prescribed,  decreed, 
commanded  by  some  sovereigns,  ministers,  parliaments,  or  newspapers? 
Is  there  any  sort  of  combined  action  which  could  not  find  justification 
in  political  unity,  or  in  patriotism,  or  in  the  balance  of  power,  or  in  civili¬ 
sation?  So  that  every  event  that  occurs  inevitably  coincides  with  some 


H3i 


WAR  AND  PEACE 
expressed  desire,  and  receiving  justification,  is  regarded  as  the  result  of 
the  will  of  one  or  more  persons. 

Whichever  way  the  ship  steers  its  course,  there  will  always  be  seen 
ahead  of  it  the  flow  of  the  waves  it  cleaves.  To  the  men  in  the  ship  the 
movement  of  those  waves  will  be  the  only  motion  perceptible. 

It  is  only  by  watching  closely,  moment  by  moment,  the  movement  of 
that  flow,  and  comparing  it  with  the  movement  of  the  ship,  that  we  are 
convinced  that  every  moment  that  flowing  by  of  the  waves  is  due  to  the 
forward  movement  of  the  ship,  and  that  we  have  been  led  into  error  by 
the  fact  that  we  are  ourselves  moving  too. 

We  see  the  same  thing,  watching  moment  by  moment  the  movement  of 
historical  personages  (that  is,  restoring  the  inevitable  condition  under 
which  all  action  takes  place — the  condition  of  the  continuity  of  motion 
in  time),  and  not  losing  sight  of  the  necessary  connection  of  historical 
figures  with  the  masses. 

Whatever  happens,  it  always  appears  that  that  was  foreseen  and  de¬ 
creed.  Whichever  way  the  ship  turns,  the  waves  gurgle  in  front  of  it, 
and  neither  guiding  nor  accelerating  its  movement,  will  seem  to  us  at  a 
distance  to  be  moving  arbitrarily  and  guiding  the  course  of  the  ship. 

Examining  only  those  expressions  of  the  will  of  historical  characters 
which  related  to  events  as  commands,  historians  have  assumed  that  the 
events  were  dependent  on  the  commands.  Examining  the  events  them¬ 
selves,  and  that  connection  in  which  the  historical  characters  stand  with 
the  masses,  we  have  found  that  historical  characters  and  their  commands 
are  dependent  on  the  events.  An  incontestable  proof  of  this  deduction 
is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that,  however  many  commands  may  be  given, 
the  event  does  not  take  place  if  there  is  no  other  cause  to  produce  it.  But 
as  soon  as  an  event  does  take  place — whatever  it  may  be — out  of  the 
number  of  all  the  expressions  of  the  will  of  different  persons,  there  are 
always  some  which,  from  their  meaning  and  time  of  utterance,  are  related 
to  the  events  as  commands. 

Having  reached  this  conclusion,  we  can  directly  and  positively  answer 
these  two  essential  questions  of  history:  — 

1.  What  is  power? 

2.  What  force  produces  the  movements  of  peoples? 

1.  Power  is  a  relation  of  a  certain  person  to  other  persons,  in  which 
that  person  takes  the  less  direct  share  in  an  act,  the  more  he  expresses 
opinions,  theories,  and  justifications  of  the  combined  action. 

2.  The  movement  of  peoples  is  not  produced  by  the  exercise  of  power; 
nor  by  intellectual  activity,  nor  even  by  a  combination  of  the  two,  as 
historians  have  supposed;  but  by  the  activity  of  all  the  men  taking  part  in 
the  event,  who  are  always  combined  in  such  a  way  that  those  who  take 
most  direct  part  in  the  action  take  the  smallest  share  in  responsibility  for 
it,  and  vice  versa. 

In  its  moral  aspect  the  cause  of  the  event  is  conceived  of  as  power;  in 
its  physical  aspect  as  those  who  were  subject  to  that  power.  But  since 


1132  WAR  AND  PEACE 

moral  activity  is  inconceivable  apart  from  physical,  the  cause  of  the  event 

is  found  in  neither  the  one  nor  the  other,  but  in  the  conjunction  of  the  two. 

Or,  in  other  words,  the  conception  of  cause  is  not  applicable  to  the 
phenomenon  we  are  examining. 

In  our  final  analysis  we  are  brought  to  the  circle  of  infinity,  to  that  ut¬ 
most  limit,  to  which  the  human  intellect  is  brought  in  every  department 
of  thought,  if  it  is  not  merely  playing  with  its  subject.  Electricity  pro¬ 
duces  heat;  heat  produces  electricity.  Atoms  are  attracted;  atoms  are 
repelled. 

Speaking  of  the  mutual  relations  of  heat  and  of  electricity  and  of 
atoms,  we  cannot  say  why  it  is  so,  and  we  say  it  is  so  because  it  is  un¬ 
thinkable  otherwise;  because  it  must  be  so;  because  it  is  a  law.  The  same 
thing  applies  also  to  historical  phenomena.  Why  does  a  war  or  a  revolution 
come  to  pass?  We  do  not  know.  We  only  know  that  to  bring  either  result 
to  pass,  men  form  themselves  into  a  certain  combination  in  which  all  take 
part;  and  we  say  that  this  is  so  because  it  is  unthinkable  otherwise; 
because  it  is  a  law. 


VIII 

If  history  had  to  deal  with  external  phenomena,  the  establishment  of  this 
simple  and  obvious  law  would  be  sufficient,  and  our  argument  would  be 
at  an  end.  But  the  law  of  history  relates  to  man.  A  particle  of  matter 
cannot  tell  us  that  it  does  not  feel  the  inevitability  of  attraction  and  repul¬ 
sion,  and  that  the  law  is  not  true.  Man,  who  is  the  subject  of  history, 
bluntly  says:  I  am  free,  and  so  I  am  not  subject  to  law. 

The  presence  of  the  question  of  the  freedom  of  the  will,  if  not  openly 
expressed,  is  felt  at  every  step  in  history. 

All  seriously  thinking  historians  are  involuntarily  led  to  this  question. 
All  the  inconsistencies,  and  the  obscurity  of  history,  and  the  false  path 
that  science  has  followed,  is  due  to  that  unsolved  question. 

If  the  will  of  every  man  were  free,  that  is,  if  every  man  could  act  as  he  - 
chose,  the  whole  of  history  would  be  a  tissue  of  disconnected  accidents. 

If  one  man  only  out  of  millions  once  in  a  thousand  years  had  the  power 
of  acting  freely,  that  is,  as  he  chose,  it  is  obvious  that  a  single  free  act  of 
that  man  in  opposition  to  the  laws  governing  human  action  would  de¬ 
stroy  the  possibility  of  any  laws  whatever  governing  all  humanity. 

If  there  is  but  one  law  controlling  the  actions  of  men,  there  can  be  no 
freewill,  since  men’s  will  must  be  subject  to  that  law. 

In  this  contradiction  lies  the  question  of  the  freedom  if  the  will,  which 
from  the  most  ancient  times  has  occupied  the  best  intellects  of  mankind, 
and  has  from  the  most  ancient  times  been  regarded  as  of  immense  im¬ 
portance. 

Looking  at  man  as  a  subject  of  observation  from  any  point  of  view — 
theological,  historical,  ethical,  philosophical — we  find  a  general  law  of 
necessity  to  which  he  is  subject  like  everything  existing.  Looking  at  him 
from  within  ourselves,  as  what  we  are  conscious  of,  we  feel  ourselves  free. 


WAR  AND  PEACE  11.33 

This  consciousness  is  a  source  of  self-knowledge  utterly  apart  and 
independent  of  reason.  Through  reason  man  observes  himself;  but  he 
knows  himself  only  through  consciousness. 

Apart  from  consciousness  of  self,  any  observation  and  application  of 
reason  is  inconceivable. 

To  understand,  to  observe,  to  draw  conclusions,  a  man  must  first  of 
all  be  conscious  of  himself  as  living.  A  man  knows  himself  as  living,  not 
otherwise  than  as  willing,  that  is,  he  is  conscious  of  his  freewill.  Man  is 
conscious  of  his  will  as  constituting  the  essence  of  his  life,  and  he  cannot 
be  conscious  of  it  except  as  free. 

If  subjecting  himself  to  his  own  observation,  a  man  perceives  that  his 
will  is  always  controlled  by  the  same  law  (whether  he  observes  the  neces¬ 
sity  of  taking  food,  or  of  exercising  his  brain,  or  anything  else) ,  he  cannot 
regard  this  never-varying  direction  of  his  will  otherwise  than  as  a  limita¬ 
tion  of  it.  If  it  were  not  free,  it  could  not  be  limited.  A  man’s  will  seems 
to  him  to  be  limited  just  because  he  is  not  conscious  of  it  except  as  free. 
You  say:  I  am  not  free.  But  I  have  lifted  and  dropped  my  hand.  Every¬ 
body  understands  that  this  illogical  reply  is  an  irrefutable  proof  of 
freedom. 

This  reply  is  an  expression  of  a  consciousness  not  subject  to  reason. 

If  the  consciousness  of  freedom  were  not  a  separate  source  of  self- 
knowledge  apart  from  reason,  it  would  be  controlled  by  reasoning  and 
experience.  But  in  reality  such  control  never  exists,  and  is  inconceivable. 

A  series  of  experiments  and  arguments  prove  to  every  man  that  he,  as 
an  object  of  observation,  is  subject  to  certain  laws,  and  the  man  submits 
to  them,  and  never,  after  they  have  once  been  pointed  out  to  him,  con¬ 
troverts  the  law  of  gravitation  or  of  impenetrability.  But  the  same  series 
of  experiments  and  arguments  proves  to  him  that  the  complete  freedom 
of  which  he  is  conscious  in  himself  is  impossible;  that  every  action  of  his 
depends  on  his  organisation,  on  his  character,  and  the  motives  acting  on 
him.  But  man  never  submits  to  the  deductions  of  these  experiments  and 
arguments. 

Learning  from  experience  and  from  reasoning  that  a  stone  falls  to  the 
ground,  a  man  unhesitatingly  believes  this;  and  in  all  cases  expects  the 
law  he  has  learnt  to  be  carried  out. 

But  learning  just  as  incontestably  that  his  will  is  subject  to  laws,  he 
does  not,  and  cannot,  believe  it. 

However  often  experience  and  reasoning  show  a  man  that  in  the  same 
circumstances,  with  the  same  character,  he  does  the  same  thing  as  before, 
yet  on  being  led  the  thousandth  time  in  the  same  circumstances,  with  the 
same  character,  to  an  action  that  always  ends  in  the  same  way,  he  feels 
just  as  unhesitatingly  convinced  that  he  can  act  as  he  chooses,  as  ever. 
Every  man,  savage  and  sage  alike,  however  incontestably  reason  and  ex¬ 
perience  may  prove  to  him  that  it  is  impossible  to  imagine  two  different 
courses  of  action  under  precisely  the  same  circumstances,  yet  feels  that 
without  this  meaningless  conception  (which  constitutes  the  essence  of 
freedom)  he  cannot  conceive  of  life.  He  feels  that,  however  impossible 


H34  WAR  AND  PEACE 

it  may  be,  it  is  so;  seeing  that,  without  that  conception  of  freedom,  he 
would  be  not  only  unable  to  understand  life,  but  could  not  live  for  a 
single  instant. 

He  could  not  live  because  all  men’s  instincts,  all  their  impulses  in  life, 
are  only  efforts  to  increase  their  freedom.  Wealth  and  poverty,  health  and 
disease,  culture  and  ignorance,  labour  and  leisure,  repletion  and  hunger, 
virtue  and  vice,  are  all  only  terms  for  greater  or  less  degrees  of  freedom. 

To  conceive  a  man  having  no  freedom  is  impossible  except  as  a  man 
deprived  of  life. 

If  the  idea  of  freedom  appears  to  the  reason  a  meaningless  contradic¬ 
tion,  like  the  possibility  of  doing  two  actions  at  a  single  moment  of  time, 
or  the  possibility  of  an  effect  without  a  cause,  that  only  proves  that  con¬ 
sciousness  is  not  subject  to  reason. 

That  unwavering,  irrefutable  consciousness  of  freedom,  not  influenced 
by  experience  and  argument,  recognised  by  all  thinkers,  and  felt  by  all 
men  without  exception,  that  consciousness  without  which  no  conception 
of  man  is  reliable,  constitutes  the  other  side  of  the  question. 

Man  is  the  creation  of  an  Almighty,  All-good,  and  All-wise  God.  What 
is  sin,  the  conception  of  which  follows  from  man’s  consciousness  of  free¬ 
dom?  That  is  the  question  of  theology. 

Men’s  actions  are  subject  to  general  and  invariable  laws,  expressed  in 
statistics.  What  is  man’s  responsibility  to  society,  the  conception  of  which 
follows  from  his  consciousness  of  freedom?  That  is  the  question  of  juris¬ 
prudence. 

A  man’s  actions  follow  from  his  innate  character  and  the  motives  acting 
on  him.  What  is  conscience  and  the  sense  of  right  and  wrong  in  action  that 
follows  from  the  consciousness  of  freedom?  That  is  the  question  of  ethics. 

Man  in  connection  with  the  general  life  of  humanity  is  conceived  as 
governed  by  the  laws  that  determine  that  life.  But  the  same  man,  apart 
from  that  connection,  is  conceived  of  as  free.  How  is  the  past  life  of  nations 
and  of  humanity  to  be  regarded — as  the  product  of  the  free  or  not  free 
action  of  men?  That  is  the  question  of  history. 

Only  in  our  conceited  age  of  the  popularisation  of  knowledge,  thanks 
to  the  most  powerful  v/eapon  of  ignorance — the  diffusion  of  printed  matter 
— the  question  of  the  freedom  of  the  will  has  been  put  on  a  level,  on  which 
it  can  no  longer  be  the  same  question.  In  our  day  the  majority  of  so-called 
advanced  people — that  is,  a  mob  of  ignoramuses — have  accepted  the 
result  of  the  researches  of  natural  science,  which  is  occupied  with  one 
side  only  of  the  question,  for  the  solution  of  the  whole  question. 

There  is  no  soul  and  no  freewill,  because  the  life  of  man  is  expressed 
in  muscular  movements,  and  muscular  movements  are  conditioned  by 
nervous  activity.  There  is  no  soul  and  no  freewill,  because  at  some  un¬ 
known  period  of  time  we  came  from  apes,  they  say,  and  write,  and  print. 
Not  at  all  suspecting  that  thousands  of  years  ago  all  religions  and  all 
thinkers  have  admitted — have  never,  in  fact,  denied — that  same  law  of 
necessity,  which  they  are  now  so  strenuously  trying  to  prove  by  physi¬ 
ology  and  comparative  zoology.  They  do  not  see  that  natural  science  can 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1135 

do  no  more  in  this  question  than  serve  to  illumine  one  side  of  it.  The  fact 
that,  from  the  point  of  view  of  observation,  the  reason  and  the  will  are 
but  secretions  of  the  brain,  and  that  man,  following  the  general  law  of 
development,  may  have  developed  from  lower  animals  at  some  unknown 
period  of  time,  only  illustrates  in  a  new  aspect  the  truth,  recognised 
thousands  of  years  ago  by  all  religious  and  philosophic  theories,  that 
man  is  subject  to  the  laws  of  necessity.  It  does  not  advance  one  hair’s- 
breadth  the  solution  of  the  question,  which  has  another  opposite  side, 
founded  on  the  consciousness  of  freedom. 

If  men  have  descended  from  apes  at  an  unknown  period  of  time,  that 
is  as  comprehensible  as  that  they  were  fabricated  out  of  a  clod  of  earth 
at  a  known  period  of  time  (in  the  one  case  the  date  is  the  unknown  quan¬ 
tity,  in  the  other  the  method  of  fabrication);  and  the  question  how  to 
reconcile  man’s  consciousness  of  freewill  with  the  law  of  necessity  to 
which  he  is  subject  cannot  be  solved  by  physiology  and  zoology,  seeing 
that  in  the  frog,  the  rabbit,  and  the  monkey  we  can  observe  only  muscular 
and  nervous  activity,  while  in  man  we  find  muscular  and  nervous  activity 
plus  consciousness. 

The  scientific  men  and  their  disciples  who  suppose  they  are  solving 
this  question  are  like  plasterers  set  to  plaster  one  side  of  a  church  wall, 
who,  in  the  absence  of  the  chief  superintendent  of  their  work,  should  in 
the  excess  of  their  zeal  plaster  over  the  windows,  and  the  holy  images, 
and  the  woodwork,  and  the  scaffolding,  and  rejoice  that  from  their 
plasterers’  point  of  view  everything  was  now  so  smooth  and  even. 


IX 

The  question  of  freewill  and  necessity  holds  a  position  in  history  differ¬ 
ent  from  its  place  in  other  branches  of  knowledge,  because  in  history, 
the  question  relates,  not  to  the  essential  nature  of  the  will  of  man,  but 
to  the  representation  of  the  manifestations  of  that  will  in  the  past  and 
under  certain  conditions. 

History,  in  regard  to  the  solution  of  this  question,  stands  to  the  other 
sciences  in  the  position  of  an  experimental  science  to  speculative  sciences. 

The  subject  of  history  is  not  the  will  of  man,  but  our  representation 
of  its  action. 

And  so  the  insoluble  mystery  of  the  union  of  the  two  antinomies  of 
freedom  and  necessity  does  not  exist  for  history  as  it  does  for  theology, 
ethics,  and  philosophy.  History  deals  with  the  representation  of  the  life 
of  man,  in  which  the  union  of  those  two  antinomies  is  accomplished. 

In  actual  life  every  historical  event,  every  human  action,  is  quite  clearly 
and  definitely  understood,  without  a  sense  of  the  slightest  contradiction 
in  it,  although  every  event  is  conceived  of  partly  as  free,  and  partly  as 
necessary. 

To  solve  the  problem  of  combining  freedom  and  necessity  and  the 
question  what  constitutes  the  essence  of  those  two  conceptions,  the 


1136  WAR  AND  PEACE 

philosophy  of  history  can  and  ought  to  go  to  work  in  a  direction  opposite 
to  that  taken  by  the  other  sciences.  Instead  of  first  defining  the  ideas  of 
freedom  and  necessity  in  themselves,  and  then  ranging  the  phenomena 
of  life  under  those  definitions,  history  must  form  the  definition  of  the 
ideas  of  freewill  and  necessity  from  the  immense  multitude  of  phenomena 
in  her  domain  that  are  always  dependent  on  those  two  elements. 

Whatever  presentation  of  the  activity  of  one  man  or  of  several  per¬ 
sons  we  examine,  we  always  regard  it  as  the  product  partly  of  that  man 
or  men’s  freewill,  partly  of  the  laws  of  necessity. 

Whether  we  are  discussing  the  migrations  of  peoples  and  the  inroads 
of  barbarians,  or  the  government  of  Napoleon  hi.,  or  the  action  of  some 
man  an  hour  ago  in  selecting  one  direction  for  his  walk  out  of  several, 
we  see  nothing  contradictory  in  it.  The  proportion  of  freedom  and  neces¬ 
sity  guiding  the  actions  of  those  men  is  clearly  defined  for  us. 

Very  often  our  conception  of  a  greater  or  less  degree  of  freedom  differs 
according  to  the  different  points  of  view  from  which  we  regard  the  phe¬ 
nomenon. 

But  every  human  action  is  always  alike  conceived  by  us  as  a  certain 
combination  of  freewill  and  necessity. 

In  every  action  we  investigate,  we  see  a  certain  proportion  of  freedom 
and  a  certain  proportion  of  necessity.  And  whatever  action  we  investi¬ 
gate,  the  more  necessity  we  see  the  less  freedom,  and  the  more  freedom 
the  less  necessity. 

The  proportion  of  freedom  to  necessity  is  decreased  or  increased,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  point  of  view  from  which  the  act  is  regarded;  but  there 
always  remains  an  inverse  ratio  between  them. 

A  drowning  man  clutching  at  another  and  drowning  him,  or  a  hungry 
mother  starved  by  suckling  her  baby  and  stealing  food,  or  a  man  trained 
to  discipline  who  at  the  word  of  command  kills  a  defenceless  man,  all 
seem  less  guilty — that  is,  less  free  and  more  subject  to  the  law  of  neces¬ 
sity  to  one  who  knows  the  circumstances  in  which  they  are  placed,  and 
more  free  to  one  who  did  not  know  that  the  man  was  himself  drowning, 
that  the  mother  was  starving,  that  the  soldier  was  on  duty,  and  so  on. 
In  the  same  way  a  man  who  has  twenty  years  ago  committed  a  murder 
and  afterwards  has  gone  on  living  calmly  and  innocently  in  society  seems 
less  guilty,  and  his  acts  seem  more  subject  to  the  law  of  necessity,  to  one 
who  looks  at  his  act  after  the  lapse  of  twenty  years  than  to  one  looking 
at  the  same  act  the  day  after  it  was  perpetrated.  And  just  in  the  same 
way  the  act  of  a  madman,  a  drunkard,  or  a  man  labouring  under  violent 
excitement  seems  less  free  and  more  inevitable  to  one  who  knows  the 
mental  condition  of  the  man  who  performed  the  action,  and  more  free 
and  less  inevitable  to  one  who  does  not  know  it.  In  all  such  cases  the  con¬ 
ception  of  freedom  is  increased  or  diminished,  and  that  of  necessity  cor¬ 
respondingly  diminished  or  increased,  according  to  the  point  of  view  from 
which  the  action  is  regarded.  So  that  the  more  necessity  is  seen  in  it  the 
less  freedom.  And  vice,  versa. 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1137 

Religion,  the  common-sense  of  humanity,  the  science  of  law,  and  history 
itself  understand  this  relation  between  necessity  and  freewill. 

All  cases,  without  exception,  in  which  our  conception  of  freewill  and 
necessity  varies  depend  on  three  considerations: 

1.  The  relation  of  the  man  committing  the  act  to  the  external  world. 

2.  His  relation  to  time. 

3.  His  relation  to  the  causes  leading  to  the  act. 

In  the  first  case  the  variation  depends  on  the  degree  to  which  we  see 
the  man’s  relation  to  the  external  world,  on  the  more  or  less  clear  idea 
we  form  of  the  definite  position  occupied  by  the  man  in  relation  to  every¬ 
thing  co-existing  with  him.  It  is  this  class  of  considerations  that  makes 
it  obvious  to  us  that  the  drowning  man  is  less  free  and  more  subject  to 
necessity  than  a  man  standing  on  dry  ground ;  and  that  makes  the  actions 
of  a  man  living  in  close  connection  with  other  people  in  a  thickly  popu¬ 
lated  district,  bound  by  ties  of  family,  official  duties,  or  business  under¬ 
taking,  seem  undoubtedly  less  free  than  those  of  a  man  living  in  solitude 
and  seclusion. 

If  we  examine  a  man  alone,  apart  from  his  relations  to  everything 
around  him,  every  action  of  his  seems  free  to  us.  But  if  we  see  any  rela¬ 
tion  of  his  to  anything  surrounding,  if  we  perceive  any  connection  between 
him  and  anything  else,  a  man  speaking  to  him,  a  book  read  by  him,  the 
work  he  is  employed  in,  even  the  air  he  breathes,  or  the  light  that  falls 
on  the  objects  around  him,  we  perceive  that  every  one  of  those  circum¬ 
stances  has  its  influence  on  -him,  and  controls  at  least  one  side  of  his  ac¬ 
tivity.  And  the  more  we  perceive  of  those  influences,  the  smaller  the  idea 
we  form  of  his  freedom,  and  the  greater  our  conception  of  the  necessity  to 
which  he  is  subject. 

2.  The  second  cause  of  variation  is  due  to  the  degree  of  distinctness 
with  which  the  man’s  position  in  time  is  perceived,  the  clearness  of  the 
notion  formed  by  us  of  the  place  the  man’s  action  fills  in  time.  It  is  owing 
to  this  class  of  considerations  that  the  fall  of  the  first  man,  leading  to  the 
origin  of  the  human  race,  seems  to  us  obviously  less  free  than  the  marriage 
of  any  one  of  our  contemporaries.  It  is  owing  to  this  class  of  considera¬ 
tions  that  the  life  and  acts  of  men  who  lived  years  ago  cannot  seem  to  me 
as  free  as  the  life  of  my  contemporaries,  the  consequences  of  whose  acts 
are  still  unknown  to  me. 

The  variation  in  our  conception  of  freewill  in  this  connection  depends 
on  the  interval  of  time  that  has  elapsed  between  the  action  and  our  criti¬ 
cism  of  it. 

If  I  examine  an  act  I  have  committed  a  moment  ago  in  approximately 
the  same  circumstances  as  I  am  placed  in  now,  my  act  appears  to  me 
indubitably  free.  But  if  I  examine  an  act  I  have  committed  a  month  ago, 
then  being  placed  in  other  circumstances,  I  cannot  help  recognising  that 
had  not  that  act  been  committed,  much  that  is  good  and  agreeable,  and 
even  inevitable,  resulting  from  that  act,  could  not  have  taken  place.  If 
I  reflect  on  a  still  more  remote  action,  performed  ten  years  or  more  ago, 
the  consequences  of  my  act  are  even  plainer  to  me,  and  it  will  be  difficult 


1138  WAR  AND  PEACE 

for  me  to  conceive  what  would  have  happened  if  that  action  had  not  taken 
place.  The  further  back  I  go  in  my  reminiscences,  or  what  is  the  same 
thing,  the  further  forward  in  my  criticism  of  them,  the  more  doubtful  be¬ 
comes  my  view  of  the  freedom  of  my  action. 

We  find  precisely  the  same  ratio  of  variation  in  our  views  of  the  ele¬ 
ment  of  freewill  in  the  general  affairs  of  men  in  history.  A  contemporary 
event  we  conceive  of  as  undoubtedly  the  doing  of  all  the  men  we  know  of 
concerned  in  it.  But  with  a  more  remote  event,  we  see  its  inevitable  con¬ 
sequences,  which  prevent  our  conceiving  of  anything  else  as  possible.  And 
the  further  back  we  go  in  the  examination  of  events,  the  less  arbitrary 
they  seem  to  us. 

The  Austro-Prussian  war  appears  to  us  to  be  undoubtedly  the  result 
of  the  crafty  acts  of  Bismarck  and  so  on. 

The  Napoleonic  wars,  though  more  doubtful,  appear  to  us  the  effect 
of  the  freewill  of  the  leading  heroes  of  those  wars.  But  in  the  Crusades  we 
see  an  event,  filling  its  definite  place  in  history,  without  which  the  modern 
history  of  Europe  is  inconceivable,  although  to  the  chroniclers  of  the 
Crusades,  those  events  appeared  simply  due  to  the  will  of  a  few  persons. 
In  the  migrations  of  peoples  it  never  occurs  to  any  one  now  that  the 
renewal  of  the  European  world  depended  on  a  caprice  of  Attila’s.  The 
more  remote  in  history  the  subject  of  our  observations,  the  more  doubtful 
we  feel  of  the  freewill  of  the  persons  concerned  in  the  event,  and  the  more 
obvious  is  the  law  of  necessity  in  it. 

3.  The  third  element  influencing  our  judgment  is  the  degree  to  which 
we  can  apprehend  that  endless  chain  of  causation  demanded  by  the 
reason,  in  which  every  phenomenon  comprehended,  and  so  every  act  of 
man,  must  have  its  definite  place,  as  a  result  of  past  and  a  cause  of 
future  acts. 

This  is  the  element  that  causes  our  acts  and  those  of  others  to  appear 
to  us  on  one  side  more  free  the  less  we  know  of  the  physiological,  psycho¬ 
logical,  and  historical  laws  deduced  from  observation,  and  the  less  thor¬ 
oughly  the  physiological,  psychological,  or  historical  cause  of  the  act  has 
been  investigated  by  us,  and  on  the  other  hand  the  less  simple  the  act 
observed  and  the  less  complex  the  character  and  mind  of  the  man  whose 
action  we  are  examining. 

When  we  have  absolutely  no  understanding  of  the  causes  of  an  action 
— whether  vicious  or  virtuous  or  simply  non-moral — we  ascribe  a  greater 
element  of  freewill  to  it.  In  the  case  of  a  crime,  we  are  more  urgent  in 
demanding  punishment  for  the  act;  in  the  case  of  a  virtuous  act,  we  are 
warmer  in  our  appreciation  of  its  merits.  In  cases  of  no  moral  bearing, 
we  recognise  more  individuality,  originality,  and  independence  in  it. 
But  if  only  one  of  the  innumerable  causes  of  the  act  is  known  to  us,  we 
recognise  a  certain  element  of  necessity,  and  are  less  ready  to  exact  pun¬ 
ishment  for  the  crime,  to  acknowledge  merit  in  the  virtuous  act,  or  freedom 
in  the  apparent  originality.  The  fact  that  the  criminal  was  reared  in  vicious 
surroundings  softens  his  fault  in  our  eyes.  The  self-sacrifice  of  a  father, 
of  a  mother,  or  self-sacrifice  with  the  possibility  of  reward  is  more  com- 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


ii39 

prehensible  than  gratuitous  self-sacrifice,  and  so  is  regarded  by  us  as 
less  deserving  of  sympathy  and  less  the  work  of  freewill.  The  founder 
of  a  sect,  of  a  party,  or  the  inventor  impresses  us  less  when  we  understand 
how  and  by  what  the  way  was  paved  for  his  activity.  If  we  have  a  large 
range  of  experiments,  if  our  observation  is  continually  directed  to  seek¬ 
ing  correlations  in  men’s  actions  between  causes  and  effects,  their  actions 
will  seem  to  us  more  necessary  and  less  free,  the  more  accurately  we 
connect  causes  and  effects.  If  the  actions  investigated  are  simple,  and 
we  have  had  a  vast  number  of  such  actions  under  observation,  our  con¬ 
ception  of  their  inevitability  will  be  even  more  complete.  The  dishonest 
conduct  of  the  son  of  a  dishonest  father,  the  misbehaviour  of  women, 
who  have  been  led  into  certain  surroundings,  the  relapse  of  the  reformed 
drunkard  into  drunkenness,  and  so  on,  are  instances  of  conduct  which 
seems  to  us  to  be  less  free  the  better  we  understand  their  cause.  If  the  man 
himself  whose  conduct  we  are  examining  is  on  the  lowest  stage  of  mental 
development,  like  a  child,  a  madman,  or  a  simpleton,  then  when  we  know 
the  causes  of  the  act  and  the  simplicity  of  the  character  and  intelligence, 
we  see  so  great  an  element  of  necessity,  and  so  little  freewill,  that  we  can 
foretell  the  act  that  will  follow,  as  soon  as  we  know  the  cause  bound  to 
bring  it  forth. 

In  all  legislative  codes  the  exoneration  of  crime  or  admission  of  miti¬ 
gating  circumstances  rests  only  on  those  three  classes  of  consideration. 
The  guilt  is  conceived  as  greater  or  less  according  to  the  greater  or  lesser 
knowledge  of  the  conditions  in  which  the  man  judged  is  placed,  the  greater 
or  less  interval  of  time  between  the  perpetration  of  the  crime  and  the 
judgment  of  it,  and  the  greater  or  less  comprehension  of  the  causes  that 
led  to  the  act. 


X 

And  thus  our  conception  of  freewill  and  necessity  is  gradually  diminished 
or  increased  according  to  the  degree  of  connection  with  the  external  world, 
the  degree  of  remoteness  in  time,  and  the  degree  of  dependence  on  causes 
which  we  see  in  the  phenomenon  of  man’s  life  that  we  examine.  So  that  if 
we  examine  the  case  of  a  man  in  which  the  connection  with  the  external 
world  is  better  known,  the  interval  of  time  between  the  examination  and 
the  act  greater,  and  the  causes  of  the  action  easier  to  comprehend,  we  form 
a  conception  of  a  greater  element  of  necessity  and  less  freewill.  If  we 
examine  a  man  in  a  less  close  dependence  on  external  conditions,  if  his 
action  is  committed  at  a  moment  nearer  the  present,  and  the  causes  lead¬ 
ing  turn  to  it  are  beyond  our  ken,  we  form  a  conception  of  a  less  element 
of  necessity  and  a  greater  element  of  freewill  in  his  action. 

But  in  neither  case,  however  we  shift  our  point  of  view,  however  clear 
we  make  to  ourselves  the  connection  in  which  the  man  is  placed  with 
the  external  world,  or  however  fully  comprehensible  it  may  appear  to 
us,  however  long  or  short  a  period  of  time  we  select,  however  explicable 


ii4o  WAR  AND  PEACE 

or  unfathomable  the  causes  of  the  act  may  be  to  us,  we  can  never  con¬ 
ceive  of  complete  freewill,  nor  of  complete  necessity  in  any  action. 

1.  However  carefully  we  imagine  a  man  excluded  from  the  influence 
of  the  external  world,  we  can  never  form  a  conception  of  freedom  in  space. 
Every  act  of  man’s  is  inevitably  limited  by  what  surrounds  him  and  by 
his  own  body.  I  raise  my  arm  and  let  it  fall.  My  action  seems  to  me  free; 
but  asking  myself  could  I  raise  my  arm  in  any  direction,  I  see  that  I  moved 
it  in  the  direction  in  which  there  was  least  hindrance  to  the  action  arising 
from  bodies  around  me  or  from  the  construction  of  my  own  body.  I  chose 
one  out  of  all  the  possible  directions,  because  in  that  direction  I  met  with 
least  hindrance.  For  my  action  to  be  entirely  free,  it  would  have  to  meet 
with  no  hindrance  in  any  direction.  To  conceive  a  man  quite  free,  we 
have  to  conceive  him  outside  of  space,  which  is  obviously  impossible. 

2.  However  near  we  bring  the  time  of  criticism  to  the  time  of  action, 
we  can  never  form  a  conception  of  freedom  in  time.  For  if  I  examine  an 
act  committed  a  second  ago,  I  must  still  recognise  that  it  is  not  free,  since 
the  act  is  irrevocably  linked  to  the  moment  at  which  it  was  committed 
Can  I  lift  my  arm?  I  lift  it;  but  I  ask  myself:  Could  I  not  have  lifted 
my  arm  in  that  moment  of  time  that  has  just  passed?  To  convince  myself 
of  that,  I  do  not  lift  my  arm  the  next  moment.  But  I  am  not  abstaining 
from  lifting  it  that  first  moment  of  which  I  asked  myself  the  question.  The 
time  has  gone  by  and  to  detain  it  was  not  in  my  power,  and  the  hand 
which  I  then  raised  and  the  air  in  which  I  raised  it  are  not  the  same 
as  the  hand  I  do  not  raise  now  or  the  air  in  which  I  do  not  now  raise  it. 
The  moment  in  which  the  first  movement  took  place  is  irrevocable,  and 
in  that  moment  I  could  only  perform  one  action,  and  whatever  movement 
I  had  made,  that  movement  could  have  been  the  only  one.  The  fact  that 
the  following  moment  I  abstained  from  lifting  my  arm  did  not  prove 
that  I  could  have  abstained  from  lifting  it.  And  since  my  movement  could 
only  be  one  in  one  moment  of  time,  it  could  have  been  no  other.  To  con¬ 
ceive  it  to  oneself  as  free,  one  must  conceive  it  in  the  present  on  the  bound¬ 
ary  between  the  past  and  the  future,  that  is,  outside  time,  which  is 
impossible. 

3.  However  we  increase  the  degree  of  difficulty  of  comprehending  the 
causes  of  the  act,  we  never  reach  a  conception  of  complete  freewill,  that 
is,  absolute  absence  of  cause.  Though  the  cause  of  the  expression  of  will 
in  any  act  of  our  own  or  another’s  may  be  beyond  our  ken,  it  is  the  first 
impulse  of  the  intellect  to  presuppose  and  seek  a  cause,  without  which 
no  phenomenon  is  conceivable.  I  raise  my  arm  in  order  to  perform  an 
act  independent  of  any  cause,  but  the  fact  that  I  want  to  perform  an 
act  independent  of  any  cause  is  the  cause  of  my  action. 

But  even  if  by  conceiving  a  man  entirely  excluded  from  external  in¬ 
fluence,  and  exercising  only  a  momentary  act  in  the  present,  not  called 
forth  by  any  cause,  we  were  to  reduce  the  element  of  necessity  to  an 
infinitesimal  minimum  equivalent  to  nil,  we  should  even  then  not  have 
reached  a  conception  of  complete  freewill  in  a  man;  for  a  creature,  unin- 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1141 

fluenced  by  the  external  world,  outside  of  time,  and  independent  of  cause, 
is  no  longer  a  man. 

In  the  same  way  we  can  never  conceive  a  human  action  subject  only 
to  necessity  without  any  element  of  freewill. 

1.  However  we  increase  our  knowledge  of  the  conditions  of  space  in 
which  a  man  is  placed,  that  knowledge  can  never  be  complete  since  the 
number  of  these  conditions  is  infinitely  great,  seeing  that  space  is  infinite. 
And  so  long  as  not  all  the  conditions  that  may  influence  a  man  are  defined, 
the  circle  of  necessity  is  not  complete,  and  there  is  still  a  loophole  for 
freewill. 

2.  Though  we  may  make  the  period  of  time  intervening  between  an 
act  and  our  criticism  of  it  as  long  as  we  choose,  that  period  will  be  finite, 
and  time  is  infinite,  and  so  in  this  respect  too  the  circle  of  necessity  is 
not  complete. 

3.  However  easy  the  chain  of  causation  of  any  act  may  be  to  grasp, 
we  shall  never  know  the  whole  chain,  since  it  is  endless,  and  so  again 
we  cannot  attain  absolute  necessity. 

But  apart  from  that,  even  if,  reducing  the  minimum  of  freewill  till  it 
is  equivalent  to  nil,  we  were  to  admit  in  some  case — as,  for  instance, 
that  of  a  dying  man,  an  unborn  babe,  an  idiot — a  complete  absence  of 
freewill,  we  should  in  so  doing  have  destroyed  the  very  conception  of 
man,  in  the  case  we  are  examining;  since  as  soon  as  there  is  no  freewill, 
there  is  no  man.  And  therefore  the  conception  of  the  action  of  a  man 
subject  only  to  the  law  of  necessity,  without  the  smallest  element  of  free¬ 
will,  is  as  impossible  as  the  conception  of  a  completely  free  human  action. 

Thus  to  conceive  a  human  action  subject  only  to  the  law  of  necessity 
without  freewill,  we  must  assume  a  knowledge  of  an  infinite  number  of 
conditions  in  space,  an  infinitely  long  period  of  time,  and  an  infinite  chain 
of  causation. 

To  conceive  a  man  perfectly  free,  not  subject  to  the  law  of  necessity, 
we  must  conceive  a  man  outside  of  space,  outside  of  time,  and  free  from 
all  dependence  on  cause. 

In  the  first  case,  if  necessity  were  possible  without  freewill,  we  should 
be  brought  to  a  definition  of  the  laws  of  necessity  in  the  terms  of  the 
same  necessity,  that  is,  to  mere  form  without  content. 

In  the  second  case,  if  freewill  were  possible  without  necessity,  we 
should  come  to  unconditioned  freewill  outside  of  space,  and  time,  and 
cause,  which  by  the  fact  of  its  being  unconditioned  and  unlimited  would 
be  nothing  else  than  content  without  form. 

We  should  be  brought  in  fact  to  these  two  fundamental  elements,  of 
which  man’s  whole  cosmic  conception  is  made  up — the  incomprehensible 
essence  of  life  and  the  laws  that  give  form  to  that  essence. 

Reason  says:  1.  space  with  all  the  forms  given  it  by  its  visibility — 
matter — is  infinite,  and  is  not  thinkable  otherwise. 

2.  Time  is  infinite  movement  without  one  moment  of  rest,  and  it  is 
not  otherwise  thinkable. 


1142  WAR  AND  PEACE 

3.  The  connection  of  cause  and  effect  has  no  beginning,  and  can  have 
no  end. 

Consciousness  sa}^:  1.  I  alone  am,  and  all  that  exists  is  only  /;  conse¬ 
quently  I  include  space. 

2.  I  measure  moving  time  by  the  unchanging  moment  of  the  present, 
in  which  alone  1  am  conscious  of  myself  living;  consequently  I  am  out¬ 
ride  of  time,  and 

3.  I  am  outside  of  cause,  since  I  feel  myself  the  cause  of  every  phe¬ 
nomenon  of  my  life. 

Reason  gives  expression  to  the  laws  of  necessity.  Consciousness  gives 
expression  to  the  reality  of  freewill. 

Freedom  unlimited  by  anything  is  the  essence  of  life  in  man’s  con¬ 
sciousness.  Necessity  without  content  is  man’s  reason  with  its  three 
forms  of  thought. 

Freewill  is  what  is  examined:  Necessity  is  what  examines.  Freewill  is 
content:  Necessity  is  form. 

It  is  only  by  the  analysis  of  the  two  sources  of  knowledge,  standing 
to  one  another  in  the  relation  of  form  and  content,  that  the  mutually 
exclusive,  and  separately  inconceivable  ideas  of  freewill  and  necessity 
are  formed. 

Only  by  their  synthesis  is  a  clear  conception  of  the  life  of  man  gained. 

Outside  these  two  ideas — in  their  synthesis  mutually  definitive  as  form 
and  content — no  conception  of  life  is  possible. 

All  that  we  know  of  men’s  life  is  only  a  certain  relation  of  freewill  to 
necessity,  that  is,  of  consciousness  to  the  laws  of  reason. 

All  that  we  know  of  the  external  world  of  nature  is  only  a  certain 
relation  of  the  forces  of  nature  to  necessity,  or  of  the  essence  of  life  to  the 
laws  of  reason. 

The  forces  of  the  life  of  nature  lie  outside  us,  and  not  subject  to  our 
consciousness;  and  we  call  these  forces  gravitation,  inertia,  electricity, 
vital  force,  and  so  on.  But  the  force  of  the  life  of  man  is  the  subject  of 
our  consciousness,  and  we  call  it  freewill. 

But  just  as  the  force  of  gravitation — in  itself  incomprehensible,  though 
felt  by  every  man — is  only  so  far  understood  by  us  as  we  know  the  laws 
of  necessity  to  which  it  is  subject  (from  the  first  knowledge  that  all 
bodies  are  heavy  down  to  Newton’s  law),  so  too  the  force  of  freewill, 
unthinkable  in  itself,  but  recognised  by  the  consciousness  of  every  man, 
is  only  so  far  understood  as  we  know  the  laws  of  necessity  to  which  it  is 
subject  (from  the  fact  that  every  man  dies  up  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
most  complex  economic  or  historic  laws). 

All  knowledge  is  simply  bringing  the  essence  of  life  under  the  laws  of 
reason. 

Man’s  freewill  is  distinguished  from  every  other  force  by  the  fact  that 
it  is  the  subject  of  man’s  consciousness.  But  in  the  eyes  of  reason  it  is 
not  distinguished  from  any  other  force. 

The  forces  of  gravitation,  of  electricity,  or  of  chemical  affinity,  are 
only  distinguished  from  one  another  by  being  differently  defined  by 


WAR  AND  PEACE  1143 

reason.  In  the  same  way  the  force  of  man’s  freewill  is  only  distinguished 
by  reason  from  the  other  forces  of  nature  by  the  definition  given  it  by 
reason.  Freewill  apart  from  necessity,  that  is,  apart  from  the  laws  of 
reason  defining  it,  is  in  no  way  different  from  gravitation,  or  heat,  or  the 
force  of  vegetation;  for  reason,  it  is  only  a  momentary,  indefinite  sensa¬ 
tion  of  life. 

And  as  the  undefined  essence  of  the  force  moving  the  heavenly  bodies, 
the  undefined  essence  of  the  force  of  heat,  of  electricity,  or  of  chemical 
affinity,  or  of  vital  force,  forms  the  subject  of  astronomy,  physics,  chem¬ 
istry,  botany,  zoology,  and  so  on,  so  the  essence  of  the  force  of  freewill 
forms  the  subject  matter  of  history.  But  even  as  the  subject  of  every 
science  is  the  manifestation  of  that  unknown  essence  of  life,  yet  that 
essence  itself  can  only  be  the  subject  of  metaphysics,  so  too  the  mani¬ 
festation  of  the  force  of  freewill  in  space,  and  time,  and  dependence  on 
cause,  forms  the  subject  of  history,  but  freewill  itself  is  the  subject  of 
metaphysics. 

In  the  experimental  sciences,  what  is  known  to  us  we  call  the  laws 
of  necessity;  what  is  unknown  to  us  we  call  vital  force.  Vital  force  is 
simply  an  expression  for  what  remains  unexplained  by  what  we  know 
of  the  essence  of  life.  So  in  history  what  is  known  to  us  we  call  the  laws 
of  necessity;  what  is  unknown,  we  call  freewill.  Freewill  is  for  history 
simply  an  expression  for  what  remains  unexplained  by  the  laws  of  men’s 
life  that  we  know. 


XI 

History  examines  the  manifestations  of  man’s  freewill  in  connection 
with  the  external  world  in  time  and  in  dependence  on  cause,  that  is, 
defines  that  freedom  by  the  laws  of  reason ;  and  so  history  is  only  a  science 
in  so  far  as  that  freedom  is  defined  by  those  laws. 

To  history  the  recognition  of  the  freewills  of  men  as  forces  able  to 
influence  historical  events,  that  is,  not  subject  to  laws,  is  the  same  as 
would  be  to  astronomy  the  recognition  of  freewill  in  the  movements  of 
the  heavenly  bodies. 

This  recognition  destroys  the  possibility  of  the  existence  of  laws,  that 
is,  of  any  science  whatever.  If  there  is  so  much  as  one  body  moving  at 
its  freewill,  the  laws  of  Kepler  and  of  Newton  are  annulled,  and  every 
conception  of  the  movement  of  the  heavenly  bodies  is  destroyed.  If  there 
is  a  single  human  action  due  to  freewill,  no  historical  law  exists,  and  no 
conception  of  historical  events  can  be  formed. 

For  history  there  exist  lines  of  movement  of  human  wills,  one  extremity 
of  which  vanishes  in  the  unknowable,  and  at  the  other  extremity  of  which 
in  space,  in  time,  and  in  dependence  on  cause,  there  moves  men’s  con¬ 
sciousness  of  freewill  in  the  present. 

The  more  this  curve  of  movement  is  analysed  before  our  eyes,  the 
clearer  are  the  laws  of  its  movement.  To  discover  and  define  those”  laws 
is  the  problem  of  history. 


xi44  WAR  AND  PEACE 

From  the  point  of  view  from  which  the  science  of  history  now  ap¬ 
proaches  its  subject,  by  the  method  it  now  follows,  seeking  the  causes  of 
phenomena  in  the  freewill  of  men,  the  expression  of  laws  by  science  is 
impossible;  since  however  we  limit  the  freewill  of  men,  so  long  as  we 
recognise  it  as  a  force  not  subject  to  law,  the  existence  of  law  becomes 
impossible. 

Only  limiting  this  element  of  freewill  to  infinity,  that  is,  regarding  it 
as  an  infinitesimal  minimum,  we  are  convinced  of  the  complete  unattain¬ 
ability  of  causes,  and  then,  instead  of  seeking  causes,  history  sets  before 
itself  the  task  of  seeking  laws. 

The  seeking  of  those  laws  has  been  begun  long  ago,  and  the  new  lines 
of  thought  which  history  must  adopt  are  being  worked  out  simultaneously 
with  the  self-destruction  towards  which  the  old-fashioned  history  is  going, 
for  ever  dissecting  and  dissecting  the  causes  of  phenomena. 

All  human  sciences  have  followed  the  same  course.  Reaching  infinitesi¬ 
mals,  mathematics,  the  most  exact  of  the  sciences,  leaves  the  process  of 
analysis  and  enters  on  a  new  process  of  approximating  to  summing  up 
the  unknown  infinitesimals.  Forsaking  the  conception  of  cause,  mathe-' 
matics  seeks  law,  that  is,  properties  common  to  all  unknown,  infinites^ 
mal  quantities. 

The  other  sciences,  too,  have  followed  the  same  course,  though  under 
another  form.  When  Newton  formulated  the  law  of  gravitation,  he  did 
not  say  that  the  sun  or  the  earth  has  the  property  of  attraction.  He  said 
that  all  bodies — from  the  greatest  to  the  smallest — have  the  property 
of  attracting  one  another;  that  is,  leaving  on  one  side  the  question  of 
the  cause  of  the  movements  of  bodies,  he  expressed  the  property  common 
to  all  bodies,  from  the  infinitely  great  to  the  infinitely  small.  The  natural 
sciences  do  the  same  thing;  leaving  on  one  side  the  question  of  cause, 
they  seek  for  laws.  History,  too,  is  entered  on  the  same  course.  And  if 
the  subject  of  history  is  to  be  the  study  of  the  movements  of  peoples  and 
of  humanity,  and  not  episodes  from  the  lives  of  individual  men,  it  too 
is  bound  to  lay  aside  the  idea  of  cause,  and  to  seek  the  laws  common  to 
all  the  equal  and  inseparably  interconnected,  infinitesimal  elements  of 
freewill. 

XII 

Ever  since  the  law  of  Copernicus  was  discovered  and  proved,  the  mere 
recognition  that  not  the  sun,  but  the  earth  moves,  has  destroyed  the  whole 
cosmography  of  the  ancients.  By  disproving  the  law,  it  might  have  been 
possible  to  retain  the  old  conception  of  the  movements  of  the  heavenly 
bodies;  but  without  disproving  it,  it  would  seem  to  be  impossible  to  con¬ 
tinue  studying  the  Ptolemaic  worlds.  But  as  a  fact  even  after  the  dis¬ 
covery  of  the  law  of  Copernicus,  the  Ptolemaic  worlds  long  continued 
to  be  a  subject  of  study. 

Ever  since  the  first  person  said  and  proved  that  the  number  of  births 
or  crimes  is  subject  to  mathematical  laws,  that  certain  geographical  and 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


ii45 

politico-economical  laws  determine  this  or  that  form  of  government,  that 
certain  relations  of  the  population  to  the  soil  lead  to  migrations  of 
peoples — from  that  moment  the  foundations  on  which  history  was  built 
were  destroyed  in  their  essence. 

By  disproving  those  new  laws,  the  old  view  of  history  might  have  been 
retained.  But  wuthout  disproving  them,  it  would  seem  impossible  to  con¬ 
tinue  studying  historical  events,  merely  as  the  arbitrary  product  of  the 
freewill  of  individual  men.  For  if  a  certain  type  of  government  is  estab¬ 
lished,  or  a  certain  movement  of  peoples  takes  place  in  consequence  of 
certain  geographical,  ethnographical,  or  economic  conditions,  the  freewill 
of  those  persons  who  are  described  to  us  as  setting  up  that  type  of  govern¬ 
ment  or  leading  that  movement  cannot  be  regarded  as  the  cause. 

And  yet  history  goes  on  being  studied  as  of  old,  side  by  side  with  laws 
of  statistics,  of  geography,  of  political  economy,  of  comparative  philology 
and  geology,  that  flatly  contradict  its  assumptions. 

The  struggle  between  the  new  views  and  the  old  was  long  and  stubborn 
in  physical  philosophy.  Theology  stood  on  guard  over  the  old  view,  and 
accused  the  new  view  of  violating  revelation.  But  when  truth  gained  the 
day,  theology  established  itself  as  firmly  as  ever  on  a  new  basis. 

As  long  and  as  obstinate  is  the  conflict  to-day  between  the  old  and 
the  new  view  of  history;  and  in  the  same  way  theology  stands  on  guard 
over  the  old  view,  and  accuses  the  new  of  attacking  revelation. 

In  both  cases  on  both  sides,  the  struggle  rouses  evil  passions  and  stifles 
truth.  On  one  side  there  is  dread  and  regret  at  demolishing  the  edifice 
that  has  been  raised  by  the  ages;  on  the  other,  the  passion  for  destruction. 

To  the  men  who  fought  against  the  new  truths  of  physical  philosophy, 
it  seemed  that  if  they  were  to  admit  that  truth,  it  would  shatter  faith  in 
God,  in  the  creation  of  the  firmament,  in  the  miracle  of  Joshua,  the  son 
of  Nun.  To  the  champions  of  the  laws  of  Copernicus  and  Newton,  to 
Voltaire,  for  instance,  it  seemed  that  the  laws  of  astronomy  wyere  destruc¬ 
tive  of  religion,  and  the  latter  made  use  of  the  law  of  gravitation  as  a 
weapon  against  religion. 

So  now  it  seems  that  we  have  but  to  admit  the  law  of  necessity  to 
shatter  the  conception  of  the  soul,  of  good,  of  evil,  and  of  the  political 
and  ecclesiastical  edifices  reared  on  the  basis  of  those  conceptions. 

So  too,  like  Voltaire  in  his  day,  the  champions  of  the  law  of  necessity 
use  the  law  as  a  weapon  against  religion,  though,  like  the  law  of  Coper¬ 
nicus  in  astronomy,  the  law  of  necessity  in  history,  far  from  destroying, 
even  strengthens  the  foundation  of  which  political  and  ecclesiastical  edi¬ 
fices  are  reared. 

Tust  as  then  in  the  Question  of  astronomy,  now  in  the  question  of 
history,  the  whole  difference  of  view  rested  on  the  recognition  or  non- 
recovnition  of  an  absolute  unit  as  a  m°a«ure  of  visible  phenomena.  For 
astronomy,  this  was  the  immobility  of  the  earth;  in  history,  the  independ¬ 
ence  of  personality — freewill. 

Tust  as  in  astronomy  the  difficulty  of  admitting  the  motion  of  the 
earth  lay  in  the  immediate  sensation  of  the  earth’s  stationariness  and 


WAR  AND  PEACE 


1146 

of  the  planets'  motion,  so  in  history  the  difficulty  of  recognising  the  sub¬ 
jection  of  the  personality  to  the  laws  of  space  and  time  and  causation 
lies  in  the  difficulty  of  surmounting  the  direct  sensation  of  the  inde¬ 
pendence  of  one’s  personality.  But  just  as  in  astronomy,  the  new  view 
said,  ‘It  is  true,  we  do  not  feel  the  movement  of  the  earth,  but,  if  we 
admit  its  immobility,  we  are  reduced  to  absurdity,  while  admitting  its 
movement,  we  are  led  to  laws’;  so  in  history,  the  new  view  says,  ‘It  is 
true,  we  do  not  feel  our  dependence,  but  admitting  our  freewill,  we  are 
led  to  absurdity;  admitting  our  dependence  on  the  external  world,  time, 
and  cause,  we  are  led  to  laws.’ 

In  the  first  case,  we  had  to  surmount  the  sensation  of  an  unreal  immo¬ 
bility  in  space,  and  to  admit  a  motion  Ave  could  not  perceive  of  by  sense. 
In  the  present  case,  it  is  as  essential  to  surmount  a  consciousness  of  an 
unreal  freedom  and  to  recognise  a  dependence  not  perceived  by  our  senses. 


THE  END 


￼
